 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 10-10799 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Edward B. Pedlow, IV, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 19, 2010, Applicant submitted his electronic Security Clearance 
Application (e-QIP). On February 10, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on February 28, 2011. He answered 
the SOR in writing on March 3, 2011, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. DOHA received the request on March 7, 2011. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on March 28, 2011, and I received the case assignment on April 4, 
2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 15, 2011, and I convened the hearing 
 
2 
 
 
as scheduled on May 4, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which 
were received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through X, 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 18, 2011. I 
granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until May 18, 2011, to submit 
additional matters.  On May 12, 2011, he submitted Exhibits Y to CC, without objection. 
The record closed on May 18, 2011. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR, except for the factual allegations in Paragraphs 1.g and 1.m of the SOR, with 
explanations. He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility 
for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 51 years old, divorced, and was trained by a defense contractor for 
employment requiring a security clearance. Applicant was married in 1988 and divorced 
in 2004. In December 2008 he was laid off from his employment as a sales 
representative for a private company. Applicant remains unemployed at the present. His 
unemployment compensation is $1,460 monthly. Applicant’s monthly expenses are 
about $1,470. Applicant submitted his monthly budget as an exhibit. He and his former 
wife raised her two children during their marriage. One child is in college and the other 
in law school. Applicant co-signed for their student loans. (Tr. 28, 59-73, 105, 125, 126, 
142; Exhibits L and M) 
 
 The SOR lists 14 delinquent debts totaling $155,135. Two debts are duplicates of 
two other listed debts. Consolidating those debts into two debts only removes $797 from 
the total owed. The total debt amount includes the entire mortgage balance owed of 
$113,000 because his house is in foreclosure proceedings. Deducting that amount from 
the total debt owed leaves a balance of $41,338. Applicant paid eight of the remaining 
twelve delinquent debts. The remaining debts without the mortgage balance total 
$23,915. Applicant signed a power of attorney and established a joint checking account 
with his attorney to create a mechanism by which his debts can be paid if he were to 
start his desired employment, which pays $217,000 annually. (Tr. 76, 80-101, 117, 118; 
Exhibits 1-5, N-BB) 
 
 Applicant’s mother gave him $10,000 in April 2011 with which to pay his 
delinquent debts. She does not expect repayment. His mother acknowledged 
Applicant’s assistance to her over the past years. Applicant used the money to repay his 
delinquent debts and has about $2,000 remaining to be used for the same purpose on 
the remaining debt. (Tr. 77, 79, 127; Exhibit P) 
 
 Applicant has not sought or engaged in any financial counseling or debt 
repayment training. He has contacted his creditors during the past year to arrange 
settlements or installment payment agreements. (Tr. 77, 121, 146) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant has not paid the bank which holds his mortgage on the judgment it 
obtained against him for his delinquent monthly mortgage payments. SOR Paragraph 
1.a states this debt is $972. A settlement offer is being sent to Applicant by the bank. 
This debt is unresolved. (Tr. 80; Exhibits 2-5)  
 
 The debt to a cable television service in the amount of $93 is paid (SOR 
Paragraph 1.b). This debt is the same as the $116 debt listed in SOR Paragraph 1.m. 
Applicant paid the debt with his debit card drawing on his checking account. These two 
debts are resolved. (Tr. 81, 82; Exhibits 2-5, X, Y) 
 
 The $365 debt to a satellite television service was paid on April 22, 2011, with 
the Applicant’s debit card. Applicant paid $367.05 on that date. This debt is listed in 
SOR Paragraph 1.c. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 83; Exhibits 2-5, R) 
 
 The bank credit card debt for $7,421 listed in SOR Paragraph 1.d was paid on 
April 26, 2011, in a settlement for $3,425.71. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 84; Exhibits 2 
(on page 9)-5, S)   
 
 In SOR Paragraph 1.e is listed a debt for $8,003 owed to a bank for credit card 
purchases. Applicant paid a settlement of $3,150. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 86; Exhibits 
2-5, T) 
 
 Applicant owes $12,290 to a bank (SOR Paragraph 1.f). He contacted the 
creditor. A settlement agreement for $5,500 is offered by the bank and pending. 
Payment must be made by May 27, 2011. This settlement is not yet paid and the debt is 
unresolved. (Tr. 87; Exhibits 2-5, U) 
 
 Applicant owes his former wife $4,006 pursuant to the spousal support order 
contained in his 2004 divorce decree. His former wife understands that Applicant is 
unemployed and will wait for him to pay her the money owed. She has been paid 
$14,000 pursuant to that agreement of the $18,000 total owed. She also received 
$37,000 when the divorce occurred and Applicant refinanced the house to pay her half 
of the equity in the house that accrued during the marriage. The SOR Paragraph 1.g 
lists this debt as child support but it is spousal support. Both of Applicant’s step-sons 
are older than 18 years of age. This debt is in being resolved based on Applicant’s past 
pattern of paying the support regularly since 2004. (Tr. 89-91, 134; Exhibits 2-5, M) 
 
 SOR Paragraph 1.h contains a debt owed to a cellular telephone company in the 
amount of $526. Applicant paid this debt with his settlement payment of $273.84 in April 
2011. This debt is resolved. (Tr. 91-93; Exhibits 2, 5, V and Z) 
 
 A credit card debt of $681 listed in SOR Paragraph 1.i is the same debt as is set 
forth in Paragraph 1.l for $680. This debt was settled on May 3, 2011, for $350. This 
debt is resolved. (Tr. 93-95; Exhibits 2, 5, W) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 A department store debt of $6,647 remains unresolved. Applicant is attempting to 
negotiate a settlement with the creditor. Applicant and the creditor have spoken by 
telephone. (Tr. 94-95; Exhibits 2-5, AA) 
 
 The home equity loan of $113,000 set forth in SOR Paragraph 1.k remains 
unresolved. Applicant hired an attorney experienced in foreclosures to protect his home 
while the negotiations continue. In April 2010 Applicant paid his mortgage payments 
that were due and in arrears. In April 2010 the bank filed for foreclosure. Applicant listed 
his home for sale in 2009 with a real estate agent. He has not been able to sell it during 
the past two years. If sold, Applicant would have used the proceeds to repay the 
mortgage and home equity loans. (Tr. 95-101; Exhibits 2-5, N, O) 
 
 Applicant owed $335 as listed in SOR Paragraph 1.n. The settlement amount 
paid was $201.55 on April 29, 2011, to satisfy this debt owed to a debt collector. This 
debt is resolved. (Tr. 101, 102; Exhibits 2-5, X, BB) 
 
 Applicant filed all his state and federal income tax returns. He owes $1,400 for 
2010 federal income taxes and $400 to the state for that year. Applicant owes about 
$5,000 for the 2009 federal tax debt. He also owes $3,354.02 on his 2010 property 
taxes and has an agreement with the county to pay those taxes. No tax liens have been 
filed against Applicant by any taxing authority. Applicant has installment payment 
agreements with the federal tax authority to pay $120 monthly. This agreement started 
May 6, 2011. These debts are being resolved. The tax liabilities were not listed in the 
SOR. (Tr. 123-125; Exhibits 2-5, CC) 
 
 Applicant does not have any active credit cards at the present time. The debts 
owed on credit cards listed in the SOR are from previously used credit cards. He does 
owe $425 to a national department store. Applicant will pay that debt as soon as he can. 
(Tr. 125, 126) 
 
 Applicant presented four character witnesses at the hearing. He also submitted 
ten character letters, which were not duplicates of witness testimony. All witnesses and 
letters disclosed the authors knew Applicant for at least several years if not several 
decades. Some witnesses knew Applicant when they served with him in the U.S. 
Marines and the state Army National Guard. All character statements mentioned 
Applicant’s honesty, integrity, moral fortitude, competency, thoughtfulness, and care in 
interacting with other people. His pastor stated Applicant was a regular church-going 
member of the congregation. One witness who is also unemployed at the present time 
stated the geographic area in which he and Applicant live has a 9.9% unemployment 
rate. (Tr. 21-59; Exhibits A to K) 
 
 Applicant testified openly and honestly about his unemployment situation during 
the past three years and his attempts to gain new employment. He was credible in his 
explanations and presented his evidence in a logical and organized fashion. He 
admitted his lack of income after his $65,000 sales position was lost in December 2008 
hindered his ability to repay his debts. Applicant described his power of attorney 
 
5 
 
 
procedure to repay his debts if he found employment. He also listed that power of 
attorney procedure in his SF-86. (Tr. 62-77, 112, 131; Exhibit 1) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
6 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  Two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated $155,175 in delinquent debt from 2008 to the present 
time that remained unpaid as of the date of the SOR’s issuance.  Applicant has 14 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Three conditions may be applicable:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
 occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
 trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
 beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
 or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
 circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
 problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is 
 being resolved or is under control; 
 
7 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
 creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
 of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
 provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the 
 dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue;  and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose after he was laid off from his job in 
December 2008 because of his employer’s declining sales. Since then, despite 
continuous job searches, Applicant at age 51 has not been able to find employment. His 
unemployment compensation payments of $1,460 are almost the same as his monthly 
expenses. His unemployment is beyond his control, because of his age and the current 
economic climate in his home area where the unemployment rate at the time of the 
hearing was 9.9%. Applicant acted responsibly by not incurring additional delinquent 
debt, actively seeking employment, arranging the power of attorney with his lawyer to 
establish an objective mechanism through which to resolve his debts, and obtaining a 
gift from his mother with which to pay as many of his debts as he can until he can find 
employment. AG ¶ 20 (b) applies with significant effect. 
  
Applicant is paying his debts in an orderly manner currently. He established a 
pattern of responsible resolution of his delinquent debts. Therefore, there are clear 
indications from the evidence he presented that the financial problems are under control 
and being resolved. AG ¶ 20 (c) has partial application.  
 
Applicant was able to focus his efforts on negotiating settlements of some debts 
and repaying others. He paid eight delinquent debts using the gift his mother gave him. 
Five remain unpaid though they may be paid if his current negotiations are successful. 
Based on his current progress in repaying his delinquent debts, it is likely Applicant will 
have those five debts paid. The sale of his home would remove two mortgage debts 
from the SOR list. The current economic situation has made that effort fruitless for the 
past two years. AG ¶ 20 (d) applies because of Applicant’s good-faith efforts to repay 
his delinquent debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the “whole-person concept,” the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
8 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an honest and hard-
working person who is not a security threat to the United States. He served in the 
Marines and the Army National Guard. His financial difficulties are not his fault. 
Applicant did not act irresponsibly to spend money he could not repay. The situation has 
only become a problem since 2009 when Applicant’s job was lost through no fault of his 
own. He worked to repay his debts and was able to do so with a gift from his mother. 
There is no likelihood of continuation or recurrence if Applicant gains employment. He 
has in place a power of attorney by which mechanism his lawyer will handle Applicant’s 
financial affairs and resolve the five remaining delinquent debts. The amount of debt 
unpaid has no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress because his 
financial situation is known in his home area as evidenced by the character witnesses 
and letters.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a to 1.n:   For Applicant 
   
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
