 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-00578 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on July 14, 2010. On March 
29, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 8, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 5, 2011, 
and the case was assigned to me on May 20, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
 
2 
 
 
on May 26, 2011, scheduling the hearing for June 14, 2011. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which was 
admitted without objection. I kept the record open until July 2, 2011, to enable Applicant 
to submit additional evidence. He timely submitted AX B through J, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 21, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old engineer technician employed by a federal contractor. 
He attended a community college from August 2002 to June 2005, but he did not 
receive a degree. He also attended a vocational school from June 2001 to April 2002 
and received a diploma. He worked in the private sector from May 2002 to April 2008. 
He worked as a field engineer for a temporary employment agency from May 2008 until 
June 2009, when he began working for his current employer. He has never held a 
security clearance. 
 
 The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts to six creditors, totaling about $400,000. 
Three of the delinquent debts are mortgages on Appellant’s primary residence and the 
rental property. All three delinquent mortgages are held by the same creditor. One debt 
is for delinquent homeowners’ association assessments, and five are medical debts 
incurred when Applicant did not have medical insurance. He admitted all the debts in his 
answer to the SOR, and his admissions are corroborated by his credit reports dated 
July 22, 2010, and March 15, 2011. (GX 4; GX 5.) 
 
 Applicant has a five-year-old son who lives with him. He was earning about 
$55,000 per year when he bought his first home in 2003. He paid $116,000 and 
borrowed the entire purchase price. He testified that this property is now worth about 
$56,000. When his son was born in 2005, he bought a larger two-bedroom home and 
began renting his previous home. He was earning about $65,000 per year when he 
bought his second home. He paid about $200,000, with a 10 percent down payment. He 
testified that this property is now worth about $84,000. (Tr. 28-29.) After the hearing, he 
presented evidence that his first home is listed for sale at $40,000, and a condominium 
similar to his current residence is listed for sale at $79,000. (AX C.) 
 
 Applicant was current on his mortgage payments until 2009. He decided to sell 
the rental property after his tenants moved out in February or March 2009. He stopped 
looking for renters after he decided to sell the property. He tried a short sale and had 
two offers, but the lender would not approve the contracts. He submitted a deed in lieu 
of foreclosure, but the lender would not accept it. As of the date of the hearing, the 
rental property was vacant. (Tr. 35-40.)  
 
Applicant tried to negotiate a loan modification on his primary residence, but the 
bank would not modify the loan because the payments were current. Applicant stopped 
making payments in an unsuccessful effort to qualify for a loan modification. After his 
unsuccessful efforts to sell either property, he decided to “walk away from both of them.” 
 
3 
 
 
(Tr. 33-36.) He stopped making payments on all the mortgages in August 2010. (Tr. 40.) 
As of the date of the hearing, neither property had been foreclosed. (GX 4 at 1-2.) 
 
In June 2009, Applicant was involved in a motorcycle accident and unable to 
work. He had just begun his current job, and he had not worked long enough for his 
medical insurance to take effect. His employer placed him on long-term disability, at 
about 80% of his pay, for about six months while he recovered from his injuries. The 
delinquent medical bills were incurred during the period he was without medical 
insurance. He was making small monthly payments on his various medical bills until 
January 2011. (AX J; Tr. 40.) 
 
 In October 2009, Applicant’s condominium association obtained a judgment 
against him for unpaid assessments totaling about $4,350. He was making monthly 
$200 payments on the judgment until February 2011. (AX J.) 
 
 Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 7 bankruptcy on April 8, 2011. (AX B.) The 
petition includes the debts alleged in the SOR. He listed assets of $172,465 and 
liabilities of $439,371. (AX B at 15.) He has completed the credit counseling required by 
the bankruptcy court. (AX H; AX I.) The meeting of creditors was held in May 2011, but 
he had not received a discharge as of the date of the hearing. (AX A.) 
 
 Applicant’s federal income tax returns reflect gross income of $76,630 for 2008, 
$54,064 for 2009, and $53,965 for 2010. (AX D, E, F.) His current net monthly income is 
about $3,300. His current budget provides for monthly rent of $1,300, based on the 
assumption that he will no longer be living in his condominium after obtaining a 
bankruptcy discharge, and it projects a net monthly remainder of about $680. (AX G.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges three delinquent real estate mortgages with the same lender 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f), an unsatisfied judgment for unpaid condominium fees (SOR 
¶ 1.c), and five delinquent medical bills (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i). The concern 
under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
5 
 
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations and his admissions are corroborated by his 
credit reports. Thus, two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are established: 
AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not 
meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s debts are recent, numerous, and not 
the result of circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant encountered several conditions 
beyond his control: a substantial income reduction in 2009, uninsured medical 
expenses, and a downturn in the real estate market. He acted responsibly toward some 
of his delinquent debts. He was making payments on his medical bills and the judgment 
for delinquent condominium fees until he decided to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
However, he did not act responsibly regarding the three mortgages. Instead, he decided 
to “walk away” from the mortgages on his primary residence and his rental property 
because they were no longer good investments. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 20(b) is 
established for the medical bills (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i) and the delinquent 
condominium fees (SOR ¶ 1.c), but not for the three delinquent mortgages (SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 
1.e, and 1.f).  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
receives some credit under this mitigating condition because he has completed the 
counseling required by the bankruptcy court, and a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge, if 
granted, will resolve all his delinquent debts. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Reliance on a legally available option such 
as bankruptcy does not necessarily establish the good-faith effort contemplated by this 
 
6 
 
 
mitigating condition. See ISCR Case No. 06-14521 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 15, 2007). For 
this reason and the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶ 20(b), I conclude 
that this mitigating condition is established for the medical bills and the judgment for 
condominium fees, but not for the three delinquent mortgages. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). This 
mitigating condition is not established, because Applicant has admitted all the debts 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant invested in real estate by borrowing most of the purchase price on two 
properties, counting on them to appreciate and provide rental income. Like many others, 
he encountered a downturn in the real estate market. Although he was “upside down” 
on his mortgages, he was keeping current on his payments until he decided that he had 
made a bad investment. When he could not negotiate a loan modification or a short 
sale, he decided to stop making payments on all three mortgages alleged in the SOR. 
He is now counting on Chapter 7 bankruptcy to resolve his debts. However, the 
circumstances of his bankruptcy do not demonstrate the sense of duty required of 
persons entrusted with classified information.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
 
7 
 
 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.i:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
