 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00026    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Noel, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows 
he has a history of financial problems that remain unresolved. His two convictions for 
money-related crimes indicate a pattern of questionable judgment. Applicant did not 
present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the financial and 
personal conduct security concerns. Accordingly, as explained below, this case is 
decided against Applicant. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on April 1, 2011, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a Statement of 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
 
2 
 
Reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR detailed the factual bases for 
the action under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal 
Conduct).    
  
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned 
to me on June 3, 2011. The hearing proceeded, as scheduled, on July 12, 2011. 
Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
admitted without objection.  Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B were also admitted 
without objection.  I identified as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1, a debt matrix prepared by 
Department Counsel. The transcript (Tr.) was received July 21, 2011. 
 
At the end of the hearing, I held the record open until August 12, 2011, to allow 
Applicant to submit additional documentation. He submitted two documents, which I 
have admitted as AE C and D, without objection from Department Counsel. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 25 years old. He is engaged and has one child with his fiancée. He 
did not finish high school and is currently studying for his GED. He attended vocational 
school to become a welder. Although he did not complete the program, he has been 
working as a welder for the past five years. He applied for a security clearance when he 
began working for a government contractor in August 2010.2  
 
 Applicant left home at 16 years old. For the next five years, Applicant found 
temporary housing with his or his fiancée’s relatives. He began accumulating delinquent 
debt at 18 years old, when he obtained his first credit card (1.b.) and cell phone (1.f.). In 
2007, Applicant and his fiancée decided to live together. Although Applicant’s living 
situation stabilized, his finances continued to be precarious. Since then, he has 
continued to accumulate delinquent debt. Applicant’s most recent financial problems 
result from five months of unemployment in 2003 (1.a.), his being consistently 
underemployed (1.d. – 1.e.), and his decisions not to pay disputed accounts (1.c. and 
1.g.).3   
  
 The SOR alleges and Applicant admits that he is indebted to seven creditors for 
$16,700. The Sprint PCS debts alleged in 1.d.  and 1.e. are duplicates. Debt Recovery 
solutions is currently collecting the debt on behalf of Sprint. The former collection 
agency, NCO, confirmed that the company is no longer collecting the account and the 
account is closed. To date, Applicant has paid $25 each on the Stevens Business 
Services account (1.c.) and Debt Recovery Solutions account (1.e.). In addition to the 
SOR debts, Applicant disclosed at hearing that he is also indebted to the Internal 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
case.  The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H 
(2006). The AG replace the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
2 Tr. 15-16; Security Clearance Application, dated August 10, 2010. 
 
3 Tr. 16-18; 54-55. 
 
3 
 
Revenue Service for $900 as a result of an overpayment of his 2010 tax refund. When 
he completed his 2010 tax return, Applicant thought his refund was too high based on 
his previous returns. He decided not to question the refund amount and spent it. He has 
not made any arrangements to repay the debt.4  
 
 Applicant attended debt management counseling in the spring of 2011. Because 
he has no disposable income, the credit counselor could not set up any payment plans 
on his behalf. He and his fiancée live paycheck to paycheck, barely earning enough 
money to cover their expenses. After paying all of their monthly expenses each month, 
the couple has a negative net remainder. When they are unable to make ends meet, the 
couple often relies on credit cards or personal loans from his fiancée’s family members. 
In addition to the delinquent debt alleged in the SOR, Applicant is currently repaying a 
personal loan to his future father-in-law, who took out a debt consolidation loan on 
behalf of Applicant and his fiancée, and medical expenses from the birth of his 
daughter, which were not covered by his fiancée’s health insurance. Applicant plans to 
repay all of his debt by taking a loan from his 401(k) account when he becomes 
eligible.5 
 
 In addition to the Guideline F considerations, the SOR also alleges that in 2005, 
Applicant pleaded guilty to improper use of a credit card over $250 and threatening to 
commit a crime. Applicant’s future brother-in-law, with whom Applicant was living at the 
time, allowed Applicant to use his credit card for necessities, as needed. Applicant used 
the credit card to purchase almost $1,500 in adult movies and toys. After learning of 
Applicant’s purchases, the two men had an altercation. Applicant’s brother-in-law kicked 
Applicant out of his home and called the police. As a result of his guilty plea, he was 
sentenced to one year of probation and ordered to pay restitution. Since this incident, 
Applicant and his future brother-in-law have made amends. In 2011, Applicant’s future 
brother-in-law loaned Applicant money to purchase a car. Applicant repaid the loan with 
the proceeds of his 2010 tax return.6 
 
 In May 2009, Applicant pleaded nolo contendere to a charge of false report of 
crime. In an effort to raise much-needed money to pay bills, Applicant took the money 
he and his fiancée kept in their home safe, about $300, to purchase lottery tickets. His 
fiancée intended to use the money to pay upcoming bills. When his fiancée discovered 
the money was missing, she called the police, thinking it had been stolen. When 
questioned by the police about the money, Applicant did not immediately admit that he 
had taken it. When he finally admitted to taking the money, he was charged with 
Obstructing an Officer in Execution of Duty. He served six months probation.7 
 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 50-52; AE C – D. 
 
5 Tr. 39-41, 50, 57, 60.  
 
6  Tr. 20, 43-47, 59; GE 3. 
 
7 Tr. 21, 48-49; GE 3.  
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. The protection of the national 
security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning 
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor 
of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that 
are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes three conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such embezzlement, employee 
theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, filling 
 
5 
 
deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches of 
trust. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems have persisted since he turned 18, over seven 
years ago. Since then, he has accumulated a number of delinquent debts that he has 
been unable or unwilling to pay. His misuse of his future brother’s-in-law credit card 
indicates a breach of financial trust. The evidence is sufficient to raise the disqualifying 
conditions cited above. Although not disqualifying under any specific disqualifying 
conditions, the 2009 lottery ticket incident is an indication that Applicant may engage in 
acts of desperation, if not illegal acts, to generate income to support his family. His 
actions raise concerns about his judgment and trustworthiness. 
  
 Of the six mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 20, two offer partial 
mitigation of the financial considerations security concern raised in this case: 
  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 Applicant sought debt management counseling in an attempt to rehabilitate his 
finances. Because he has no disposable income, relief through a debt consolidation 
program was not feasible. His financial problems remain unresolved and his financial 
situation is not under control. He has recently paid $50 toward his delinquent debts. 
Given Applicant’s tight monthly finances, the two $25 payments are significant. 
However, his efforts are not enough to mitigate the financial concerns in this case. His 
2005 and 2009 criminal acts were motivated by lack of money. Both events cast doubt 
on his security worthiness and he has not provided any evidence to show that either of 
these events is unlikely to recur. On the contrary, the circumstances surrounding his 
2010 tax return, though not alleged, reinforce the impression that Applicant may 
continue to show questionable judgment where his finances are concerned.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 
 
6 
 
The guideline notes one disqualifying condition that is relevant to this case under 
AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indication that the person may not safeguard protected 
information. 
 
 Applicant’s 2005 and 2009 convictions support a negative whole-person 
assessment. In both incidents he displayed questionable judgment. In the latter, he 
exhibited dishonesty. His willingness to cover up his actions fearing the potential 
repercussions and his willingness to accept the tax refund he believed to be an error 
casts doubt on the possibility that he would self-report a security clearance violation. For 
the reasons explained in the financial considerations discussions above, the two 
convictions cannot be mitigated under any of the personal conduct mitigating conditions.  
 
The evidence as a whole justifies current doubts about Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan8 and the clearly-consistent standard, I 
resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this conclusion, 
I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept. Nevertheless, Applicant did not 
meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This 
case is decided against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c. – 1.e:  For Applicant 
   
  Subparagraphs 1.f. – 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs  2.a. – 2.b.  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
                                                          
8 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
