                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 07-13512 
 SSN:------------------ ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 18, 2007, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86) electronically as an e-Quip. On May 14, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security 
concerns under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and G (Alcohol Consumption).. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 19, 2008, and answered it in 
writing on May 28, 2008.  On August 6, 2008, Department Counsel submitted the 
Department=s written case.  A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was 
provided to the Applicant. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.  Applicant received the file on August 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
11, 2008.  Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM.  I received the case 
assignment on October 10, 2008.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and 
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, dated May 28, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 2.a of the SOR, with explanations. He denied the factual 
allegations in ¶¶ 2.b of the SOR. He also provided additional information to support his 
request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 21 years old, unmarried, and works for a defense contractor.  He has 
an associate college degree. (Items 2, 4) 
 
 Applicant was arrested on September 12, 2005, and charged with possession of 
marijuana.  Applicant denied the pipe and marijuana in his car were owned by him, but 
he pled guilty to the charge as a first offender.  He received a restricted driving license 
for six months, 24 months of community service, and was required to undergo random 
urine screenings for controlled substances.  Also, he paid a fine of $100 and $141 in 
court costs. He complied with all requirements. (Items 2, 5-9) 
 
 On November 4, 2006, Applicant was arrested for DUI, speeding (100 m.p.h. in a 
60 m.p.h. zone), having a blood alcohol level of .15 to .20, and the purchase and 
possession of alcohol by a person under 21 years of age.  He pled guilty to the DUI, and 
his driving license was suspended for one year.  The court issued Applicant a work-
related restricted driving permit, fined him $500, and assessed him $191 in court costs.  
He spent 10 days in jail.  Applicant was ordered to attend an alcohol safety awareness 
program.  He also received three years of unsupervised probation, which extends into 
2010. (Items 2, 5-9) 
 
 Applicant started drinking alcohol at 17 years of age, and regularly attended 
parties where he drank alcohol while under the age of 21 years.  He built his tolerance 
to 10 to 15 beers per drinking session from the age of 18.5 years to 19 years when he 
received the DUI after drinking 15 beers between 8 p.m. and 2:30 a.m., the day he was 
arrested.  Applicant claims he does not consume alcohol anymore, but did not submit 
any objective testing data to support his statement.  He further claims his drinking never 
affected his education or work.  He attributes the drinking to the college environment. 
(Items 2, 5-9) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
3 
 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
4 
 
 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes five conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying.  The following four conditions may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person 
was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; and,  
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program. 
 
 Applicant has two arrests within a 14 month period.  Both arrests occurred when 
Applicant was under 21 years of age.  The first arrest was for possession a marijuana, 
and the second arrest for speeding, DUI, and possession of alcohol by an underage 
person pursuant to state law.  Applicant pled guilty to both offenses.  AG ¶ 31(a) 
applies.  Applicant admitted these offenses.  AG ¶ 31(c) applies.  He is currently on a 
three year probation.  AG ¶ 31(d) applies.  He violated his marijuana probation when 
arrested for DUI in 2006, resulting in a longer probation until 2010, and a one-year 
driving privilege suspension.  AG ¶ 31(e) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security 
concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and, 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the 
passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job 
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
In Applicant’s case, AG ¶ 32 (b) and (c) are clearly not applicable because he 
admitted he committed the driving offense freely and without coercion.  The marijuana 
offense he denied because he contended the pipe and residue was not his, but there 
was sufficient evidence from the police officer to support the offense, and Applicant pled 
guilty to it. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The first offense occurred in September 2005, and the second in November 
2006, all within the past three-year period.  That time is not enough to trigger the 
application of AG ¶ 32 (a).  Nor were there any unusual circumstances in either of these 
incidents.  This mitigating condition does not apply. 
 
Finally, mitigating condition AG ¶ 32 (d) requires successful rehabilitation.  
Applicant earned his college degree, and apparently a good work record, but did not 
submit any recommendations from his supervisors to confirm that he is a good and 
dutiful worker; however, he remains on probation.  This mitigating condition has limited 
application.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption, 
“Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or 
the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual's reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
 
AG ¶ 22 describes seven conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of 
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in an 
intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical 
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion of an 
alcohol rehabilitation program; and, 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, evaluation, 
treatment, or abstinence. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Of these seven disqualifying conditions, AG ¶ 22 (a) and (c) are applicable.  
Applicant received a DUI in 2006 for drinking and driving, when he was under his state’s 
legal drinking age of 21 years.  He pled guilty to the offense, and had his driving 
privileges suspended.  His Answer and statements show that over a three-year period 
of time from age 17 that he built an alcohol tolerance of up to 15 beers a night.  He 
demonstrated impaired judgment by driving drunk, and speeding at 100 m.p.h. in a 60 
m.p.h. zone. 
 
AG ¶ 23 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, 
provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a 
pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling or 
treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, and is making 
satisfactory progress; and, 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or 
rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and 
established pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a 
similar organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program. 
  
Applicant showed a strong pattern of excessive consumption of alcohol, resulting 
in dangerous misconduct as shown by his DUI arrest.  His statements show the pattern 
of his alcohol consumption. AG  ¶ 23 (a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant admitted alcohol caused him some problems, and allegedly ceased his 
consumption to avoid further problems.  But he did not submit any objective evaluations, 
or other evidence of actions he has taken to avoid the problems in the future. AG ¶ 23 
(b) does not apply to Applicant.   Nor does AG ¶23 (c) apply because there is no 
evidence to support it. 
 
AG ¶ 23 (d) applies only if there is evidence of counseling and rehabilitation, with 
required aftercare, participation in Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization, and 
a favorable prognosis from a medical professional or licensed clinical social worker who 
are staff members of a recognized alcohol treatment program.  Applicant has submitted 
no evidence to support the application of this mitigating condition.  The alcohol 
 
7 
 
 
education program he attended as part of his court disposition in the DUI case does not 
meet these criteria either.   
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness 
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include 
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant is a 21-year-old male with 
two arrests for violations of state laws on possession of marijuana, and possession of 
alcohol as a minor, DUI, and speeding.  This frequent misconduct within a 14 month 
period indicates immaturity and irresponsibility.  His actions were voluntary, especially 
his speeding and DUI.  There is a strong likelihood of recurrence based on Applicant’s 
past immature and selfish actions, in addition to the lack of evidence of substantive 
evidence of alcohol rehabilitation .  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his criminal conduct and 
alcohol consumption misconduct.  I also conclude the “whole person” concept against 
Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
