 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-15218 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
December 4, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the Statement of Reasons (SOR), she admitted she has 
three brothers and two sisters that are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. One 
brother and one sister are employed by the Government of Afghanistan. Her mother is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen, but resides in Afghanistan. She failed to mitigate the Foreign 
Influence security concerns. Additionally, she was involuntarily terminated by two 
different employers in April 2006, July 2010, and November 2012, which raised security 
concerns under the guideline for Personal Conduct. She falsified questions regarding 
her July 2010 and November 2012 terminations on her electronic Security Clearance 
Application (e-QIP) dated March 12, 2013. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her e-QIP on March 12, 2013. On January 31, 2014, the 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued an SOR to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
 
2 
 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR (Answer) on March 23, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). The case was assigned to me on May 2, 2014. A notice of hearing 
was issued to Applicant on May 7, 2014, scheduling the hearing for June 30, 2014. At 
that time, Applicant was overseas and requested that the hearing be delayed until she 
returned to the United States. An amended notice of hearing was issued to Applicant on 
May 27, 2014, scheduling the hearing for October 24, 2014.The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted 
without objection. It also submitted Hearing Exhibit (HE) I, which verified that GE 1 
through 5 had been served upon the Applicant. Applicant testified on her own behalf 
and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through I. AE A through I were admitted into the record 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 3, 
2014.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
Request to take Administrative Notice 
 
 At the hearing, the Government requested that I take administrative notice of 
certain facts relating to Afghanistan. Department Counsel provided a five-page 
summary of the facts, supported by six Government documents pertaining to 
Afghanistan, identified as Hearing Exhibit (HE) II. I take administrative notice of the facts 
included in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters of general 
knowledge, and not subject to reasonable dispute. They are set out in the Findings of 
Fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 56 years old. She is employed by a Government contractor as a 
translator. She was born in Afghanistan and immigrated to the United State 
approximately 18 years ago. She moved to the United States because she wanted to 
live in peace and have her children pursue their educations here. She was naturalized 
as a U.S. citizen in May 1997. She possesses a bachelor’s degree from a university in 
Afghanistan. She is married and has five adult children. Applicant’s children and 
husband all reside in the United States and are U.S. citizens. Applicant and her 
husband own a house in the United States. Her bank accounts are located solely in the 
United States. She did not provide the value of her assets. (GE 1; AE I; Tr. 34-37, 43-
46.) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant’s three brothers and two sisters are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan (SOR subparagraph 1.a). Two of her siblings are alleged to be 
employed by the Government of Afghanistan (SOR subparagraph 1.b). Her mother, a 
naturalized U.S. citizen, was alleged to reside in Afghanistan (SOR subparagraph 1.c). 
Applicant admitted all of these allegations. 
 
Applicant has 11 siblings: five brothers and six sisters. Two sisters and one 
brother are naturalized U.S. citizens and reside in the United States. One sister is a 
citizen of the United Kingdom and resides there. One brother is deceased.1 Three 
brothers and three sisters are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. (GE 1; 47-50.) 
 
In her Answer, Applicant admitted that two siblings work for the Government of 
Afghanistan. In her 2013 e-QIP and 2014 Answer, Applicant identified that her 65-year-
old brother had a foreign military affiliation through his work as a director of forces “GTL 
Organization for Education.” She also stated that her 57-year-old sister was employed 
by the Afghan Ministry of Education as a teacher. She offered no further details about 
their employment. (GE 1; Tr. 40-43, 47-50.) 
 
Applicant’s mother, who is a naturalized U.S. citizen, currently resides in 
Afghanistan. She is 85 years old. She has traveled between the United States and 
Afghanistan to visit family, but intends to remain in Afghanistan because she is ill and 
wants Afghanistan to be her final resting place. Applicant did not specify how her 
mother is supported. (GE 1; Tr. 40-43.) 
  
Afghanistan 
 
Afghanistan’s stability is threatened by the convergence of insurgent, terrorist, 
and criminal networks. Corrupt government officials are often interlinked via multi-layer 
connections, making ties between officials and criminal activity difficult to prove and 
prosecute. (HE I.) 
 
Afghanistan’s human rights record has remained poor, and the Afghan-Taliban 
dominated insurgency has become increasingly sophisticated and destabilizing. Human 
rights problems include: armed insurgent groups’ killings of persons affiliated with the 
government and indiscriminate attacks on civilians; torture and abuse of detainees by 
security forces; extrajudicial killings; poor prison conditions; arbitrary arrests and 
detention; prolonged pretrial detention; judicial corruption; violation of privacy; 
restrictions on freedom of speech; and abuse of children. Overall, the State Department 
has declared that the security threat to all American citizens in Afghanistan remains 
critical as no part of Afghanistan is immune from violence. U.S. citizens who are also 
                                                          
1 At the hearing Applicant testified that her brother, who worked for the government of 
Afghanistan, passed away three years ago. (Tr. 47-50.) When she completed her e-QIP in 2013, she only 
identified one brother as deceased. She presented no evidence that an additional brother passed away. 
 
 
4 
 
citizens of Afghanistan may be subject to other laws that impose special obligations. 
(HE I.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant exercised conduct involving questionable 
judgment on multiple occasions. She was terminated from three different positions from 
April 2006 to November 2012. She failed to disclose her 2010 and 2012 terminations on 
her 2013 e-QIP. In her Answer, Applicant admitted she was terminated three times, but 
denied falsifying her e-QIP. 
 
 In April 2006 Applicant was working overseas. An initial JPAS report to the DoD, 
dated October 24, 2006, reflected that Applicant was terminated by her employer in 
April 2006 for “Personal Conduct” including “unreliability, tardiness, and forgery.” (GE 
2.) Applicant testified that her site manager filed false incident reports against her in 
retribution, after Applicant defended another woman in their office that was the subject 
of sexual harassment by the site manager. She claimed that an Army lawyer “cleared” 
the situation and the site supervisor was later fired. She failed to present any 
documentation to support her testimony that the situation was resolved in her favor. 
JPAS reflected a “final” entry, dated October 18, 2010, which continued to show she 
was terminated by this employer for “unreliability, tardiness, and forgery.” She indicated 
as a result of this incident, her security clearance was denied or revoked. (GE 3; GE 4; 
Tr. 37-39, 50-51.)2  
 
 In July 2010 Applicant was involuntarily terminated by her employer for improper 
use of leave under the Family Medical Leave Act. Applicant testified she left her position 
voluntarily when her husband and son became ill. (GE 3; Tr. 53-54.) 
 
 Applicant was rehired in October 2010 by the company that terminated her in 
July 2010. However, she was again involuntarily terminated on November 7, 2012, due 
to job abandonment, after she failed to return to work. Applicant testified that she left 
her position voluntarily when she became ill with asthma. She was told that if she took 
more than 30 days leave, she would be terminated, despite having a letter from her 
doctor. In her March 25, 2013 counter-intelligence screening, she indicated she was on 
vacation in the United States when her mother fell ill. She felt she needed to care for her 
mother, but was told that if she did not return to work within the allotted time she would 
be terminated. Applicant chose not to return to work. It is unclear from the record 
whether Applicant went to Afghanistan to care for her mother or if she cared for her 
mother in the United States. She claimed to have a letter from her employer stating that 
she resigned from the position, but she did not present it into evidence. (GE 3; Tr. 52-
53.)  
 
 In Applicant’s March 12, 2013 e-QIP, she answered, “No,” in response to 
“Section 13C-Employment Record. Have any of the following happened to you within 
                                                          
2 Applicant indicated she never had a security clearance eligibility/access authorization denied, 
suspended, or revoked on her 2013 e-QIP. (GE 1.) 
 
 
5 
 
the last seven (7) years at employment activities that you have not previously listed? 
Fired from a job? Quit a job after being told you would be fired? Have you left a job by 
mutual agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct? Left a job by mutual 
agreement following notice of unsatisfactory performance?” She failed to disclose the 
July 2010 and November 2012 terminations. (GE 1.) Applicant claimed she did not 
know she was terminated. (Tr. 56.) 
 
 Applicant produced Letters of Recommendation and Appreciation to demonstrate 
that despite the terminations, her Government customers found that she was dedicated 
to her position and did an excellent job on assigned tasks. (AE A; AE C; AE E; AE F; AE 
G.) She received certificates of merit and appreciation for her exceptional performance. 
(AE B; AE D; AE E; AE F; AE H.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
 
6 
 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7.Two are applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
  To be fully applicable, AG ¶ 7(a) requires both the presence of family members 
(or business or professional associates, friends, or other persons) who are citizens 
and/or residents of a foreign nation, and substantial evidence of a heightened risk. 
Applicant’s three brothers and three sisters are citizens and residents in Afghanistan. 
Her mother is a U.S. citizen residing in Afghanistan. The heightened risk required to 
 
7 
 
raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. Heightened risk 
denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living 
under a foreign government or substantial assets in a foreign nation. Terrorist groups 
and other criminal organizations operate within Afghanistan. Further, the government of 
Afghanistan has been identified as committing human rights violations. In this instance, 
a heightened risk is present. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶ 7(a).  
 
  Applicant has close familial ties to her mother, brothers, and sisters, who are 
citizens and residents in Afghanistan. Two of her siblings are employed by the 
Government of Afghanistan. These familial ties in Afghanistan could potentially create a 
conflict of interest between her duty to protect classified information and her desire to 
help her foreign family members. AG ¶ 7(b) applies. 
 
  AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under 
this guideline. I considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these people are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant has lived in the United States for more than 18 years. Her assets are in 
the United States. Her children were raised here. She has worked for a government 
contractor and has been recognized by those that know her for exceptional 
contributions through her work as a translator. These factors weigh in the Applicant’s 
favor and are mitigating, in part. However, she has close ties of affection to her family in 
Afghanistan. Two of her siblings work for the Afghan Government. I cannot conclude 
that it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.; that she can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest; or that there is little likelihood that her foreign relatives could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation. Applicant bears the burden to introduce sufficient 
evidence to mitigate the Government’s concerns with respect to those issues, and she 
has not met this burden. None of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 
8 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
  (d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
  (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
 Applicant failed to identify her 2010 and 2012 terminations on her 2013 e-QIP. 
She knew she had been terminated after she failed to report to work on both occasions. 
Yet, she willfully chose not to disclose them on the e-QIP. This behavior indicates 
questionable judgment and untrustworthiness under AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
 Applicant has been terminated by two different Government contractors on three 
occasions. Those terminations demonstrate a pattern of violating her employer’s 
policies, which led to terminations. She failed to substantiate her claims that the 
terminations do not show she exercised questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. AG ¶ 
16(d) applies. 
 
 
  
 
9 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under 
this guideline. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, the 
evidence does not support the application of any one of them. Applicant did not make 
prompt or good-faith efforts to correct her falsification or concealment. She provided no 
information that indicates she was ill-advised in completing her SF 86. She failed to 
support her explanations regarding the terminations with documentation. Given the 
falsification on her e-QIP, her credibility is questionable. Falsifying material information 
is a serious offense and Applicant has provided no evidence indicating that similar 
lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. Further, she failed to take responsibility for her 
actions that led to the terminations. She has not provided sufficient evidence to meet 
her burden of proof to mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
10 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a patriotic American citizen, whose work has been of value to our 
military mission in Afghanistan, as reflected in letters of recommendation and 
certificates. However, she has close ties to her family in Afghanistan, which remain 
unmitigated. Further, she has a questionable employment track record and has not 
been forthright in disclosing it to the Government. She omitted her terminations on her 
security clearance application, and failed to disclose that her security clearance had 
been denied or revoked as a result of the 2006 incident. She offered varying and 
inconsistent explanations regarding the reason she was terminated in November 2012. 
Overall, Applicant lacks credibility. The record evidence leaves me with serious 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Foreign Influence or 
Personal Conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
