 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 11-10572 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On June 14, 2011, Applicant submitted her electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On November 7, 2013, the Department of 
Defense issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 10, 2013. Applicant 
requested her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
On January 24, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant on September 24, 2014. She was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
September 30, 2014. Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30-day 
time allowed that would have expired on October 30, 2014. I received the case 
assignment on December 4, 2014. Based upon a review of the complete case file, 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in all three Subparagraphs of the SOR. (Items 
1-3)  
 
 Applicant works for a defense contractor. She is 35 years old and has a 
certificate in aviation maintenance. She has one child. She moved from one state to 
another for her job and to be closer to the father of her child, for the child’s benefit, in 
the summer of 2011. (Items 1-6) 
 
 The SOR alleges three delinquent debts. The Government amended the second 
allegation to delete “$2,180” and replace it with “$2,387” and in the third allegation 
replacing “$8,389.00” with “$9,107.00” to accurately reflect the actual amount of money 
owed. All three debts total $11,649. (FORM; Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant owes $155 on a credit account from 2011 (Subparagraph 1.a). She 
claims in her Answer it was paid in a settlement for $93 on December 10, 2013. Her 
November 2013 credit report shows the debt as due and owing. Applicant originally 
disputed the debt but later decided to resolve it. She did that and the debt is not owed 
anymore, based on her Answer and the minimal amount of the debt. (Items 1-6) 
 
 Applicant is indebted on two student loans (Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c). These 
debts total $11,494, as amended. Applicant claims she could not pay the student loans 
in a timely manner because she moved to her new job and did not have the money to 
pay for the move and her student loans. The file documents show Applicant’s debts 
were delinquent from December 2005 and January 2006 to the present time. Her last 
payments were in 2008, preceding her move in 2011. (Items 1-6)  
 
 Applicant was unemployed from April 2008 to July 2008. Otherwise she has been 
fully employed since December 2005. She has had time from 2011 to the present to 
arrange payment of her student loans. Her November 2013 credit report shows the two 
student loan accounts and a cellular telephone debt. Her July 2011 interview with a 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
government investigator includes her statement that she cannot pay her current 
obligations beyond her rent and food because she is a single parent. She sought a 
roommate in 2011 to help reduce her monthly rent obligations. No current information 
was provided by Applicant about her 2014 financial situation. Her personal financial 
statement from October 2012 shows her net monthly income as $2,849 and her 
expenses as $2,414, leaving $435 of disposable income. (Items 1-6) 
 
Applicant did not submit any documentation that she has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. Her interview in July 2011 with the government 
investigator states she has not had any credit counseling. She provided no evidence 
concerning the quality of her job performance. She submitted no character references 
or other evidence tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I 
was unable to evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or character in person since she 
elected to have her case decided without a hearing. (Item 6) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2005 to the present, Applicant accumulated three delinquent debts. One 
debt was paid for $155. The two remaining debts total $11,649 and remain unpaid or 
unresolved.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 (a) would apply if Applicant’s financial problems occurred long ago, were 
infrequent, or occurred under unusual circumstances not likely to reoccur. Such is not 
the situation for this Applicant. This mitigating condition does not apply.  
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the loss of employment was shown by Applicant to 
have a substantial effect on her ability to repay her student loan debts. In the past eight 
years, Applicant has been unemployed three months. She failed to meet her burden of 
proof on that issue. 
 
Applicant has not had any financial counseling and there is no indication she has 
any plan to repay her student loans, based on her past inaction toward repayment. AG 
¶ 20 (c) does not apply.   
 
Applicant only repaid one small debt for $155. She settled the debt for $93. She 
did not make any good-faith effort to repay her $11,494 in delinquent student debt. AG ¶ 
20 (d) does not apply to her student loans. 
 
Applicant has not asserted a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
delinquent debts nor provided any documents showing a basis for the dispute. AG ¶ 20 
(e) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has not shown any affluence so this mitigating condition AG ¶ 20 (f) is 
not an issue in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when she 
incurred the debts. She has not taken any action to resolve her two delinquent student 
loan debts. This inaction leaves her vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress based on her financial obligation. Her lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. Her inaction will continue based on past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts. Next, she exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make any payments on her two delinquent 
debts during the past eight years. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
