1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-14899 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 18, 2011. 
On July 16, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. On October 31, 2014, the DOD 
sent him an amended SOR, adding allegations under Guideline E. The DOD acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the original SOR on August 11, 2014, and the amended 
SOR on November 21, 2014. (Hearing Exhibit (HX) II.) (HX I is described below.) He 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to 
2 
 
proceed on October 31, 2014, and the case was assigned to me on November 4, 2014. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
November 3, 2014, scheduling the hearing for November 21, 2014. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 10 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s letter transmitting copies of GX 1 
through 10 to Applicant is attached to the record as HX I. Applicant testified and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through CC, which were admitted without 
objection. I kept the record open until December 8, 2014, to enable Applicant to submit 
additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX DD through NN, which were 
received without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX DD through 
NN are attached to the record as HX III. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on 
December 4, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d and denied ¶¶ 
1.b and 1.c. In his answer to the amended SOR, he admitted SOR ¶¶ 2.b-2.c, 2.f, 2.g, 
2.i-2.l, 2.n-2.q, 2.s, and 2.v. He denied SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.d, 2.e, 2.h, 2.m, 2.r, 2.t, and 2.u. 
His admissions in his answers to the SOR, his answers to the amended SOR, and his 
testimony at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old machinist employed by a defense contractor. He has 
held a security clearance since August 2003. 
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from April 2000 to December 
2002. He held a security clearance while in the Navy. He received nonjudicial 
punishment in April 2000 for failure to go to his appointed place of duty and dereliction 
of duty. In November 2000, he was punished for unauthorized absence. He was 
punished again in February 2001 for disobedience. In September 2002, he was 
punished for failure to go to his appointed place of duty and disobedience. In November 
2002, he was accused of computer tampering and hacking. He denied the allegation 
and there is no evidence that it resulted in disciplinary action. (GX 9.) 
 
Applicant appeared before an administrative separation board in December 
2002. The board unanimously found that the allegation of committing a serious offense 
was not supported by the evidence, but the allegation of a pattern of misconduct was 
supported by the evidence. Two of the three board members recommended that 
Applicant’s administrative discharge be suspended for six months, but Applicant’s 
commander and the commander who convened the administrative separation board 
disagreed with the recommendation for suspension. In April 2003, Applicant was 
administratively discharged from the Navy, receiving a general discharge under 
honorable conditions for a “pattern of misconduct.” (AX A; AX B; AX E.) The November 
2002 hacking allegation was not considered by the administrative separation board. (Tr. 
56.) Applicant’s disciplinary record in the Navy is alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2.e. 
 
3 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA in August 2011, he disclosed that he received 
a general discharge from the Navy. He answered “No” to the question asking if, during 
the last seven years, he had been subject to court-martial or other disciplinary 
proceedings. (GX 1 at 29.) During a personal subject interview (PSI) in October 2011, 
Applicant told the investigator that he was discharged from the Navy because he was 
“late for classes two or three days” and his record “showed other issues involving UCMJ 
[Uniform Code of Military Justice] violations” when he first entered the Navy. He told the 
investigator he was disciplined for a UCMJ violation in February or March 2000 for 
falling asleep while on watch, and disciplined in late 2000 for two instances of 
disobedience. He told the investigator that he did not have any other UCMJ violations. 
He did not mention the September 2002 disciplinary action. (GX 4 at 10.) In his April 
2013 responses to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant certified that the summary of his 
PSI was true and correct. SOR ¶¶ 2.t and 2.u allege that applicant sought to conceal the 
circumstances of his discharge from the Navy.  
 
 Applicant worked for a city government in a temporary position as a heavy 
equipment maintenance supervisor from May to September 2003. He worked as a 
civilian machinist for the Navy from September 2003 to January 2007. He worked in an 
auto parts store from October 2005 to July 2008. He worked for defense contractors as 
a machinist from April 2008 to October 2009, was employed as a seasonal employee in 
a retail department store from October 2009 to January 2010, and was unemployed 
from February to June 2010. He began his current job in July 2010. (GX 1 at 14-27.) 
 
 Applicant married in December 2002 and divorced in December 2005. He and 
his wife had an 11-year-old son during this marriage. He remarried in 2013 and has a 
five-year-old son by his current wife. He has another 11-year-old son from another 
relationship, for whom he is obligated to pay child support. (GX 4 at 11-12; Tr. 69-71.) 
 
 The evidence concerning the four delinquent debts alleged in the SOR is as 
follows: 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a, collection account for cell phone ($227). Applicant admitted this 
debt, which is reflected in his June 2014 credit bureau report (CBR). (GX 7 at 1.) In his 
April 2013 response to DOHA financial interrogatories, he stated that he had an 
agreement to pay it by April 2014. (GX 6 at 2.) At the hearing, he testified that he had an 
agreement to settle the debt for $145, but it has not been settled because he was 
waiting for a written confirmation of the agreement. (Tr. 46-47, 82-83.)  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, collection accounts for child support ($1,256 and 
$6,636). Applicant denied these debts in his answer to the SOR. The evidence 
pertaining to these two collection accounts is conflicting. Applicant’s September 2011 
CBR reflected two child support accounts: one (account number ending in 7895) reflects 
past-due payments of $1,622 and a balance of $2,074, and the other (account number 
ending in 7894) is listed as an inactive account with no balance or past-due payments 
reflected. The two collection accounts alleged in the SOR are reflected in his February 
2013 and June 2014 CBRs, with no account numbers listed. (GX 5 at 2; GX 7 at 2.) 
4 
 
Applicant has been paying child support in varying amounts since April 2012. (GX 6 at 
11-13.) The payments have been collected by garnishment for $208 per pay period 
since at least March 2013. At the hearing, Applicant submitted a statement from the 
state child-support office reflecting that his balance due for child support was only $441. 
However, the account number for this balance is the same as the account reflected as 
inactive in the September 2011 CBR. (GX 6 at 13; AX CC; AX FF through AX HH.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d, charged-off car loan ($29,226). Applicant admitted this debt in his 
answer to the SOR. It is reflected in his September 2011 CBR (GX 2 at 8), but not 
reflected in his February 2013 and June 2014 CBRs. (GX 5; GX 7.) During a personal 
subject interview in October 2011, he told the investigator that the creditor offered to 
settle the account for $18,000, but he did not have the funds to accept the offer. (GX 4 
at 4.) In his April 2013 response to DOHA interrogatories, he stated that he intended to 
settle the debt with a lump-sum payment by the end of the year. (GX 6 at 3.)The debt is 
not resolved.  
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement in April 2013. It reflected net 
monthly income of $2,853, expenses of $2,250 (including $600 for child support), and 
debt payments of $330, leaving a net monthly remainder of $273. The debt payments 
do not include the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.d. (GX 6 at 6.) After the hearing, 
he submitted a family monthly budget reflecting monthly income of $4,013 and a net 
monthly remainder of $145. The budget includes child-support payments of $417 per 
month. (AX II.) Applicant has considered debt consolidation, but he has not sought or 
received financial counseling. 
 
Between May 2004 and December 2013, Applicant has been arrested or cited for 
the offenses listed in the table below. 
 
SOR Date Offenses SOR 
Answer
Disposition Evidence 
2.f May 2004 Driving under 
the influence 
Admit Convicted, fined; license 
restricted 
GX 1 at 
39; GX 4 
at 5 
2.g June 2004 HOV violation; 
no seatbelt; 
illegal exhaust; 
tinted windows 
Admit Convicted; illegal exhaust 
dismissed 
GX 8 at 1; 
AX H at 8; 
AX K 
2.h June 2004 Tinted 
windows 
Deny Dismissed AX J 
2.i July 2004 Loud music Admit Fined GX 8 at 2 
2.j Sep 2004 Violate 
restricted 
license; noise 
Admit Restricted license charge 
dismissed; fined for noise 
violation 
GX 8 at 2; 
AX P; 
2.k Sep 2004 Speeding; 
Improper lane 
change 
Admit Convicted; fined GX 8 at 2; 
AX H at 7; 
AX N 
5 
 
2.l Sep 2006 No front tag, 
registration,  
or inspection; 
driving on 
suspended 
license 
Admit Convicted of driving on 
suspended license; lack of 
registration, lack of front 
tag, and lack of inspection 
dismissed 
GX 8 at 1; 
AX H at 5; 
AX R;  
AX S;  
AX T;  
AX U 
2.m Feb 2007 Speeding; 
concealed 
weapon 
Deny Convicted of speeding; 
weapon charge dismissed 
(Applicant had concealed-
weapon permit) 
GX 8 at 2; 
AX BB;  
AX DD 
2.n Dec 2007 Operating 
radar device 
Admit Convicted; fined GX 8 at 2; 
AX W 
2.o Sep 2008 Failure to obey 
traffic signal; 
driving on 
suspended 
license 
Admit Nolle prosequi for both 
offenses 
GX 8 at 2; 
AX X;  
AX Y 
2.p Jun 09 Uninspected 
vehicle 
Admit Guilty in absentia; fined GX 8 at 2; 
AX Z 
2.q Mar 2010 Contempt of 
court 
Admit Dismissed after Applicant 
rescheduled appearance 
GX 3;  
GX 4 at 6 
2.r May 2010 Contempt of 
court 
Deny Unknown None 
2.s Nov 2010 Contempt of 
court 
Admit Dismissed after Applicant 
rescheduled appearance 
GX 3;  
GX 4 at 6 
2.v Dec 2013 Failure to obey 
highway sign 
Admit Fined; unsupervised 
probation for two years 
GX 4 at 6 
 
 The contempt of court charges alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.q, 2.r, and 2.s arose when 
Applicant missed court hearings pertaining to his child-support obligation. In his PSI, he 
told the investigator that he missed the March 2010 court hearing because he 
erroneously thought his attorney would appear for him. He had no specific recollection 
of a May 2010 court appearance, but he assumed that it pertained to his child-support 
obligation. (GX 4 at 6.) At the hearing, he testified that he missed the November 2010 
court hearing because he was working in another state and did not receive the hearing 
notice. He turned himself in when he returned from his out-of-state work assignment, 
and the charge was dismissed. (Tr. 61-63.)  
 
 In August 2014, Applicant was charged with failing to come to a complete stop at 
a stop sign. He was convicted in September 2014. (AX H at 3; Tr. 113-14.) This offense 
is not alleged in the SOR.1  
                                                          
1 Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to decide 
whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, 
or changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; 
or as part of a whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have 
considered the evidence of unalleged conduct for these limited purposes. 
6 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
7 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges four delinquent debts (SOR ¶ 1.a-1.d). The concern under this 
guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR, his CBRs, and his testimony at 
the hearing establish SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d and two disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a 
history of not meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions are 
potentially applicable. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant encountered two conditions largely 
beyond his control: his marital breakup in December 2005 and his unemployment from 
February 2009 to June 2010, when his seasonal employment ended. However, he has 
not acted reasonably. He has been employed continuously since July 2010, but he has 
made little effort to resolve the cell-phone debt and the charged-off auto loan. His child-
support obligation is being collected by garnishment.  
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Applicant received a settlement offer for the cell 
phone debt, but he has not acted on it. He promised to settle the delinquent auto loan in 
his April 2013 responses to DOHA interrogatories, but it is not settled. He is making 
child-support payments, but the payments are being collected by garnishment of his 
pay. Payment by involuntary garnishment, “is not the same as, or similar to, a good-faith 
initiation of repayment by the debtor.” ISCR Case No. 09-5700 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 
2011), citing ISCR Case No. 08-06058 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2009). 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(e) are not established. Applicant has not sought or received 
financial counseling, and he has not disputed any of the debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges multiple military offenses (SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2.d); an administrative 
discharge from the Navy for a “pattern of misconduct” (SOR ¶ 2.e); an arrest and 
conviction of DUI (SOR ¶ 2.f); ten traffic-related infractions (SOR ¶¶ 2.f-2.p and 2.v); 
three contempt of court citations for failure to appear in court (SOR ¶¶ 2.q-2.s); and 
falsifications during a PSI (SOR ¶ 2.t) and in response to DOHA interrogatories (SOR ¶ 
2.u. The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
9 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The disqualifying condition relevant to Applicant’s statements during the PSI and 
in response to DOHA interrogatories is AG ¶ 16(b): “deliberately providing false or 
misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security 
official, competent medical authority, or other official government representative.” When 
a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government has the burden 
of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative 
judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of 
mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 
2004). An applicant’s level of education and business experience are relevant to 
determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information during a security 
clearance investigation was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 
2010). 
 
 The evidence shows that Applicant disclosed his discharge from the Navy on his 
SCA. He correctly answered “No” to the question about military disciplinary 
proceedings, because his various punishments preceded his SCA by more than seven 
years. During the PSI, he disclosed and described several disciplinary actions that were 
the basis for his administrative separation, but he did not mention the disciplinary action 
in September 2002. Based on his extensive disclosure of his Navy disciplinary record 
during the PSI, I am satisfied that his failure to mention one of several disciplinary 
actions was not an intentional concealment. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 16(b) is not 
established for his statements during the PSI, alleged in SOR ¶ 2.t. 
 
 The second alleged falsification is based on the first falsification. If Applicant did 
not deliberately conceal the September 2002 disciplinary action in the PSI, then his 
subsequent certification that the summary of his PSI was true and correct was not 
deliberately false. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 16(b) is not established for Applicant’s 
response to the DOHA interrogatories alleged in SOR ¶ 2.u.  
 
 Applicant denied the tinted-window infraction alleged in SOR ¶ 2.h and the 
concealed-weapon charge alleged in SOR ¶ 2.m, and those charges were dismissed. 
He denied the contempt of court alleged in SOR ¶ 2.r, and there is no documentary 
evidence in the record establishing it. Thus, I find for Applicant on these three 
allegations. The remaining allegations, alleging Applicant’s disciplinary actions while in 
the Navy, DUI conviction, multiple traffic infractions, and two contempt of court citations, 
are established by Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence. The 
following disqualifying conditions are established: 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
10 
 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations; and  
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(e): the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established for SOR ¶¶ 2.a-2.p and 2.v. Most of Applicant’s 
infractions were minor, but they are numerous and frequent. The incidents did not occur 
under unique circumstances making them unlikely to recur. While some infractions are 
more than ten years old, they are part of a long chain of incidents reflecting Applicant’s 
unwillingness to follow rules. However, the contempt of court citations alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 2.q-2.s were minor and infrequent. Applicant gave plausible and credible 
explanations for his failures to appear in court. When he learned that he had missed a 
court date, he turned himself in and rescheduled the hearings, after which the contempt 
citations were dismissed. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(e) is established. Applicant has openly disclosed his record during the 
security clearance process and at the hearing. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
11 
 
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems, disciplinary record in the Navy, DUI conviction, 
and multiple traffic infractions constitute a long record of irresponsible conduct and 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. He is still on probation for the 
December 2013 traffic infraction. He apparently did not take his probationary status 
seriously, committing another infraction in August 2014. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on his finances and personal 
conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.h:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.i-2.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.m (speeding):   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.m (concealed weapon):  For Applicant 
12 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.n-2.p:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.q-2.u:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.v:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
