KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant had not laid a sufficient factual predicate to
have the Judge rule on application of the state anti-deficiency statue was reasonable.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 12-05113.a1
DATE: 12/30/2014
DATE: December 30, 2014
In Re:
-----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-05113
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Stephen Silvers, Personal Representative
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 12, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On September 17, 2014, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Jennifer I. Goldstein denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in some of her
findings of fact; whether the Judge failed to consider all of the evidence; and whether the Judge’s
adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we
affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact 
Applicant married his now ex-wife in the late 1990s.  The couple bought a house.  After
moving in, and without Applicant’s knowledge, the spouse received a number of credit cards and
charged the maximum amounts on them.  As a consequence of this financial problem, Applicant
filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 2000, discharging about $70,000 in delinquent debt.  
In 2006, Applicant bought a new house, financing the purchase with two mortgages.  The
first mortgage was at a fixed rate, the second at a flexible rate.  Unfortunately, Applicant was able
to make his payments for this house for only two years.  Applicant stopped making payments in
2008, despite an annual income of $100,000.  He stated that the reason for this delinquency was the
high cost of his marital separation.  He and his ex-wife were divorced in early 2014.  He had
requested the court to order a short sale of the house, but it declined to do so because a minor child
was living there.
The divorce decree permitted the ex-spouse to reside in the house until it was foreclosed
upon; however, as of the close of the record, the lender had yet to seek foreclosure.  To save money,
Applicant has moved back into the house but is looking for an apartment to rent.  The holder of the
first mortgage has offered Applicant a loan modification, but he has been unwilling to accept it
despite having the financial ability to make the payments.  Instead, he has sought a deed-in-lieu of
foreclosure.  He has not had any contact with the second mortgage holder in almost four years.  He
believes that his state’s anti-deficiency law protects him from liability on deficiency judgments.  
Applicant’s SOR alleges another debt, a delinquent medical bill for his ex-wife’s dental care. 
This debt has been resolved.  He also stated that he had resolved a non-alleged debt for legal fees
owed to an attorney who handled his daughter’s divorce proceeding.  In early 2014, Applicant
bought two vehicles, which were for his ex-wife and his daughter.  His ex-wife is supposed to give
him money for the monthly payments on hers.  Applicant has over $200,000 in retirement savings
and an annual salary of $140,000.  He attended no counseling or debt consolidation programs.  His
uncle, a retired CPA, is advising him on his financial affairs.  He advised Applicant not to withdraw
funds from his retirement account.  Applicant enjoys a good reputation for trustworthiness and
dedication to family.  He is said to live a modest and abstemious lifestyle.  He enjoys a good
reputation at work for being hardworking, loyal, and honest.
The Judge’s Analysis
2
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s circumstances raised concerns under Guideline F.  She
resolved the dental bill in his favor.  However, she found that Applicant had not mitigated remaining
allegations, which addressed his mortgage delinquencies and bankruptcy.  She noted his argument
that the state’s anti-deficiency statute precludes liability for deficiency judgments.  However, she
stated that it was premature to conclude that the law shields Applicant from liability, insofar as no
foreclosure action had been commenced.  She stated that his problems were ongoing and the
evidence did not provide a reason to conclude that they would not recur.
She noted circumstances outside Applicant’s control that affected his finances, such as his
divorce and the drop in the housing market.  She went on to conclude that Applicant had not
demonstrated responsible action in regard to his debts.  She noted evidence that he stopped making
payments on the house in 2008, despite an annual income of $100,000, that he has had no contact
with the second mortgage holder in several years, and that he has rejected an offer for a loan
modification despite an ability to make the payments.  She noted that he is seeking a deed-in-lieu
of foreclosure.  She went on to observe that Applicant, “his ex-wife, and his daughter are all still
living in the house for free.”  Decision at 6.  The Judge found that Applicant had not sought formal
debt counseling, although he is receiving advice from his uncle, a retired CPA.  She concluded that
Applicant had not made a good-faith effort to pay his debts, nor has he provided a reason to believe
that his financial problems are resolved or are under control.  
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted evidence that Applicant enjoys a good
reputation for honesty, hard work, and dedication to his job.  Despite this, she stated that he makes
a substantial income, has nearly $225,000 in retirement savings, and was able to purchase two
vehicles for his ex-wife and his daughter.  She stated that Applicant has not made any payments
since 2008 on the house that he owns and in which he currently resides.  She concluded that
Applicant has exercised “questionable judgment” and that the evidence left her with doubts about
his suitability for a clearance.  Id. At 8. 
Discussion
Applicant has challenged some of the Judge’s findings.  In particular, he contends that the
Judge erred in finding that it was premature to conclude that the anti-deficiency statute would
protect him from liability for a default judgement.  He also argues that the Judge did not properly
evaluate the evidence concerning the offered loan modification, thereby impairing her findings on
this matter.  We examine a Judge’s findings of fact to see if they are supported by “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  In presenting his argument, Applicant
has cited to matters from outside the record, specifically events that post-date the decision.  We
cannot consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.
Concerning the applicability of the anti-deficiency statute in the context of a security
clearance or trustworthiness adjudication (as opposed to the mere collectability question), we have
previously held that DOHA Judges are capable of ruling on this issue when an applicant has laid an
adequate factual predicate and the applicant’s conduct and circumstances are otherwise appropriate. 
3
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-04806 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 3, 2014).  In this case, the Judge appears
to have concluded that such a predicate had not been laid, in that the events necessary to trigger the
anti-deficiency statute had not occurred by the close of the record.  This conclusion was reasonable,
given the evidence that was before her.  Even if she had erred, however, it did not likely affect the
outcome of the case.  Her analysis devoted significant attention to evidence that Applicant’s
financial problems arose from conduct that impugned his judgment, irrespective of the extent to
which he may come to enjoy the protection of the anti-deficiency statute.  Therefore, any error on
this issue would have been harmless.
 Applicant’s argument about the Judge’s treatment of the loan modification offer does not
cite to an actual error in her findings.  Rather, it appears to challenge the manner in which the Judge
viewed this evidence and the weight that she extended to it.  He cites to evidence from which he
argues that a reasonable person would not want to continue making payments on a house in which
an ex-wife is living, in that doing so would impose an undue financial burden.  Applicant’s argument
is not sufficient to undermine the Judge’s findings of fact on this matter.  It is not controverted that
Applicant was offered a loan modification from his primary lender, that he had sufficient income
and other financial means to make the payments, and that he rejected the offer.  Applicant’s
contention that this was a responsible course of action merely argues for an alternative interpretation
of the record evidence, which is not sufficient to undermine the Judge’s findings or her weighing
of the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03790 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 12, 2014).  We have
considered
the entirety of Applicant’s argument regarding the sufficiency of the Judge’s findings.  Her material
findings of security concern are supported by substantial record evidence or constitute reasonable
conclusions that could be drawn from the evidence.  Applicant has not cited to a harmful error in
the Judge’s findings of fact.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00151 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 12, 2014).
Applicant notes that the Judge gave him time after the hearing to submit additional evidence
concerning his effort to resolve his mortgage debts.  Applicant submitted such evidence within the
time allotted.  He further notes that Department Counsel did not object to the admission of this
evidence.  He argues that by not objecting Department Counsel conceded that Applicant had
mitigated all of the security concerns in his case.  However, Department Counsel merely conveyed
that she had no legal objection to the Judge’s consideration of these documents, not that she believed
that they were dispositive of the issues that were before the Judge.1
Applicant argues that the Judge erred in her mitigation analysis.  He cites to his evidence
regarding the anti-deficiency law, his reasons not to pursue a loan modification, his marital
difficulties,  his good character, and other things that he believes show that he has overcome any
security concerns in his case.  Applicant’s argument is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that
1To the extent that Applicant is arguing that his case did not raise security concerns, we note that his delinquent
debts were established by his credit reports, his answers to DOHA interrogatories, and his answers to pertinent questions
on the security clearance application.  The Directive presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any Guideline and
an applicant’s security worthiness.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-10255 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 28, 2014).  The Government
presented substantial evidence of security concerns.  
4
the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  Neither is it sufficient to show that the Judge
mis-weighed the evidence, viewed as a whole.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00151 at 3, supra.  We
note the Judge’s findings, and record evidence, of the following: (1) Applicant was discharged in
bankruptcy in 2000; (2) Applicant was aware that delinquent debts can affect one’s security
clearance (Tr. at 63); (3) Applicant ceased making payments on his house in 2008; (4) Applicant’s
ex-wife and daughter have lived in the house ever since, and he currently resides there himself, in
essence for free; (5) as of the close of the record Applicant had not resolved his mortgage
delinquencies; and (6) he appears to have the financial means to have done so.  In light of this, the
Judge’s conclusion that Applicant’s financial problems raised concerns about his judgment and
reliability, which are integral to a security clearance analysis, is supportable.  See Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶18 (Failure to meet financial obligations may indicate, inter alia, a lack of judgment,
raising questions about an applicant’s ability to protect classified information).  Applicant’s
mitigation case consists, in essence, of promises of future action, rather than of a demonstrated track
record of debt resolution.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-02926 at 2 (App. Bd. May 11, 2010).    
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan               
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
5
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board13.a1
DATE: 12/30/2014
6
