1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
 )       ADP Case No. 12-03549
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On June 3, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing trustworthiness concerns arising under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in September
2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 9, 2014. A notice of
hearing was issued on October 22, 2014, scheduling the hearing for November 7, 2014
by video teleconference. Government Exhibits. (GX) 1-5 were admitted into evidence
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 12 exhibits (AX) A-L, which were
admitted into evidence. The transcript was received on November 18, 2014. Based on
a review of the case file, I find Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns
raised. Eligibility for a position of trust is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations under
Guideline F, ¶¶ 1.a-1.r with explanations.  
Applicant is 47 years old, and works as a computer operator at an insurance
company. Applicant is divorced and has two children from his first marriage. He
remarried but divorced a second time. Applicant has a third child who is in college.
Applicant received his GED in 1984 and entered the U.S. Navy. He left after one year
due to concerns about his father’s health, and received an Other Than Honorable
discharge.  Applicant has been employed with his current employer since May 2010. On
December 20, 2011, Applicant submitted an official application for eligibility for a
position of trust.  
 The SOR alleges 18 delinquent debts, and a 2010 federal and state tax lien.
These debts include consumer debts, car loans, and credit card accounts.  A Chapter
13 bankruptcy that was filed in 2008, was dismissed in 2010. Credit reports submitted
by the Government confirm the debts.  
Applicant explained in his Answer that this behavior was uncharacteristic for him.
He has been employed since he left the Navy. Until 2005, he worked for one company
but was laid off. However, Applicant had another position for which he qualified and did
not receive unemployment. The salary was lower than his former salary. His
separations and divorces caused legal bills and the loss of an income from his ex-wife.
He has paid child support in the amount of $110 weekly since the 2007 separation.
Applicant incurred legal fees for his 2014 divorce. He decided to prioritize his debts by
paying the federal and state tax liens before tackling the other debts. (Tr. 31) He hopes
to consolidate the smaller debts by using a financial counseling agency. 
 In 2008, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. His first wife had spent
recklessly and he could no longer make payments on all accounts.  He made payments
on the bankruptcy plan for almost two years. In 2010, the bankruptcy was dismissed.
Applicant explained that after he filed for bankruptcy, he received a notice from the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) that there was an issue with his personal tax return.  He
noted that this increased his bankruptcy payment. (Tr. 24) He further explained that
additional credit card debt was added to his bankruptcy and by 2010, he could no
longer afford the payment. Applicant began to miss his payments and the bankruptcy
was dismissed. 
As for the allegation in SOR 1. b, Applicant explained the collection account for a
mobile phone bill for $175 has been paid. (AX H) The medical account for $95  alleged
in 1.c is paid. (AX I ) (SOR 1.p is a duplicate account).
The allegation in SOR 1.d is not resolved. The charged-off account for $8,199
was a car loan for his ex-wife. He denied that the account is his, but he admits that he
co-signed the note. (Tr. 30) Applicant hoped that his ex-wife would pay the account, but
that has not happened.
3
As to the allegation in SOR 1.e for a car loan in the amount of $3,703, Applicant
admits that the account is unpaid. He states that it was a voluntary repossession. (Tr.
32) He knows that the car was sold at auction but he has not paid the remainder. He
admits that he owes the debt. (Tr. 33)
Applicant admits that the delinquent debts in SOR allegations 1.f ($2,877); 1.g
($2,188); 1.h ($7,042); 1.i ($824); 1.j ($493) and 1.k ($1,114) are not paid. They were
included in the Chapter 13 bankruptcy that was dismissed in 2010. (Tr. 35) He admits
that he has not contacted the creditors since the bankruptcy was dismissed. (Tr. 36)
Applicant paid the bill alleged in SOR 1.l, which was a utility bill for $382. (AX J)
As to the account in 1.m, he has not paid the $157 that is due. 
The medical account alleged in SOR 1.n for a $75 co-pay has been forgiven. He
does not owe the amount. The balance reflected on the account is zero. (Tr. 40)
Applicant admits that the account in SOR 1.o in the amount of $892 is unpaid.
This credit card account had also been included in his bankruptcy plan.  He intends to
pay the debt. 
Applicant entered into a payment plan with the IRS for the 2010 federal tax lien
in the amount of $10,059 alleged at SOR 1.q. His tax refunds have been withheld since
2010. His monthly payments of $193 since 2010, leaves a balance of $1,963. (AX ) He
hopes to have this paid in full by the end of the year. (Tr. 26)
Applicant paid the state 2010 tax lien which is alleged in SOR 1.r in the amount
of $2,270. (AX L) He accomplished this through a payment plan. (Tr. 44)
Applicant earns about $65,000 yearly. His net monthly income is $3,200. After
expenses and debt payments, Applicant has a net monthly remainder of about $520.
(Tr. 47) He  has paid his legal fees for his divorce and now can concentrate on the
remaining delinquent debts. 
Applicant submitted seven character reference letters from former managers,
colleagues, and friends. (AX A-G) Each letter attests to Applicant’s ethics and maturity.
Each writer was aware of the financial difficulties that Applicant has encountered. One
friend believes this situation is totally inconsistent with Applicant’s reputation.  A
colleague states that Applicant is a hard worker with a calmness and consistency that
gets things done. Applicant has had promotions and raises during his work career. (AX
G)
Applicant’s manager notes that she has worked directly with him and that he is
an exceptional worker. He is always professional and dependable. He volunteers for
assignments whenever needed. (AX B)
4
Policies   
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3. 1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for
assignment to sensitive duties is that the persons’s loyalty, reliability, and
trustworthiness are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly
consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. Department of
Defense contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive
before any final unfavorable access determination may be made. Regulation ¶C8.2.1
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information. 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government
must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate  the
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition,
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant eligibility for a
public trust position. 
5
 
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The trustworthiness concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
Applicant’s admissions and credit reports establish his delinquent debts. He filed
for a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in 2008, but it was dismissed in 2010. Consequently,
Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial
obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the
case against him and mitigate trustworthiness concerns.  
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties
make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago.” An unpaid debt is a
continuous course of conduct for the purposes of security clearance adjudications. See,
ISCR Case No. 10-11083 at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2012). Applicant still has unresolved
delinquent debt. While he has paid a few items, the delinquent obligations remain. His
bankruptcy was dismissed in 2010. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating
Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not
apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances) partially applies. Applicant had two
marriages that ended in divorce. He was reduced to one income to support his family.
He also had to take a lower paying job in 2005. While he paid a state tax lien and is in
repayment status of the federal tax lien, he still has a large amount of debt that he has
neither resolved nor shown that he is in the process of resolving.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) partially applies. Applicant provided
documentation that certain accounts have been paid. He paid his state tax lien and is in
repayment status for the federal tax lien. He expects to have it paid by the end of the
year. He plans to tackle the remaining debts after that. He did not present evidence that
6
he received financial counseling. AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem) does not apply. He has not addressed the other debts in a
timely manner. Consequently, I find that  there are not clear indications that his financial
problems are being resolved and are under control. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a position of trust by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a position
of trust  must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the ultimate burden
of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a public trust position. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person
factors. Applicant is 47 years old. He  has worked for his current employer since May
2010. He has three children and has been divorced twice. The separations and
divorces caused debt that he could not afford. He filed for bankruptcy in 2008, but after
two years could not afford the payments. He tried to resolve his debts in a legal
manner. He also incurred federal and state tax liens. He made those debts his priority.
One is paid and the other is almost paid. Applicant still has a significant amount of debt
that he is responsible for. He has made payments and paid some accounts and
produced documentation. Many credit card collection accounts exist with fairly high
balances. Applicant intends to pay his debts, but this will not be resolved in a short
period of time. I have some doubts about Applicant’s judgment.  He has not mitigated
the security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. 
 The clearly consistent standard indicates that trustworthiness determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials. A denial of his eligibility for a position of
trustworthiness does not necessarily indicate anything adverse about Applicant’s
character or loyalty. It means that the individual has presented insufficient mitigation to
meet the strict standards controlling access to sensitive information. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a position of public trust.
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
