KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant used various illegal drugs at least from 2008 until 2012 and falsified a
security clearance application.  Adverse decision affirmed. 
CASENO: 12-04875.a1
DATE: 12/10/2014
DATE: December 10, 2014
In Re:
----------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-04875
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 21, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).
Applicant requested a hearing.  On August 22, 2014, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Matthew E. Malone denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for his current employer, a Defense contractor, since 2011.  He has
received numerous awards for the quality of his duty performance. He previously worked off and
on for the same contractor, experiencing periodic layoffs due to lack of work.  In January 2011, his
employer recalled him, though to a position requiring a security clearance. 
Applicant worked for another company from 2008 until 2010 in a job that did not require a
clearance.  Both that company and Applicant’s current employer required drug screening tests for
new hires or recalled employees.  
During periods of unemployment, Applicant found work with a moving company.  Some of
his fellow workers at the moving company used illegal drugs, such as cocaine and crack cocaine. 
During one of his layoffs, he began using these drugs himself on a weekly or bi-weekly basis.  When
he started working for the other company in 2008, he stopped using drugs because he knew he
would have to take a drug test.  About two months after leaving employment with this company he
resumed his drug use. 
 
When Applicant’s current employer recalled him, in January 2011, he submitted a
security clearance application (SCA).  In June of that year he was tested for drugs.  Applicant failed
the drug test but was allowed to continue with his employment contingent upon successful
completion of a drug counseling and rehabilitation program.  He met this requirement.  In addition,
he is required to attend Alcoholics Anonymous meetings and submit to random drug screening by
his employer.  
After Applicant failed the pre-employment drug test, he continued to use cocaine until the
following August.  He stated that he felt despondent over the results of the test and believed he had
nothing to lose by using drugs.  In completing his SCA, Applicant denied the use of illegal drugs
in the prior seven years.  He stated that he was ashamed about his drug use and that he was
concerned that he would lose his job due to lack of a security clearance.
He submitted an affidavit stating his intention never to use illegal drugs in the future.  He
also provided character witnesses who attested to his excellent work habits, his outstanding qualities
2
as a father, and his honesty and reliability.  None of the witnesses knew that he continued to use
cocaine after he submitted his SCA or after he failed the drug test.
The Judge’s Analysis 
The Judge noted that Applicant has successfully completed a drug rehabilitation program and
that he is subject to periodic testing, which gives him a reason to avoid using drugs.  However, he
stated that Applicant did not stop using cocaine after being recalled by his current employer, due to
the mistaken belief that he would not have to submit to a drug test.  The Judge stated that this
evidence shows that Applicant can be “calculating” in his use or avoidance of drugs.  Decision at
6.  He stated that it is not clear from the evidence that Applicant’s illegal drug use is behind him.  
Regarding his false answer on the SCA, the Judge stated that this was not a minor infraction,
insofar as it bears upon Applicant’s willingness to put the Government’s interests ahead of his own. 
He noted that Applicant had not been forthcoming with his own character witnesses about his
continued use of cocaine even after having failed the drug test, which, the Judge concluded,
impugned Applicant’s willingness to be candid about security-significant information.  
Discussion
Applicant challenges a number of the Judge’s findings of fact, in particular that Applicant
had continued to use cocaine while working for his current employer.  He states that he was recalled
in January 2011 but that he did not actually resume working until the following October, after he
had completed his drug rehabilitation program.  In making this argument he cites to matters from
outside the record, which we cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Even if the Judge erred in this
matter, it did not likely affect the outcome of the case, in view of evidence that Applicant used
cocaine after having completed his SCA and after having taken, and failed, a pre-employment drug
screening.  After considering the totality of Applicant’s argument, we conclude that the Judge’s
material findings of security concern are supported by substantial evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).
 
Applicant’s arguments on appeal amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence.  The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel a Judge to make a
favorable security clearance decision.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence is not sufficient to
undermine a Judge’s decision.  Applicant’s arguments are not sufficient to show that the Judge
weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 14-00173 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2014).  
Applicant’s citation to favorable evidence, such as his three years of abstinence from illegal
drugs and his character references, is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence in the record.   See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-10255 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul.
28, 2014).  A Judge is not required to address all of the evidence in a record, which would be a
3
practical impossibility.  In the case before us, the Judge’s findings fairly embraced the substance of
Applicant’s mitigating evidence.
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan          
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett          
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Billett              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
