 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-00217 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 30, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 1, 2014, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 25, 2014. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
September 26, 2014, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on October 9, 2014. 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence 
 
2 
 
without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. Applicant submitted AE D, which was admitted into evidence 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 20, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the following SOR allegations: ¶¶ 1.a – 1.e, 1.g, 1.i – 1.k, 1.m, 
1.o, 1.q – 1.r, and 1.t. She denied ¶¶ 1.f, 1.h, 1.l, 1.n, 1.p, and 1.s. These admissions 
are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the pleadings and evidence, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
various contractors, performing the same duties, since 1985. She has a GED. She is 
divorced and has one adult child. She served briefly in the Air Force in 1977, but was 
discharged for medical reasons. She has held a security clearance since 1985.1  
 
 The SOR alleges a judgment, two tax liens (federal and state), and 17 other 
delinquent debts. The total debt amount is in excess of $60,000. The debts were listed 
in various credit reports from June 2011, February 2013, and March 2014.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems arose in 2009 when she ended a relationship with 
a boyfriend who was living with her and who contributed to paying their mutual 
expenses including the mortgage payments. The boyfriend stopped contributing and the 
obligations fell to Applicant who could not afford the payments based upon her sole 
income. Additionally, she helped pay some of her son’s expenses. He is a disabled 
veteran. Also, her most recent contractor-employer decreased her hourly wages from 
$29 per hour to $26.94 per hour. She has not sought financial counseling because she 
believed it was too expensive. She has been making regular payments on a non-SOR-
related debt since May 2014 in the total amount of $1,878. None of the SOR debts are 
paid or are currently being paid. When asked about her plan to address the debts, 
Applicant stated that she planned to pay each one, one at a time, but she had not 
begun this plan yet. The current status of the debts is as follows:3    
 
SOR ¶ 1.a (Judgment $535): 
 
 This judgment was entered in March 2011. It remains unpaid. This debt is 
unresolved.4 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.c (Tax liens $3,829 and $7,592): 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 4, 4, 24-25; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 2-4. 
 
3 Tr. at 30, 32-33, 38-39; GE 2: AE A, C. 
 
4 GE 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant admitted that she underpaid her withholding contributions for tax years 
2006 and 2007 to both the state and federal governments. Consequently, she owed 
more for those years than was withheld from her pay. She originally claimed that she 
was paying under a payment plan with the IRS; however, she failed to produce 
evidence of any plan. These liens are unresolved.5 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d – 1.g; 1.j; 1.l – 1.m; 1.o; 1.r – 1.t (Consumer debts $139; $596; $218; 
$59; $434; $238; $1,217; $1,500; $570; $53; and $2,145): 
 
 These accounts became delinquent in 2011 or 2012. They are all outstanding 
and no payment plans are in place. These debts are unresolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h (Mortgage $40,427): 
 
 Applicant’s mortgage became delinquent in 2008 when she could not make 
continuous full payments. She sent in partial payments when she could, but the lender 
did not accept them. The property was foreclosed, but she does not know when that 
occurred. This debt is unresolved.7 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.i; 1.n (Checks returned for insufficient funds $893 and $49): 
 
 These insufficient accounts were reported in 2009 and 2011. They remain 
unpaid. These debts are unresolved.8 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.k; 1.p – 1.q (Medical accounts $36; $170 and $39): 
 
 These delinquent accounts were reported in 2008. They remain unpaid. These 
debts are unresolved.9 
 
 According to her personal financial statement completed in July 2013, Applicant 
listed her net monthly income as $3,102 and her expenses and obligations as $2,719, 
with a remainder of $383. Applicant presented 11 character letters from friends, 
coworkers, supervisors, and her union. They all commented that Applicant is a loyal 
employee, is trustworthy, and they support her efforts to retain her security clearance.10 
 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 31; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 33; GE 3-5. 
 
7 Tr. at 28; GE 4. 
 
8 GE 3-5. 
 
9 GE 3-5. 
 
10 GE 2; AE B, D. 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a judgment, two tax liens, and significant other delinquent debts. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
6 
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant found herself in a difficult financial situation when her boyfriend, who 
was sharing living expenses with her, ended their relationship and his contributions. She 
also expended her resources to assist her son, a disabled veteran, with his financial 
difficulties. These were circumstances beyond her control. However, I am unable to find 
that she acted responsibly in dealing with her debt. Aside from making payments toward 
a debt outside the SOR, she failed to present evidence that she took action on any of 
the SOR debts and tax liens. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant did not seek financial counseling because of the expense it might 
involve. The evidence does not support that there are clear indications that her debts 
are being resolved, nor was there evidence of good-faith efforts to pay or resolve the 
debts.11 AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) do not apply.  
 
 Applicant failed to produce sufficient documentary evidence supporting any 
disputed debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a 
concern despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
                                                          
11 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the predecessor mitigating condition to AG ¶ 20(d)], 
an Applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the Applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an Applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [AG ¶ 20(d)].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military service, the good character evidence presented 
in the statements offered, and the circumstances by which she became indebted. 
However, I also considered that she has made little effort to resolve her financial 
situation. She has not established a meaningful financial track record of debt 
management, which causes me to question her ability to resolve her debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.t:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
