 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-12373 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E. This action 
was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR set forth reasons why DOD could not make the affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. On July 5, 2014, Applicant 
answered the SOR allegations and requested a hearing. This case was assigned to me 
on September 4, 2014. On September 11, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
 
2 
 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing scheduling the hearing for September 25, 
2014. The hearing was held as scheduled.1  
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel objected to instant message 
communications attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. His objection was 
overruled. He also offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. Applicant did not 
object to GE 1 through 5, but objected to GE 6 through 8 because she disagreed with 
the content in them. Her objections were overruled. GE 1 through 8 were admitted into 
evidence. Applicant testified and offered no exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) of the hearing 
was received on October 3, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 26-year-old linguist who was born overseas, entered the United 
States as a refugee in 2000, and became a U.S. citizen in 2005. She began working for 
her current employer in August 2012. She dropped out of high school in the eleventh 
grade so that she could help support her family. She has never been married and has 
no children. She held a security clearance for about a year in 2010.2 
 
 The SOR listed seven Guideline E allegations. Two asserted that Applicant was 
terminated from jobs under unfavorable circumstances, while the other five were 
falsification allegations. Applicant denied each allegation.3 
  
 In late 2007, Applicant was charged with assault in the 4th degree and malicious 
mischief in the 3rd degree. Both were misdemeanor charges. During this incident, 
Applicant and a male acquaintance had an argument. The male acquaintance reported 
to police that Applicant became upset because he did not give her $5,000 that she 
requested to help her boyfriend who was in jail. The police report further indicated that 
she cracked the windshield in the acquaintance’s car by kicking it and threw a set of 
keys at him. The keys hit him in the face below the left eye and resulted in a possible 
permanent eye injury. As a result of that injury, he had difficulty seeing, reading, and 
driving with his left eye. The damage to the car’s windshield was about $200.4 
 
In a counterintelligence-focused security screening interview on September 10, 
2012, Applicant was questioned about the above criminal charges. She reportedly 
stated that she lent the male acquaintance $1,000; he refused to return the money 
because he did not want her to go on vacation with another male; and, when she 
pushed him away during this incident, his hand that was holding keys hit his face. Her 
version of the events changed somewhat at the hearing. She testified that she had 
                                                          
1 At the hearing, Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement. See Tr. 14. 
2 Tr. 6-8, 40-48; GE 1, 2, 3. 
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
4 GE 2, 3, 4, 5.  
 
3 
 
worked for the male acquaintance for three month, that he did not pay her for that work, 
and that she was seeking her unpaid wages of $2,000 for a vacation. She further 
testified that “he grabbed her in the wrong place” and she pushed him. She described 
the male acquaintance’s version of the events as a lie. She also indicated that she pled 
guilty, took responsibility for this incident, but further stated she did not hit him. In 
August 2008, prosecution of the charges was deferred subject to Applicant having no 
violations in 12 months, performing 20 hours of community service, completing an anger 
management program, and paying a fine of $700. In August 2009, the charges were 
dismissed with prejudice.5 
 
 In February 2011, a notice of trespass was filed against Applicant. This notice 
was filed because she was involved in a verbal dispute in a retail store that disrupted 
customers and normal business. During the dispute, she allegedly communicated 
threats to the store manager. The notice of trespass revoked her permission to enter the 
store for one year. This conduct was not alleged in the SOR.6 
  
In January 2012, Applicant was working overseas as a linguist in a combat zone. 
On January 30, 2012, an overseas military unit released her back to her employer after 
a string of confrontations, both verbal and physical, with a coworker. Her behavior was 
described as unprofessional and detrimental to the unit’s mission. However, specifics 
about her behavior are unknown. On February 1, 2012, Applicant’s employer issued a 
termination report that reflected her employment ended under unfavorable 
circumstances. The report noted that Applicant was dismissed by the client (i.e., the 
military unit) after a string of confrontations. In her Answer to the SOR, she stated that 
she submitted a letter of resignation that predated her termination, but her resignation 
was not processed properly because she refused to engage in sexual relationships with 
two managers.7 
 
In early 2012, Applicant was rehired by the same company and worked again 
overseas. On March 29, 2012, she was involved in an incident in which a male friend, 
who some identified as her boyfriend, acted in an unprofessional and threatening 
manner to coworkers and managers. During the incident, Applicant stated that she 
knew a good lawyer and would sue the employer because she and her friend were 
treated unfairly. At or near the time of that incident, she also indicated that she was 
quitting and wanted a flight home arranged for her. After a manager talked with her, she 
                                                          
5 Tr. 37-38, 50-59, 72-75; GE 2, 3, 4, 5. In her Office of Personnel Management interview of 
September 7, 2012, and her Answer to the SOR, Applicant’s version of this incident was similar to what 
she provided during the counterintelligence-focused security screening interview. 
6 Tr. 61-64; GE 8. Conduct not alleged in the SOR “may be considered (a) to assess an 
applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed 
circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to 
decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-
person analysis under Directive Section 6.3 . . . ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 24, 2003).” 
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct 26, 2006). Non-alleged conduct will only be considered for 
these limited purposes.   
 
7 Tr. 64-72; GE 6, 7; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
4 
 
changed her mind about quitting. At some point, she also requested to be assigned to 
an outlying location and asked a manager to mislead her friend into thinking she 
returned to the United States. On April 3, 2012, Applicant’s employer issued a 
termination report that reflected her employment ended under unfavorable 
circumstances. The report noted that Applicant’s performance was unprofessional and 
her antagonistic behavior resulted in her “boyfriend/linguist” assaulting a site manager. 
It also indicates that she should not be rehired. In her Answer to the SOR, she stated 
that she was the victim of sexual harassment in that job and that she was essentially 
retaliated against for filing a complaint against managers. She testified that she was 
treated wrongly by the company and that she decided to quit that job. She provided 
instant message communications in which she asked a former manager to provide her a 
letter indicating that she quit. The former manager declined to provide such a letter, but 
did indicate that he would have done so if he were still a manager there.8 
 
On August 28, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). In Section 13A of the e-QIP, she listed employment 
as a linguist from September 2011 to February 2012. In follow-on questions addressing 
that employment, she was asked if she was fired, quit after being told she would be 
fired, left by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct, or left by 
mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory performance. She responded “No” 
to those questions and failed to report her terminations of employment in January 2012 
and March 2012. In her Answer to the SOR, she claimed that she was unaware that she 
was terminated and believed her letter of resignation was the basis for the end of her 
employment.9 
 
In Section 12 of the e-QIP, Applicant was asked about her education in the last 
ten years. In that section, she indicated that she attended high school from September 
2002 to June 2006. She also responded “Yes” to a question that asked if she received a 
degree/diploma and indicated that it was a “High School Diploma” awarded in “06/ 
2006.” She testified that, when she was filling out the e-QIP, there were other people 
present. She was embarrassed to list that she did not graduate from high school 
because the other people would look down upon her. She indicated that she informed 
an investigator and her prospective employer that she did not graduate from high 
school.10 
 
In Section 22 of the e-QIP, Applicant was asked if she had been charged with, 
convicted of, or sentenced for a crime in any court in the past seven years. She 
responded “No” to that question and failed to list the charges against her for assault in 
the 4th degree and malicious mischief in the 3rd degree in 2007. She testified that, when 
she was interviewed for her first security clearance, she told the investigator of the 
charges. She stated that the investigator told her there was no record of it and she did 
                                                          
8 Tr. 35, 64-72; GE 7.    
9 GE 1. 
10 Tr. 35-36, 46-50; GE 1, 3. 
 
5 
 
not have to tell the investigator about it. At the hearing, she stated the court clerk told 
her the charges were dismissed and she indicated that she was confused when she 
filled out the e-QIP. In her Answer to the SOR, she stated that she misinterpreted this 
question and indicated the probation officer told her this record was completely 
expunged, and she believed this matter need not be reported.11 
 
 During an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview on September 7, 
2012, Applicant reportedly stated that she left her linguist job in February 2012 when the 
contract ended. In the counterintelligence-focused security screening interview, 
Applicant reportedly stated that she left her linguist position in February 2012 because 
she was mistreated as a woman.12 
 
During the counterintelligence-focused security screening interview, Applicant 
was also asked if she had any interaction with law enforcement authorities or the court 
system. The report of the interview indicated that she initially stated she did not have 
any interaction with law enforcement authorities or court systems. After being 
confronted with the assault and malicious mischief charges, she reportedly claimed the 
judge informed her that she did not have to mention such information because the 
charges were dismissed.13 
 
Applicant presented letters of reference that described her as an industrious 
worker and very helpful. A lieutenant colonel indicated that she displayed a high degree 
of integrity, responsibility, and ambition.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AGs list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
11 Tr. 36-38; 59-60; GE 1. 
12 Tr. 60-61; GE 2, 3. 
13 Tr. 60-61; GE 2, 3. 
14 GE 3. 
 
6 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
 
7 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined will all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics including that the person may 
not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not 
limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior . . .; (2) 
disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace; (3) a 
pattern of dishonesty or rule violations . . . .  
 
In 2012, Applicant was fired twice from a linguist job for engaging in disruptive 
behavior. Such behavior raises questions about her reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 16(d) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b.  
 
Applicant admitted that she intentionally provided false information in her e-QIP 
about graduating from high school because she thought others would look down upon 
her. Embarrassment is not a justification or excuse for a falsification. See ISCR Case 
No. 99-0557 (App. Bd. Jul. 10, 2000).  AG ¶ 16(a) applies to SOR ¶ 1.g. 
 
Applicant was not a credible witness. She made inconsistent statements about 
the criminal charges in 2007 and the falsification allegations. Sufficient information was 
presented to establish that she deliberately provided false information when she failed 
to disclose in Section 13A of her e-QIP and during her OPM interview that she was fired 
from jobs in January 2012 and April 2012. She also deliberately failed to disclose in 
Section 22 of her e-QIP and initially during her counterintelligence-focused security 
screening interview that she was charged with criminal offenses. AG ¶ 16(a) applies to 
SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e. AG ¶ 16(b) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f.  
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advise of 
 
8 
 
unauthorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security clearance process. Upon being 
made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 Applicant engaged in repetitive misconduct and intentionally submitted multiple 
false statements during the security clearance process. Her conduct raises serious 
security concerns. None of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
 
9 
 
comments under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a young woman who came to this country as a refugee. She has 
endured many hardships. She served with the U.S. military in a combat zone. 
Nevertheless, her behavior raises serious security concerns and doubts about whether 
she can be trusted to protect classified information.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
   
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
