KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant was granted a clearance after hearing in 2012.  In the present case his
admitted delinquent debts are greater than in the first proceeding. The challenged findings are
sustainable.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 13-01241.a1
DATE: 12/29/2014
DATE: December 29, 2014
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 13-01241
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 17, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On October 10, 2014, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Darlene D. Lokey Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision ran contrary to the weight of the record
evidence.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Married with six children, Applicant is employed by a Defense contractor.  He has held a
security clearance for the past twelve years.  The SOR alleges that Applicant has numerous
delinquent debts, totaling over $100,000, for such things as cell phone services, credit card debt,
vehicle repossessions, etc.
Applicant has a history of financial problems.  In mid-2012 he was the subject of a DOHA
security clearance hearing regarding delinquent debts totaling about $70,000.  He testified at that
hearing that he had hired a debt consolidation firm, to which he made monthly payments of $800. 
Based upon evidence that Applicant was addressing his financial difficulties, the Judge in this prior
case granted him a clearance.  Since that hearing, however, Applicant’s debts have grown. 
Applicant discovered that he was not able to make his monthly payments to the debt consolidation
firm, and the company would not negotiate a smaller payment.  He no longer uses the firm.
Applicant’s financial situation resulted from several things.  He and his wife opened a
business, using $21,000 from his retirement fund and money borrowed from his family as start-up
cash.  The store was originally successful, so Applicant and his wife opened up a second.  However,
Applicant’s daughter, born in 2010, suffered from serious medical problems requiring multiple
hospital stays.  These medical expenses, accompanied by slumping sales and high operating costs,
resulted in Applicant closing both of his stores.  By this time, Applicant was struggling to make his
mortgage payments on two properties, both of which went into foreclosure.  He also used a
corporate credit card to pay a $9,000 hotel bill.  
Despite these financial difficulties, Applicant bought his wife a Porsche, with monthly
payments of $1,697.  He owes over $55,000 on this loan.  
Some of Applicant’s delinquent debts have been removed from his credit reports.  He
provided proof of payment for one debt and claims that another, for $67.91, has been paid.  
Applicant earns $126,000 a year.  He believes that his delinquent debts total a little less than
$68,000.  His checking account has a negative balance, and he has between $300 and $400 in a
2
savings account.  He has received no financial counseling.  A post-hearing exhibit, a pay stub, shows
that his wages were garnished for about six months last year, in the amount of $19,418.  He states
that this left him unable to pay his other debts.  
He has enrolled in a debt counseling program with monthly payments of $580.  This program
only addresses debts in excess of $500.  Applicant plans to resolve debts of lesser amounts “one at
a time.”  Decision at 4.  Applicant has received favorable work performance ratings.  He has
received several awards at his job.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s circumstances raised security concerns.  In resolving
these concerns adversely to Applicant, the Judge stated that he had failed to provide proof of
payment or other evidence demonstrating debt resolution.  She stated that the record does not show
that Applicant can live within his means.  She noted evidence provided after the hearing that
Applicant has enrolled in the debt counseling program.  She stated, however, that there is little
likelihood that he will follow through, given his failure to have done so with the previous one.  
The Judge stated that Applicant has not demonstrated “a concrete understanding of his
financial responsibilities.”  Id. at 8.  She also stated that he has not made a good-faith effort to
resolve his debts, concluding that none of the mitigating conditions applied to Applicant’s case.  She
determined that, under the whole-person concept, the totality of Applicant’s circumstances indicate
poor judgment, untrustworthiness, and other characteristics inconsistent with holding a security
clearance.
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s findings of fact, specifically her finding that his debt
problems have increased since the prior DOHA decision in 2012.  He argues that his credit reports
support a finding that his debts have decreased significantly.  He also argues that his current
repayment plan is reasonable.  We examine a Judge’s findings of fact to see if they are supported
by “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion
in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  
Viewed in light of the record as a whole, the challenged findings are sustainable.  Applicant’s
contention that he has established a reasonable repayment plan merely argues for an alternative
interpretation of the evidence, which is not sufficient to show that a Judge erred.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 14-00173 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2014).  Concerning the extent of his debt problems, we
note that Applicant admitted delinquent SOR debts totaling more than was alleged in the prior
DOHA case.  Viewed as a whole, the Judge’s material findings of security concern are supported
3
by substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences that could be drawn from the evidence. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).
Applicant challenges the Judge’s conclusion that he has done little to resolve his debt
problems.  He also challenges the Judge’s opinion that he will not likely succeed with his current
payment plan.  He argues that this is merely speculative.  As we stated above, however, an ability
to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence is not sufficient to undermine a Judge’s
decision.  We note the Judge’s findings that (1) Applicant was granted a clearance in 2012 despite
his delinquent debts; (2) soon after, he stopped making payments on his debt repayment plan; (3)
his delinquent debts have increased in number since the earlier DOHA case; and (4) Applicant has
made financial decisions that impugn his good judgment, such as mis-using a corporate credit card
and purchasing an expensive automobile.  These findings support the Judge’s adverse decision.  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.” 
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan           
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                 
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
