 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-01213 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s relationships with foreign 
relatives do not present a heightened risk of exploitation or vulnerability. Applicant has 
also presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the personal conduct concerns raised by 
his improper use of privileges and services while working on a U.S. military base in 
2011. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 31, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the foreign influence and personal 
conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and 
recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was 
assigned to another administrative judge, who after convening a hearing on May 29, 
2014, continued the case to determine whether DOHA had jurisdiction over the matter.2  
During the adjournment, Applicant submitted an offer letter from his employer, indicating 
that the offer was contingent on his ability to obtain a DOD security clearance.3 
Jurisdiction established, the case was reassigned to me in June 2014 for hearing.  
 
At the hearing convened on August 18, 2014, I admitted Government’s Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 4 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, without objection. After the 
hearing, Applicant timely submitted AE E through G, which were also admitted without 
objection.4 I received the transcript (Tr.) on August 26, 2014. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Pakistan and Afghanistan. Applicant did not object. The written 
summaries, along with their attachments, are appended to the record as HE II and III, 
respectively.5 The Government did not offer any documents for administrative notice on 
Germany, the United Kingdom, or the Netherlands.6  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 39, is from Afghanistan. As a child, he fled to Pakistan in 1989 with his 
parents and four siblings after the Soviet Union invaded the country. Applicant 
immigrated to the United States in 1992 with his mother and siblings. His father died 
while the family lived in Pakistan. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2001. 
His brothers and sisters are also naturalized U.S. citizens. His mother, however, 
maintains permanent resident status. Now 82 years old, Applicant’s mother does not 
work and lives with Applicant. She has lived continuously in the United States since 
1992 and has never returned to Afghanistan. In addition to his nuclear family, members 
of Applicant’s extended family fled Afghanistan after the Soviet invasion and settled in 
other western countries. Two of Applicant’s uncles, along with their families, are 
residents and citizens of Germany. Applicant has a cousin who is a resident and citizen 
                                                          
2 See Transcript (Tr 1.), dated May 29, 2014.  
 
3 The June 2, 2014 offer letter is appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
 
4 Correspondence related to Applicant’s post0hearing submissions are appended to the record as HE IV.  
 
5 Tr 2.  at 18. 
 
6 Tr 2.  at 63. 
 
3 
 
of the United Kingdom and another set of cousins who are residents and citizens of the 
Netherlands. Applicant maintains infrequent contact with his extended relatives.7  
 
 In August 2014, Applicant divorced his wife of 11 years. She is a naturalized U.S. 
citizen, also from Afghanistan. Their son, 10, is a U.S citizen by birth. Both Applicant’s 
ex-wife and his son reside in the United States. Applicant’s parents-in-law, sister-in-law, 
and three of his brothers-in-laws are citizens of Afghanistan, residing in Pakistan.  
Although Applicant maintained contact with his in-laws during his marriage, he severed 
ties with them after he separated from his ex-wife in October 2013.8 
 
 Applicant has worked as a linguist for several federal contractors since 2004. 
Applicant was initially granted access to classified information in approximately 2006 
and upgraded to sensitive compartmented information access in 2009. He has served 
two tours of duty, totaling 21 months, supporting military operations overseas and has 
received numerous awards and commendations for his work. One of Applicant’s former 
clients, a master sergeant who worked with Applicant while deployed in 2005, cited 
Applicant’s ability to collaborate and provide support to different units with 
compartmentalized responsibilities without compromising any tactical information. In 
August 2007, Applicant accepted a position working as linguist supporting intelligence 
operations located at a U.S. military base in Europe. In July 2011, Applicant was fired 
from this position after a military police investigation substantiated several allegations of 
misconduct made against him. Applicant admits that he knowingly used a rescinded 
letter of authorization issued by his employer to obtain benefits to which he was not 
entitled on the military base. Four of Applicant’s co-workers, including one who was a 
veteran of the U.S. Air Force, were investigated and terminated for the similar acts of 
misconduct. 9  
  
According to the investigation, Applicant evaded $530 in taxes to the host nation 
by improperly registering his personal vehicle on base instead of with the host nation 
and purchasing tax-free gasoline for his personal vehicle from the military exchange. 
The investigation substantiated allegations that he improperly used his DOD 
identification to obtain a military driver’s license, instead of obtaining a driver’s license 
from the host nation. The investigation revealed that he also purchased $540 in goods 
and fuel from the military exchange and commissary. Although a prosecutor opined that 
there was sufficient evidence to file criminal charges against Applicant, no charges were 
filed against him. In response to the investigation, Applicant de-registered his car and 
sold it to be in compliance with the rules. In addition to losing his job, Applicant lost his 
security clearance and received an indefinite ban from U.S. military bases in Europe. He 
has been unemployed since December 2011.10  
                                                          
7 Tr 2.  at 21-24; GE 1-2. 
 
8 Tr 2.  at 18-21, 25-34; AE G; Answer. 
 
9 Tr 2. at  37-41, 49-58; GE 1 -2, 4; AE A-B, D-F; Answer. 
 
10 Tr 2. at 44-46; GE 2.  
 
 
4 
 
At hearing, Applicant testified that his motivation was not to avoid any financial 
responsibility to the host nation (he earned a six-figure salary). Applicant admitted that 
at the time, he felt entitled to the on-base privileges, based on his past work supporting 
military operations and his status within the command he supported as a skilled and 
respected linguist. Applicant’s performance reviews show that he was an outstanding 
performer who consistently exceeded expectations. During his last evaluation in 2010, 
the client requested that Applicant’s employer take all necessary steps to ensure his 
retention. Applicant realizes that he acted improperly and expresses remorse for his 
misconduct.11  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
“[F]oreign contacts . . . may be a security concern if the individual has divided 
loyalties . . ., may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”12 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s 
relationships with his mother, ex-wife, son, parents-in-law, siblings-in-law, and extended  
family members, may indicate a foreign preference.  
                                                          
11 Tr 2. at 41, 52-55, 81; AE C. 
 
12 AG ¶ 6.  
 
5 
 
 Applicant’s mother has lived in the United States as a permanent resident for 22 
years. There is no evidence that she has any ties to Afghanistan. Applicant’s ex-wife 
and son are both citizens and residents of the United States. Neither resides in Pakistan 
or Canada as alleged in the SOR. Applicant’s extended relatives are citizens of 
Germany, the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands. There is nothing in the record to 
indicate that relationships with citizens or residents of those countries create a 
heightened risk of exploitation or vulnerability for Applicant.13 Finally, Applicant’s ties to 
his in-laws have been severed by the dissolution of his marriage. He does not maintain 
any independent contacts or have ongoing relationships with his ex-wife’s parents or 
siblings. The record does not contain sufficient evidence to find any security risks 
associated with these relationships.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
An applicant’s personal conduct becomes a concern when his actions show 
questionable judgment, an unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations, or raises 
questions about an applicant’s ability to protect classified information.14 The SOR 
alleges that Applicant was fired from his job as a linguist after military police confirmed 
several acts of misconduct. Applicant admits that he knowingly obtained goods and 
exercised privileges on a U.S military base to which he was not entitled. Applicant 
actions also allowed him to avoid taxes due to the host nation. While Applicant’s 
conduct is not sufficient for an adverse finding under the criminal conduct guideline, it 
does support a whole person assessment of questionable judgment, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, which raises serious doubts about his ability to 
properly handle and safeguard classified information.15  
 
Although the financial harm done to the host nation was negligible, Applicant’s 
conduct cannot be considered minor. However, his actions are mitigated by the 
passage of time. Furthermore, Applicant does not have a history of criminal conduct or 
other misconduct. On the contrary, his record reveals a stellar work history with no prior 
disciplinary actions. His conduct is isolated and is not indicative of an inability to 
properly handle or safeguard classified information.16 The personal conduct concerns 
are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 In deciding that the security concerns raised by Applicant’s conduct are 
mitigated, I considered the whole-person concept as described in AG ¶ 2(a). On 
balance, the favorable whole-person evidence in the record outweighs any doubts and 
concerns about Applicant’s current security worthiness. As a linguist, Applicant has 
                                                          
13 See  AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
14  See  AG ¶15. 
 
15 See AG 16(a). 
 
16 See AG 16(c). 
 
6 
 
aided the U.S. military operations abroad. According to Applicant’s clients, his work and 
cultural knowledge directly impacted the security and safety of U.S military members. 
The record shows that in his six years of service as a linguist, almost two of those 
deployed overseas, Applicant handled the security-related responsibilities of his position 
appropriately and without incident. Applicant’s decision to improperly use goods and 
services on the military base where he worked were entirely self-serving. He wanted to 
avoid the inconvenience and burden of having to engage with the host nation’s 
bureaucracy to register his car and obtain a driver’s license. Applicant accepts 
responsibility for his actions and is remorseful. He has learned that his status does not 
make him exempt from applicable rules and regulations. Given that the consequences 
for his behavior have been professionally and financially significant, it is unlikely that 
Applicant will indulge in such conduct in the future.                                      
 
 Those granted access to classified information are held to a high standard of 
conduct; they are not held to a standard of perfection. It is not the purpose of a security 
clearance adjudication to punish applicants for past misconduct. All that is required is 
that an applicant’s past is not indicative of a current inability to properly handle and 
protect classified information. Here, it is not. Applicant has taken responsibility for his 
conduct. In doing so, he has successfully rehabilitated himself from an instance of poor 
judgment. Clearance is granted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
