 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------  )  ISCR Case No. 13-00828 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Christopher Morin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations, but 
he failed to mitigate the personal conduct issues. Eligibility for a security clearance and 
access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 18, 2012, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On July 8, 2013, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility Industry Division (CAF) issued him a set of 
interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories on July 25, 2013.2 On February 26, 
2014, the DOD CAF issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified 
                                                          
1 GE 1 ((SF 86), dated October 18, 2012). 
 
2 GE 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated July 25, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
(Directive);  and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to 
Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR 
alleged security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations), and it detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR. In one undated and unsigned 
statement, Applicant responded as follows:3  
 
Due to a current litigation matter, I am unable to respond to that specific 
question. I agreed not to disclose any information at this time concerning 
the matter and was instructed to reply in the negative should questions 
arise.  
 
In two separate sworn statements, dated May 3, 2014, and August 29, 2014, Applicant 
responded to the SOR allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. On August 20, 2014, Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
prepared to proceed. The case was assigned to me on August 21, 2014. A Notice of 
Hearing was issued on August 27, 2014, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on 
September 17, 2014. 
 
 During the hearing, five Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 5) and six 
Applicant exhibits (AE A through AE F) were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant and two other witnesses testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on 
September 30, 2014. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. 
Applicant took advantage of that opportunity, and he submitted a number of additional 
exhibits (AE G through AE R) that were admitted into evidence, some over the 
objections of Department Counsel and some without objection.4 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answers to the SOR, Applicant eventually admitted a portion of one of the 
factual allegations pertaining to personal conduct (¶ 1.a.) as well as one of the factual 
allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶ 2.a.). He denied the remaining 
allegations or portions thereof. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and 
upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
                                                          
3 Applicant’s First Answer to the SOR, undated. 
 
4 Department Counsel objected to AE G and AE L on the grounds of relevance because they pertained to 
disciplinary actions taken by Applicant’s employer against other employees, and because Applicant was attempting to 
show that there was no consistency as to the crime and the punishment within the employer’s system of justice. I rule 
that the exhibits are relevant, but will be given limited weight. Accordingly, the objections are overruled.  
 
3 
                                      
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor who, since October 
2012, has served in an unspecified part-time position pending receipt of a security 
clearance.5 He has never served with the U.S. military.6 Applicant was employed by 
another government agency (AGA) from October 1986 until he retired in June 2012.7 He 
had held a top secret security clearance with access to sensitive compartmented 
information (SCI), with a polygraph, since October 1986.8 For reasons discussed further 
below, that security clearance and SCI access were suspended in March 2012. 
 
A 1982 high school graduate, Applicant obtained a bachelor‘s of science degree 
in business administration in 1985.9 He was married in 1989, and has two daughters 
born in 1990 and 1994 as well as a stepdaughter born in 1985.10 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 (SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 2.c.): In March 2001, while performing surveillance duties for 
AGA, Applicant used his government-issued credit card for a number of personal, non-
official or non-business-related, purchases. His actions were not known to his superiors 
until Applicant and several other colleagues were reported by an individual who was in 
the process of leaving the AGA. The allegation was investigated, and it was determined 
that Applicant had misused his government credit card. He was suspended for three 
days and placed on probation for six months. Applicant did not disclose his suspension 
to his wife.11   
 
 (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 2.b.): Ten years later, this time while performing covert 
surveillance duties for AGA, Applicant used his government-issued credit card for 
official business expenses and, because he was “under severe financial stress,” he also 
repeatedly used the card for personal, non-official or non-business-related, purchases in 
violation of the AGA Confidential Funding Policy Implementation Guide and AGA 
division instructions.12 The allegation was investigated by the AGA. Applicant’s 
government credit card transactions for the period 2007 through October 2011 were 
scrutinized. Applicant admitted the credit card misuse, and it was determined that he 
had made the following unauthorized personal transactions: 2007: 7; 2008: 26; 2009: 
70; 2010: 72; and 2011: 48, for a total of 223 such transactions.13 Applicant 
                                                          
5 GE 1, supra note 1, at 10-11; GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated January 16, 2013), at 3. 
 
6 GE 1, supra note 1, at 14. 
 
7 GE 1, supra note 1, at 12-13. 
 
8 GE 1, supra note 1, at 29-30. 
 
9 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 5, at 3; GE 2 (College Transcript, dated March 14, 1988). 
 
10 GE 1, supra note 1, at 17, 21-22; Tr. at 42-43. 
 
11 GE 5 (Report of Investigation, dated December 19, 2012), at 2; Tr. at 48-49, 57-58. 
 
12 AE J (Report of Investigation, dated September 1, 2011); Tr. at 59. 
 
13 AE P (Report of Investigation, dated November 4, 2011). 
 
4 
                                      
 
characterized his misuse as “very minimal,” and referred to his broken lawnmower, and 
his wife acknowledged he had used the card for household items because they were 
“financially strapped.”14 It was determined that Applicant had a balance of $9,294.87, 
which he eventually paid off.15  
 
During that AGA investigation, Applicant purportedly admitted that he had 
routinely withheld his government credit card statements from review by the appropriate 
AGA authority, in essence to conceal his credit card misuse.16 However, in his August 
2014 Answer to the SOR, Applicant modified his position and contended “there is 
conflicted information concerning that in current litigation.”17 Following the hearing, he 
seemingly avoided addressing the withholding of the credit card statements and 
contended the post office box to which the statements were to be mailed had been 
relocated several times.18  
 
In March 2012, the investigation into Applicant’s misuse of his government credit 
card was completed and Applicant’s security clearance was suspended. He was also 
suspended from work, pending a hearing with the assistant director of the AGA.19 The 
Office of Professional Responsibility (OPR) found that Applicant had violated the 
following established offense codes: 2.5, Lack of Candor/Lying – No Oath; 3.7, Misuse 
of Government Credit Card (Theft) – Gasoline or Automobile-Related Expenses; and 
3.8, Misuse of Government Charge Card – Personal Use. On June 1, 2012, Applicant 
was removed/dismissed from his employment with the AGA.20 He appealed the OPR 
findings and decision to a Disciplinary Review Board (DRB), and the DRB voted to 
vacate the substantiation of offense code 3.7, as well as affirm the substantiation of 
offense codes 2.5 and 3.8, along with Applicant’s dismissal.21 Applicant disputed the 
allegations; the evidence used against him, the fairness of the process, especially when 
some of his desired exculpatory evidence was shredded by the AGA; and the unfair 
disparity of punishment given to other employees for similar or more serious 
misconduct. He subsequently filed an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC) complaint.22 
                                                          
14 Tr. at 39-40. 
 
15 AE J, supra note 12, at 1; GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 5, at 1; Tr. at 60. 
 
16 AE J, supra note 12, at 1; AE B (Statement, dated November 21, 2011), at 2-3. 
 
17 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated August 29, 2014, at 2. 
 
18 AE O (E-mail, dated September 24, 2014), at 1. 
 
19 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 5, at 1. 
 
20 GE 5, supra note 11; AE I (Letter, dated January 31, 2013), at 1. 
 
21 AE I, supra note 20, at 1-2. 
 
22 AE I (E-mail, dated February 7, 2013); AE G (Extract of Decisions, dated February 21, 2012); AE K 
(Extract of Potential Punishment, dated January 15, 2012); AE L (Comparison Chart, undated); AE M (Newspaper 
Article, dated April 9, 2008); AE N (Internet Article, dated February 28, 2013); AE R (Newspaper Article, dated 
February 5, 1993); Tr. at 72-73. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
 (SOR ¶ 1.b.): On October 18, 2012, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he 
responded to questions pertaining to his employment activities. The questions in 
Section 13A asked his reason for leaving the employment activity identified as the AGA, 
and if he had, in the last seven years, been fired. Applicant answered the first question 
with the entry “separated, under current on-going appeal,” and the second question with 
“no.”23 He certified that the responses were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of 
his knowledge and belief. His response to the first question was technically correct, and 
he would not be appealing the action if the separation was not adverse. The response 
to the second question was both incomplete and false for Applicant concealed his June 
2012 removal/dismissal for Lack of Candor/Lying – No Oath; and Misuse of 
Government Charge Card – Personal Use. In his August 2014 Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant denied intending to conceal the truth about his leaving the AGA. He wrote:24 
 
I answered honestly in that I was separated, pending a current on-going 
appeal. The next question asked if I had been fired and I answered “No” 
under the advice (sic) of my attorney at the time, and my situation was still 
under appeal within the [AGA]’s disciplinary system. My attorney strongly 
felt I would not be removed and it would be better to wait for the outcome 
of the case rather than prejudice myself for future employment by making 
an admission without a definitive answer. 
  
 (SOR ¶ 1.c.): In that same SF 86, Applicant responded to another question 
pertaining to his financial record. The question in Section 26 – Financial Record 
(Employer Travel or Credit Card) asked if, in the last seven years, he had been 
counseled, warned, or disciplined for violating the terms of agreement for a travel or 
credit card provided by his employer. Applicant answered “no” to the question. He 
certified that the response was “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his 
knowledge and belief, but the response to that question was, in fact, false for Applicant 
had been disciplined and removed/dismissed from his employment with the AGA for his 
government credit card misuse. Applicant subsequently furnished the same narrative 
that he gave for his other responses regarding his reasons for answering as he did.25 
He denied attempting to mislead anyone, but acknowledged that, in retrospect, he 
“probably” should have answered “yes” when answering the question.26 
  
 (SOR ¶ 1.d.): Other questions in Section 26 – Financial Record (Delinquency 
Involving Routine Accounts) asked if, in the last seven years, he had bills or debts 
turned over to a collection agency; been over 120 days delinquent on any debt not 
previously entered, and if he was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt. 
Applicant answered “no” to both of those questions. He certified that the response was 
“true, complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge and belief, but the response to 
                                                          
23 GE 1, supra note 1, at 13. 
 
24 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated August 29, 2014, at 2; See also Tr. at 65. 
 
25 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 24, at 2; Tr. at 66-67. 
 
26 Tr. at 66-70. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
those questions was, in fact, false for Applicant had concealed multiple accounts that 
were either placed for collection or were over 120 days delinquent that were listed in his 
October 2012 credit report.27 He subsequently admitted having accounts in collection, 
but denied that he had “ever intentionally or with malice tried to mislead the recipients of 
the [SF 86].”28 
 
Financial Considerations 
Applicant contends there apparently was nothing unusual about his finances until 
he was suspended from his job by the AGA in March 2012. At about the same time, his 
wife became ill and was unable to work, and she claimed she was later unable to find a 
new job. Because they had continuing financial obligations, including the costs of 
sending their children to college, he cashed out some of his retirement to resolve the 
majority of his “credit problems.”29 However, his rendition of his initial financial 
difficulties is at odds with the established facts. Applicant acknowledged that he had 
been “under severe financial stress” even before he was suspended from his job, and 
he offered that stress as the explanation for his misuse of his government credit card 
during the period 2007 through October 2011. His wife acknowledged that they were 
financially strapped even before he was suspended. Applicant’s October 2012 credit 
report reflects some delinquencies in 2005 and 2006, as well as significant 
delinquencies during 2011.30 While Applicant contended in January 2013 that he had 
resolved, either by settling for a reduced amount or paying off in full several of his 
delinquent accounts,31 his August 2014 credit report reflects a number of accounts that 
had been charged off with no payments.32 
(SOR ¶ 2.a.): The SOR identified only one purportedly continuing delinquency. 
When Applicant was transferred from one duty location to another duty location in 2010, 
he was referred to a specific realty relocation network to market and sell his residence. 
It was during this time that the housing market fell apart.33 One aspect of the program 
was the existence of a guaranteed buyout offer. According to that program:34 
 
Your home must be listed for 30 days before the appraisals can be 
ordered (we must also receive your signed homeowner disclosures before 
                                                          
27 GE 3 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated October 24, 2012), at 5-11, 14-
16; GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 5, at 1-3; Tr. at 71-72. 
 
28 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 24, at 2; Tr. at 71. 
 
29 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 5, at 1. 
 
30 GE 3, supra note 27, at 5-10, 14-15. 
 
31 GE 2 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 5, at 1-3. 
 
32 GE 4 (Equifax Credit Report, dated August 19, 2014), at 1-3. 
 
33 Tr. at 39. 
 
34 AE H (E-mail, dated February 5, 2010), at 2. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
we can order). I’ll send a list of appraisers to choose from. From your 
selection, we’ll order 2 appraisers to contact you to schedule an 
appointment for a relocation appraisal on your property. Please note that 
relocation appraisals are very different from a typical mortgage appraisal. 
The suggested sales price is going to be forecasted out for 120 days. 
Once both appraisal reports are sent to me (this process can take up to 30 
working days, about 6 weeks) the average of the 2 will be your guaranteed 
buyout offer. The [AGA] relocation policy requires your current listing to be 
within 105% of the buyout offer within 10 days. You continue to market 
your home for an additional 30 days before accepting your offer. The 
guaranteed buyout offer will expire 60 days from the day I offer it to you. 
Please note the guaranteed buyout offer is meant as a safety net. You will 
get MORE money if you sell your home to a 3rd party buyer. 
 
Applicant offered no evidence to indicate that the provisions of the guaranteed buyout 
program had been satisfied. Instead, he contended that the house appraised for less 
than it was worth, and since the residence could not be sold on the open market, the 
realty relocation company made an offer of $293,000, which was $37,000 less than he 
still owed on the mortgage. The realty relocation company withdrew its offer, and in May 
2010, the residence was sold as a short sale for $269,900, resulting in a $69,000 loss 
for Applicant.35  
 
A private mortgage insurance (PMI) company subsequently activated collection 
efforts for a $10,000 promissory note, requesting that monthly payments of $83.33 be 
submitted.36 Applicant contends the $10,000 should have been satisfied at closing. He 
submitted documentation to support one payment of $21.19 in July 2013.37 The 
collection agent filed a civil action against Applicant and the matter appears to be 
unresolved.38 The matter is also seemingly included in a larger class-action lawsuit 
alleging that the mortgage lender wrongfully required consumers to purchase PMI in 
connection with the purchase of the residence.39 It is unclear what the current status of 
the two lawsuits might be. 
 
In July 2013, Applicant completed a personal financial statement in which he 
indicated a monthly family net income of $3,381; and monthly expenses of $1,816. With 
no significant debts, he has a net remainder of $1,565, available for discretionary 
                                                          
35 AE C (Statement, undated); Tr. at 74. 
 
36 AE C (Letter, dated January 27, 2012); GE 3, supra note 27, at 11. 
 
37 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 24, at 3; GE 2, supra note 2, at 10, 17. 
 
38 AE C (Court Documents, various dates). 
 
39 AE C (News Stories, various dates); Tr. at 45-47. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
spending or savings.40 His assets include bank savings (approximately $4,000), and 
stocks and bonds (approximately $13,000).41 
 
Work Performance and Character References 
 
 During his nearly 26 years with the AGA, Applicant completed 325.25 hours of 
training and received a number of certificates of appreciation, achievement, superior 
service, and exceptional performance.42 Several former coworkers from the AGA have 
characterized him in glowing terms. He was described as conscientious, dedicated, 
efficient, effective, ethical, well-respected by coworkers, trustworthy, very focused, 
honest, compassionate, and possessing integrity.43  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”44 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”45   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
                                                          
40 GE 2 (Personal Financial Statement, undated). 
 
41 GE 2 (Personal Financial Statement), supra note 41. 
 
42 AE D (Certificates, various dates). 
 
43 AE A (Character References, various dates); Tr. at 30-37. 
 
44 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
45 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
9 
                                      
 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”46 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.47  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”48 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”49 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
46 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
47 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
48 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
49 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
It is also potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(d), if there is: 
 
credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, 
but which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include 
breach of client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information; . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; (4) evidence 
of significant misuse of Government or other employer’s time or 
resources. 
 
 As noted above, as early as 2001, Applicant violated the AGA Confidential 
Funding Policy Implementation Guide and the AGA division instructions when he 
misused his government-issued credit card for a number of personal, non-official or 
non-business-related, purchases. He was subsequently disciplined. Nevertheless, 
during the period 2007 through 2011, he again misused the credit card on 223 
additional occasions. The deterrence effectiveness of the discipline administered to him 
following the 2001 incidents proved to be inadequate to change his behavior. It is the 
extensive, repeated, and routine misuse of the card that constituted untrustworthy or 
 
11 
                                      
 
unreliable behavior, a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations, and evidence of 
significant misuse of the AGA’s resources. AG ¶ 16(d) has been established. 
 
 Applicant has placed significant emphasis on the disciplinary actions taken by the 
AGA against other employees in an attempt to show that there was no consistency as to 
the offense and the punishment within the AGA’s system of justice, and that he should 
have been given lesser punishment. While his concern is understandable, this is not the 
proper forum for such a grievance. In this instance, the issue is not the degree of 
discipline received, but rather the nature of his conduct. Moreover, a security clearance 
proceeding is not a disciplinary proceeding. 
 
 On October 18, 2012, when Applicant completed his SF 86, he responded to 
questions pertaining to his employment activities and the misuse of his employer credit 
card. The questions asked his reason for leaving the employment activity identified as 
the AGA, and if he had, in the last seven years, been fired or counseled, warned, or 
disciplined for violating the terms of agreement for a travel or credit card provided by his 
employer. Applicant answered the first question with the entry “separated, under current 
on-going appeal,” and the other questions with “no.” He certified that the responses 
were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge and belief, but the 
responses to those questions were, in fact, both incomplete and false for Applicant 
concealed his June 2012 removal/dismissal for Lack of Candor/Lying – No Oath; and 
Misuse of Government Charge Card – Personal Use. In addition, when asked asked if, 
in the last seven years, he had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency, or been 
over 120 days delinquent on any debt not previously entered, Applicant answered “no” 
to both of those questions. He certified that the response was “true, complete, and 
correct” to the best of his knowledge and belief, but the response to those questions 
was, in fact, false for Applicant had concealed multiple accounts that were either placed 
for collection or were over 120 days delinquent. His position is unreasonable and not 
credible. AG ¶ 16(a) has been established.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct, but none of those mitigating conditions apply. 
His conduct shows a lack of honesty and integrity. It is also recent and serious. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise 
security concerns. In addition, deceptive or illegal financial practices such as 
embezzlement, employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account 
fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional breaches of trust is 
potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 19(d).  
 
Applicant misused his government-issued credit card for a number of personal, 
non-official or non-business-related, purchases in 2001, as well as during the period 
2007 through 2011, when he did so again on 223 additional occasions. He also has 
been experiencing problems with a PMI account which is in collection, and in ongoing 
litigation. AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(d) apply.    
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. Evidence 
that the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.50 It is also potentially mitigating under AG ¶ 20(e) where the individual has a 
reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the 
problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d) and 20(e) apply. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) both partially apply. 
The nature, frequency, and relative recency of Applicant’s financial difficulties between 
2005 and 2013 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so 
                                                          
50 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
infrequent,” especially since they appear to have continued until relatively recently. 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to a variety of circumstances that he claimed 
were largely beyond his control. Those circumstances included the job-related 
relocation, the failure of the guaranteed buyout program, his wife becoming ill and 
unable to work, and the costs of sending children to college. He failed to explain in 
detail how those circumstances negatively impacted his ability to maintain his monthly 
payments or how they justified his misuse of his government credit card. While his 
financial problems may have, in some measure, been beyond Applicant’s control, it 
remains unclear as to what degree they were. Nevertheless, under the circumstances, 
while Applicant acted irresponsibly over a substantial period, ending in 2011, by 
misusing his government credit card, he eventually acted responsibly by addressing his 
delinquent accounts rather than avoiding them.51 
  
While there is no evidence that Applicant ever received financial counseling, 
there are clear indications that his financial problem is being resolved or is under 
control. He has only one SOR-related delinquent account, and it is currently disputed by 
him and in litigation, and he has a monthly net remainder of $1,565 available for 
discretionary spending or savings. Applicant’s misuse of his government credit card 
assisted him in initially resolving delinquent accounts, but he appears to have turned his 
efforts to more positive good-faith efforts to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve his debts. Applicant’s misuse of his government credit card ceased in 2011, and 
his subsequent actions under the circumstances confronting him no longer cast doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.52 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
                                                          
51 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
52 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.53       
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He is a caring 
husband and father. With the exception of his misuse of his government credit card, his 
previous professional career with the AGA was outstanding. He has addressed his 
financial issues, and is currently involved in litigation to resolve the one remaining 
delinquent account. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial, 
for this is more than simply a case with personal conduct and financial issues. Applicant 
misused his government credit card on an unspecified number of occasions in 2001 and 
again on 223 occasions from 2007 through 2011. When he completed his SF 86, he 
responded to several questions and certified that the responses were “true, complete, 
and correct” to the best of his knowledge, but the responses to those questions were, in 
fact, false or incomplete. He denied the responses were deliberate or an attempt to 
falsify the material facts, and attributed his actions to advice he supposedly had 
received from an attorney. He is an intelligent, talented, and experienced individual, but 
his explanations are unreasonable and not credible. Accordingly, I have concluded that 
he deliberately falsified his responses in an attempt to conceal the truth about his 
personal conduct involving his misuse of his government credit card, his employment 
termination, and his delinquent accounts. Overall, the evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns 
arising from his financial considerations, but has failed to mitigate the personal conduct 
issues. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant  
   
                                                          
53 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
15 
                                      
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
