 
1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 13-01147 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant had two collection 
accounts totaling more than $50,000 and was past due on his $300,000 mortgage. He 
has not resolved his delinquent accounts. Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on November 19, 
2013, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
In Applicant’s undated answer to the SOR he elected to have the matter decided 
without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Department 
Counsel submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated 
April 21, 2014. The FORM contained nine attachments. The FORM was re-sent2 on 
September 23, 2014 
On October 8, 2014, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of 
his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. Applicant had 30 days in which to submit any 
material in response to the FORM. A response was due on November 7, 2014. As of 
December 4, 2014, no response had been received. On December 5, 2014, I was 
assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied owing the collection account listed 
in SOR 1.a, $49,141; admits being 120 or more days past due on the debt in SOR 1.b, 
$303,000; and admits the collection account listed in SOR 1.c, $2,647. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 63-year-old software quality assurance engineer who has worked 
for a defense contractor since February 2009, and seeks to obtain a security clearance.  
The FORM contains no documentation of work or character references. He provided no 
documents concerning his delinquent accounts. In May 2008, Applicant’s clearance was 
denied due to financial considerations security concerns. (Item 6) 
 
 In 2012, Applicant had dental work done and incurred a $2,647 bill (SOR 1.c). He 
has not paid the delinquent account, and it was turned over for collection. (Item 6) He 
refused to pay the bill because he believed the dentist had doubled the amount owed 
for the dental implant. In July 2013, he completed a Personal Subject Interview (PSI) in 
which he stated he intended to resolve the dental bill. (Item 6) The delinquent account 
remains unpaid.  
 
 In December 1998, Applicant purchased a home. (Item 7) The record does not 
reflect the original purchase price. In March 2002, a $255,540 mortgage was purchased 
by a different mortgage lender. The terms of the mortgage required $1,763 monthly 
payments for 25 years. (Item 7) In March 2004, the mortgage was transferred to a new 
mortgage holder. The new mortgage was for $303,000 with $2,511 monthly payments 
for 30 years. (Item 7) As of mid-2006, Applicant was late making his payments. (Item 7) 
In 2007, Applicant’s home was returned to the mortgage holder. He provided no 
documentation as to why he chose to return the home to the lender. He believes 
because the mortgage was secured by the home that the return of the house negates 
any further indebtedness. The house has been sold since he surrendered it. In his SOR 
answer he stated, “I turned the title over to [lender] for an agreed amount of cash.” The 
                                                          
2 The record contains no information why the FORM was resent. 
 
3 
$303,000 mortgage debt (SOR 1.b) remains unpaid. Following the surrender of his 
home, he moved in with his father. 
 
 In addition to the first mortgage, Applicant owed approximately $50,000 to two 
other mortgage lenders. In October 2013, the $49,414 delinquent account was turned 
over to a collection firm. (Item 7) In October 2013, the delinquent account was 
transferred to a new collection firm. (Item 8) He has made no attempts to resolve his 
debts with the mortgage holders. In his undated SOR answer, he asserted he was 
paying $100 monthly on the $50,000 (SOR 1.a) debt. He provided no documentation 
showing actual payment on the debt.  
 
 Applicant was divorced three times: in April 1979, September 1991, and June 
2004. He provided no documentation as to the financial impact of the divorces. He was 
unemployed from May 2002 through January 2003 and April 2005 through July 2006. 
(Item 5) Between October 2005 and December 2012, he took 11 vacations to various 
overseas locations. The vacations were normally six to ten days and involved vacations 
to the Netherlands, Mexico, Honduras, Ecuador, Jamaica, Thailand, Costa Rica, and 
Belize. 
 
 Applicant’s September 2014 Personal Financial Statement (PFS) listed monthly 
income of $4,571, and other expenses of $3,055, which included $1,000 for 
miscellaneous, entertainment, transportation, etc. His net monthly remainder (monthly 
income less monthly expenses) was approximately $1,500.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
4 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
 
5 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. His current 
net monthly remainder (monthly income less monthly expenses) is approximately 
$1,500. 
 
 Applicant purchased a home with a first and second mortgage. He failed to 
properly pay the mortgages. In 2007, he turned the house’s title over to the primary 
mortgage holder. The credit report lists the $303,000 first mortgage as 120 or more 
days past due. The secondary mortgage holder lists the $49,141 delinquent obligation 
as having been placed for collection. Applicant’s $2,647 dental bill was turned over for 
collection when he failed to pay it. He has not provided proof of payments on his 
delinquent accounts. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His 
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. He indicated he had been unemployed 
from May 2002 through January 2003 and April 2005 through July 2006 and divorced 
three times. He provided no information as to how his periods of unemployment or 
divorces, which were events beyond his control, financially impacted his decision to 
return his home in 2007 to the mortgage lender. While he may have surrendered the 
home, he did not provide documentary evidence to establish the surrender resolved the 
first or second mortgage. 
 
6 
Applicant has not paid or resolved the SOR debts including the smaller dental bill 
incurred in 2012, which he stated in his July 2013 PSI he intended to resolve. He has 
not acted responsibly in addressing his debts. He provided no evidence he has received 
credit or financial counseling. He has not demonstrated that his financial problems are 
under control or that he has a plan to resolve the SOR debts. He has not made a good-
faith effort to satisfy his debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the delinquent debts remain unpaid and 
because they remain unpaid, they are considered recent. There is nothing in the record 
supporting that conditions under which the debts were incurred were unusual. Applicant 
was on notice of the Government’s concern about these delinquent obligations starting 
in July 2013. Given sufficient opportunity to address his financial delinquencies, 
Applicant has failed to act timely or responsibly under the circumstances. Failing to pay 
the debts casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) does not apply. Applicant experienced two periods of unemployment 
with the latest period of unemployment ending in July 2006, more than eight years ago. 
He was also divorced three times with his last divorce occurring in June 2004, which is 
more than ten years ago. These are events beyond his control; however, he failed to 
establish how his unemployment eight years ago and his most recent divorce ten years 
ago have impacted his current ability to pay his debts.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There is no 
documentation Applicant received counseling or that his financial obligations are being 
addressed. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because 
Applicant has failed to document payment on any of the delinquent accounts. He 
asserted he was paying $100 monthly on the $49,000 second mortgage, but failed to 
provide any documents showing payment on this debt.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. Applicant states he 
believes the dentist overcharged him for an implant. However, he has not provided 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the disputed account.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has been aware of the 
Government’s concern about his delinquent debts since his July 2013 PSI, which was 
reinforced in the November 2013 SOR. He purchased a home and chose, for reasons 
not set forth in the record, to return it to the mortgage lender. He asserts, but provides 
no documentation, that the surrender of the home negates any further financial 
responsibility for the first or second mortgage. Additionally, he has yet to pay a 
delinquent dental bill.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or 
evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his 
circumstances and facts which would mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns. He failed to offer evidence of financial counseling or provide documentation 
regarding his past efforts to address his delinquent debts. He failed to provide such 
information, and by relying solely on his brief explanation in response to the SOR, he 
failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Applicant expressed the hope that all of his financial difficulties 
would be resolved by December 2014. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a 
clearance is not recommended. In the future, if Applicant has paid his delinquent 
obligations, established compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise substantially 
addressed his past-due obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of 
his security worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
  
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
8 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
