KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Judge concluded that unpaid debts are a continuing course of conduct which precluded
a finding that the debts occurred so long ago as to lack security significance.  She also concluded
that Applicant did not provide a nexus between her economic circumstances and her financial
situation.  These conclusions are sustainable on this record.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 13-01008.a1
DATE: 12/15/2014
DATE: December 15, 2014
In Re:
---------------------------------
 
Applicant for Position of Trust
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 13-01008
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation. 
On November 7, 2013, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis
for that decision–trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a decision on the written record.  On September 18, 2014, after considering the record,
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Noreen A. Lynch denied
Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ 
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed properly to apply
the whole-person concept and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm. 
The Judge’s Findings of Fact 
Applicant works for a Defense contractor.  She has been employed in her current position
since late 2012 and has been gainfully employed since 2003.  The record does not show whether she
has previously held a position of trust.  
Applicant’s SOR alleges several delinquent debts totaling over $79,000, for such things as
state and federal tax liens and various collection accounts.  Applicant stated that her problems
resulted from an economic downturn and family medical bills.  She did not provide any further
information about these matters.
Applicant stated that from 2004 to 2008 her taxes were not withheld from her pay, as she was
an independent contractor.  She set up a payment plan of $150 a month with the IRS.  She is
negotiating an Offer in Compromise and avers that the IRS has suspended her obligation to make
payments in the meantime.  The SOR alleged two other Federal tax delinquencies.  Applicant stated
that one of these is a repeat of the debt described above.  She provided no corroboration for her
claim that the third alleged Federal tax debt is in repayment status.  She also had state tax
delinquencies which, she stated, have been in repayment status for two years.  She supported this
claim with documentation.
Another debt is a judgment for nearly $16,000.  She stated that this debt had been in
repayment status for three years and provided documentation showing monthly payments of $150
for year 2014.  She stated that this debt will be resolved by the end of the year.  Regarding three
other SOR debts, Applicant stated that they had been settled and charged off.  She provided no
corroboration for this claim.  
The record contains no evidence as to Applicant’s monthly income.  She stated that she pays
no rent and has no car loan.  She traveled abroad for over a month in 2011.
Applicant enjoys as excellent reputation for trustworthiness, loyalty, and dependability.  Her
March 2014 performance appraisal showed that she consistently exceeded standards.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial circumstance raised concerns under
Guideline F.1  The Judge resolved the allegation regarding the state tax debt in Applicant’s favor. 
However, she resolved the remaining allegations against Applicant.  The Judge noted that unpaid
debts are a continuing course of conduct,2 precluding a finding that the debts occurred so long ago
as to lack security significance.3  She also stated that Applicant did not provide a nexus between the
economic circumstances that she discussed in her written presentation and her financial situation.4 
The Judge stated that there was insufficient information as to when Applicant began making
payments on her debts, and Applicant provided no evidence that she had received financial
counseling.5
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to Applicant’s favorable character evidence and
to her payments on some of the debts.  However, the Judge stated that payments to the IRS began
in 2013, although the tax delinquencies go back to 2005.  Accordingly, the Judge expressed doubts
about Applicant’s financial responsibility.  She noted that the Directive requires her to resolve
doubts in  favor of national security.
Discussion
Applicant’s brief cites to her favorable evidence, such has her work performance and her
efforts to pay off her debts.  In doing so, she provides details that were not included in the record. 
We are not permitted to consider new evidence on appeal.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  The Judge made
detailed findings about Applicant’s character evidence and her debt payments.  Applicant’s
argument on appeal is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence in the record or to show that she weighed the evidence in a manner that was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 13-00584 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 24, 2014).  
We conclude that the Judge addressed the totality of Applicant’s circumstances and conduct
in reaching her ultimate decision.  Accordingly, we find no reason to disturb the Judge’s whole-
person analysis.  See, e.g., ADP Case 06-02549 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 3, 2007). 
1See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debt;” and 19(c): “a history of not
meeting financial obligations[.]”  
2See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-01309 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 29, 2010).  
3See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(a): “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment[.]”
4See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(b): “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances[.]”  
5See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 20(c): “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control[.]”  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  The standard applicable to trustworthiness
cases is that set forth in Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) regarding
security clearances:  such a determination “may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the
interests of the national security.’”  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 12-04343 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21,
2013).  See also Kaplan v. Conyers, 733 F.3d 1148 (Fed. Cir. 2013), cert. denied.
Order
The Administrative Judge’s decision is affirmed.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
