 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02447 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald C. Sykstus, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the personal conduct, handling protected information, 
and use of information technology systems security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct), K (handling protected information), and M (use of information technology 
systems). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 28, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 23, 2014. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
 
2 
 
September 29, 2014, scheduling the hearing for October 21, 2014. The hearing was 
convened on October 21, 2014, and reconvened on October 23, 2014. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 30, 2014.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Procedure 
 
A joint hearing was conducted for Applicant and his father. I have one set of 
exhibits and one transcript, but I am issuing separate decisions.  
 
Evidence 
 
Department Counsel called three witnesses and submitted Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 33, which were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant and his 
father testified. They called 12 additional witnesses and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through W and AA through QQ, which were admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel sent an informational letter to Applicant’s attorney on August 29, 
2014. The letter is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.b by changing the date “August 
2012” to “April 2012.” The motion was granted over Applicant’s objection.1 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2002. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which he 
has held since about 2002. He has a bachelor’s degree. He is married with three minor 
children.2  
 
 Applicant and his father work for the same company. They were required to 
periodically spend time at an isolated location in the United States. The closest hotel to 
the location was more than 60 miles away. Conditions at the location were austere with 
few amenities. The location had a bank of classified computers that were connected to 
a classified network.3  
 
 During a trip to the isolated location in 2011, it was noted that the computers 
would occasionally be locked. The locked computers were being used by remote logins 
from other locations. Authorization was required to do remote logins. The approved way 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 422-426. 
 
2 Tr. at 194-197; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 57-63, 146-148; GE 4, 5, 23. 
 
3 
 
to conduct remote logins was through Remote Desktop.4 In early 2012, a secure 
network was created between Applicant’s home location and the isolated location. 
Classified information could be transmitted over the secure network, and it was possible 
to conduct a remote login between the two locations. However, no authorization was 
granted to anyone at Applicant’s home location to perform a remote login to the 
computers at the isolated location.5 
 
 Applicant traveled to the isolated location in April 2012. His father was unable to 
make the trip because of a medical condition. Applicant created a text file with the 
Internet Protocol (IP) address of the computer at the isolated location and placed the 
text file on the secure network. He called his father and asked him to attempt a remote 
login from the classified computer at the home location to a classified computer at the 
isolated location using Remote Desktop. His father was able to use the IP address that 
was on the text file, and he attempted a remote login to the computer at the isolated 
location. He was able to get to the login prompt on the screen, but he was unable to log 
in. Applicant’s father indicated that he thought the date of the attempted remote login 
was April 26, 2012.6 
 
 Applicant created a Secure Shell (SSH)7 key while he was at the isolated 
location. He used the SSH key to create a connection between the computers at the 
isolated location and the home location. This was in essence a remote login, but 
through a different means than the approved way for remote logins, which is Remote 
Desktop. Applicant did not seek authorization from the home location to do a remote 
login or to use the SSH key. The SSH key created a connection between the two 
computers that remained open. Installing and using the SSH key to create a remote 
login was prohibited.8   
 
 The information system security manager for the classified program (Mr. A) 
worked from the home location, but he also spent time at the isolated location. In May 
2012, he was notified of a problem at the isolated location. He had the system 
                                                          
4 Remote Desktop Connection is a Microsoft Windows-based product that permits the user to connect 
to a computer running Windows from another computer running Windows that is connected to the same 
network or the Internet. See http://windows.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/connect-using-remote-desktop-
connection#connect-using-remote-desktop-connection=windows-7.  
 
5 Tr. at 63-64, 77-78, 105, 134, 150, 208-211; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4, 5, 10, 23. 
 
6 Tr. at 59-60, 77-82, 102, 106, 110, 119-120, 163-164, 207, 222-223, 273; Applicant’s response to SOR; 
GE 4, 5, 10, 17, 19, 20, 23. 
 
7 Secure Shell (SSH) is a cryptographic network protocol for secure data communication, remote 
command-line login, remote command execution, and other secure network services between two 
networked computers. It connects, via a secure channel over an insecure network, a server and a client 
running SSH server and SSH client programs, respectively. The encryption used by SSH is intended to 
provide confidentiality and integrity of data over an unsecured network, such as the Internet. SSH is 
typically used to log into a remote machine and execute commands. See http://en. 
wikipedia.org/wiki/Secure Shell.  
 
8 Tr. at 236-242, 267-268, 277, 316-321, 357-363, 443-445, 464-466, 473-477; Applicant’s response to 
SOR; GE 5, 10. 
 
4 
 
administrator at the home location (Ms. B) monitor the system. On June 7, 2012, Ms. B 
conducted a maintenance check on the network. She discovered a folder that was used 
by Applicant and his father. The folder contained the text file with the IP addresses and 
a shortcut to Remote Desktop.9  
 
 Applicant discussed his father’s attempted remote login in an e-mail dated June 
8, 2012. The SSH key had not been discovered yet, nor was it known that Applicant 
connected from the isolated-location computer to the home-location computer using the 
SSH key. Applicant never discussed the SSH key.10 He wrote: 
 
To my knowledge, [Applicant’s father] only attempted the login on that day 
in April. I myself only tried “remote” logins between computers at [isolated 
location] based on information from System Administrators. I have not 
attempted a remote login from the [home location] to [isolated location].11 
 
 In August 2012, Mr. A and Ms. B traveled to the isolated location. While there, a 
system administrator at the site (Mr. C) discovered the BIOS (Basic Input/Output 
System) setting on two computers had been changed. The modification permitted a 
connection between computers using an SSH key. After they returned to the home 
location, Ms. B discovered the SSH key on a computer used by Applicant and his 
father.12 
 
 The security manager at the home location (Ms. D) testified that installing any 
unauthorized software on the computer system was in direct violation of the user 
agreement signed by Applicant. Use of an SSH key was not permitted. She also 
testified that Applicant did not have authorization to conduct a remote login from the 
isolated location to the home location.13 
 
 Applicant has consistently maintained that he had authorization to conduct a 
remote login. He stated that on his April 2012 trip to the isolated location, he attempted 
a remote login from one computer to another computer at the isolated location. He was 
unsuccessful. He stated that he went to one of the system administrators (Ms. E) who 
told him that he would have to be added to the correct group. He testified that she 
added him to the group and told him that he was authorized to conduct a remote login 
from the isolated location to the home location. He asked her if it was possible to 
conduct a remote login from the home location to the isolated location. She told him that 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 440-445; GE 10, 20. 
 
10 GE 23. 
 
11 GE 23. 
 
12 Tr. at 400-401, 407-408, 440-445, 455-462, 475-477; GE 10, 11, 25. 
 
13 Tr. at 400-401, 407-408; AE OO. 
 
 
5 
 
it was possible, and that if there were any problems, he should let her know. He then 
remotely logged in from one computer to another computer at the isolated location.14  
 
 Applicant admitted that he created a text file with the computer’s IP address, and 
he called his father and asked him to do a remote login to the isolated-location 
computer from the home-location computer. He stated that he did not expect his father 
to be able to remotely log in, but he wanted to see if the prompt came up so that he 
could do a remote login when he returned to the home location. Applicant never 
attempted a remote login from the home location. He stated that there was no need for 
a remote login before it was discovered in June 2012.15   
 
 Applicant admitted that he created the SSH key and conducted a remote login 
from the isolated location to the home location. He stated that he did not seek 
permission because he thought he only needed permission to conduct a remote login 
using Remote Desktop, and that he did not need permission to do so using the SSH 
key. He stated that he had authorization to conduct the remote login using Remote 
Desktop, but he created the SSH key “to enable easier access.” He denied modifying 
the BIOS on any computers at the isolated location.16   
 
 Ms. E testified that she did not grant Applicant permission to conduct a remote 
login. Requests to conduct remote logins had to be submitted via a form to the security 
team to approve the request. Ms. E would not add anyone to the group that was 
authorized to conduct remote logins unless she was directed to do so by the security 
team. She indicated that there were two user groups: one user group could remotely 
access one computer at the isolated location to another computer at that location. The 
second group was authorized to remotely log in from another location to the isolated 
location using Remote Desktop. If someone wanted remote access from the isolated 
location to the home location, the person would have to seek authorization from the 
home location. Using an SSH key to remotely log in to or from the isolated location was 
not permitted.17 
 
 Ms. E left her position at the isolated location in March 2012 to take another job. 
The job did not work out, and she returned to work at the isolated location on April 26, 
2012, a Thursday. She did not have full access on April 26, 2012, and had to be 
escorted at the site. She did not gain full access until the following week. The computer 
system at the isolated location has been disassembled, and Ms. E no longer works 
there. She does not remember Applicant or his father by name. She has not seen them 
since before she was asked about them in June 2012. She stated that she might 
                                                          
14 Tr. at 212-217, 230-234, 255-257; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4, 5, 23. 
 
15 Tr. at 215-230, 275; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4, 5. 
 
16 Tr. at 357-363, 462, 507-508; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5. 
 
17 Tr. at 370-392; AE OO-QQ. 
 
 
6 
 
recognize them if she saw their faces, but she testified telephonically and never had the 
chance to identify them.18   
 
 Applicant provided an affidavit to an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator in December 2012. He stated that he asked Ms. E for remote access, and 
she added him to the remote-access user group. He admitted asking his father to 
attempt a remote login from the home location. He also admitted creating and using the 
SSH key to log in from the isolated location to the home location, but he stated that he 
“believed using SSH as a non-administrator was allowable.”19  
 
 Applicant provided another affidavit to an OPM investigator in June 2013. He 
stated that he asked Ms. E how his father could remotely log in from the home location. 
He stated that she added him to the remote-access user group. He asked his father to 
attempt a remote login from the home location. He also admitted creating and using the 
SSH key in April 2012. He denied attempting any remote logins after April 2012.20 
 
 Applicant’s facility security officer (FSO) directed Applicant to take remedial 
security training after the incidents. The FSO indicated that the matter was a “he said, 
she said” issue between Applicant and Ms. E, and that there was “no documented proof 
that a violation occurred.” The Defense Security Service (DSS) suspended Applicant’s 
security clearance in November 2012 pending the outcome of this case.21 Applicant has 
been retained by his company, and he is working on non-classified projects pending the 
outcome of this case.22  
 
 Applicant called numerous witnesses and submitted documents and letters 
attesting to his outstanding job performance, character, honor, professionalism, 
sincerity, trustworthiness, honesty, loyalty, reliability, dedication, and integrity. He is 
active in his community. He is enthusiastically recommended for a security clearance.23 
 
 I considered the possibility that this case resulted from an honest mistake or 
misunderstanding. However, those possibilities are rejected. I did not find Applicant 
credible. He did not satisfactorily explain why he needed to create an SSH key to 
conduct a remote login if he had authorization to conduct logins using the approved 
Remote Desktop means. Ms. E did not recognize Applicant’s or his father’s name, but 
she did not have the opportunity to see either of them and might have recognized them 
if she had. I also considered the testimony that she could not have granted Applicant 
                                                          
18 Tr. at 392-393, 468-472, 482; GE 10. 
 
19 GE 4. 
 
20 GE 5. 
 
21 I have made an independent evaluation of the evidence, and I have not relied on the FSO’s opinion or 
the fact that DSS suspended Applicant’s security clearance in arriving at my decision. 
 
22 GE 9; AE W, PP. 
 
23 AE AA-NN. 
 
7 
 
permission because she had just returned to work on April 26, 2012, she had to be 
escorted, and she did not have full access until the following week. I find Applicant’s 
failure to mention the SSH key and his remote login in his June 2012 e-mail to be 
misleading. 
 
 After considering all the evidence, I do not find that Applicant sought or obtained 
approval from Ms. E to conduct remote logins. I further find that Applicant intentionally 
provided false information in his December 2012 and June 2013 affidavits when he 
stated that he had authorization from Ms. E to conduct remote logins. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
8 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant asked his father to attempt a remote login from the classified computer 
at the home location to a classified computer at the isolated location. Applicant created 
an SSH key and conducted a login from the isolated location to the home location. None 
of these actions were authorized. That conduct created a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable. Additionally, the conduct showed 
poor judgment and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, which raises 
questions about Applicant’s ability to protect classified information. The general concern 
addressed in AG ¶ 15 is also raised. See ISCR Case No. 12-01683 at 4 (App. Bd. Jun. 
10, 2014).  
 
 Applicant intentionally provided false information in his December 2012 and June 
2013 affidavits when he stated that he had authorization from Ms. E to conduct remote 
logins. AG ¶ 16(b) is applicable.  
 
 The evidence does not support a finding that Applicant attempted to use the SSH 
key to attempt a remote login in August 2012. SOR ¶ 3.d is concluded for Applicant.  
 
 
9 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 
Applicant has not accepted responsibility for his conduct. I found him less than 
completely forthcoming at the hearing. Without complete candor, I am unable to find 
that Applicant has learned from the experience and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
No mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
The security concern for use of information technology systems is set out in AG ¶ 
39: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information. 
 
10 
 
 AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or 
component thereof;  
 
(b) illegal or unauthorized modification, destruction, manipulation or denial 
of access to information, software, firmware, or hardware in an information 
technology system; 
 
(c) use of any information technology system to gain unauthorized access 
to another system or to a compartmented area within the same system; 
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system; and 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system without authorization, 
when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations. 
 
Applicant participated in his father’s attempted remote login; he created an SSH 
key; and he used the SSH key to conduct a remote login. All of the above disqualifying 
conditions are applicable.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate the use of information technology systems security 
concerns are provided under AG ¶ 41. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one’s 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available. 
 
Applicant’s conduct was not minor. He has not been forthcoming about his 
actions. His conduct continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. There are no applicable mitigating conditions. 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 The security concern for handling protected information is set out in AG ¶ 33: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
 
11 
 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
 AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information.  
 
 Applicant asked his father to attempt a remote login from the classified computer 
at the home location to a classified computer at the isolated location. AG ¶ 34(g) is 
applicable. There are no applicable mitigating conditions under the same rationale 
discussed in the analysis for personal conduct and use of information technology 
systems.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E, K, and M in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s strong character evidence and his stable work history. 
However, Applicant has a problem with honesty and following rules. I have concerns 
about his judgment, trustworthiness, and willingness to safeguard classified information.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
 
12 
 
mitigate the personal conduct, handling protected information, and use of information 
technology systems security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline K:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline M:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.c:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.d:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
