 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02974 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 8, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 18, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 27, 2014. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
31, 2014. I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 18, 2014. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, and they were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on November 26, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted both allegations in the SOR. I have incorporated her 
admissions into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. She graduated from college in 1989. She married in 
1994 and has no children. She held a top secret security clearance while working for a 
government agency during a college internship from 1987 to 1989. She began full-time 
employment with the government agency in January 1990 after graduating from college. 
She remained employed with the agency until 1993, when she left to seek employment 
in the private sector. She continued to hold a top secret security clearance until she left 
the agency. She began working for her current employer, a federal contractor, in August 
2013.1  
 
 Applicant admitted that she began experimenting with marijuana use while 
attending college in 1984. She used it a couple of times a year during college. From 
1987 to 1989, she attended school for six months and worked as an intern for six 
months. She did not use marijuana while she was actively working for the agency during 
her six-month internships, but she did use it once when she returned to school and still 
maintained her security clearance. She was aware that marijuana use was prohibited by 
her employer. She was required to go through a recertification process while at the 
agency when she admitted her use. She was also required to take a polygraph every 
three years. She explained she was a young college student and disclosed her use to 
the agency during her internship. She was not terminated from her position. She told the 
agency she would not use illegal drugs again. She did not use marijuana again while 
working for the agency from 1990 to 1993. Applicant admitted that she was aware that 
illegal drug use was a concern of the federal government.2  
 
 Applicant stated that she did not think she was going to seek employment with 
the federal government after leaving her job with the agency in 1993. She smoked 
marijuana about once every three to five years from 1993 to 2011, either at a party or a 
concert. It was usually provided by friends or people she knew. She did not purchase it. 
She was usually drinking alcohol at those times. She was aware that marijuana use was 
illegal. She acknowledged she made poor decisions when she used it.3  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 10, 24-27, 31, 53-55; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. 22, 32-39. 
 
3 Tr. 22, 32-35, 55. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant used marijuana about once a month from late 2011 to May 2013. She 
ingested it in the form of a cookie. She stated she used it to alleviate pain. It was not 
prescribed. Her friend baked the cookies and provided them to Applicant. She 
acknowledged that although she was aware marijuana use and possession was illegal, 
it was not in the forefront of her thought process when she consumed it. She stated she 
is now more aware of its illegality. She acknowledged that since at least 1989 she has 
known that the government prohibits illegal drug use by people holding or seeking a 
security clearance.4  
 
 Applicant stopped using marijuana in May 2013 because she wanted to pursue 
other employment, and did not want her marijuana use to jeopardize her opportunities. 
On her security clearance application (SCA), signed August 12, 2013, Applicant 
disclosed her prior drug use from 1984 to 2013. The SCA stated: “Provide an 
explanation of why you intend or do not intend to use this drug or controlled substance 
in the future.” Applicant wrote that she: “will not use while under security clearance.”5 
Applicant explained that she did not mean to infer that she would continue to use 
marijuana if she did not have a clearance.6  
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she stated:  
 
“I admit I did use marijuana when I was approximately 20-21 years old 
while holding a clearance. I did inform security voluntarily and it was 
stated in my polygraph session. At the time of the marijuana use, I did not 
think I would be returning to the [agency] for full-time employment. It was a 
one-time, isolated event and didn’t happen again while I held a clearance 
at the [agency]. 
 
 Applicant stated that she did not use marijuana in any form other than a cookie 
from 2011 to 2013. She does not have illegal drugs in her house. Her husband used 
marijuana with her during this time period, and he no longer uses it because he does 
not want to put Applicant’s employment at risk. She has never abused prescription 
medications and never bought or provided others with illegal drugs. When asked if she 
considered seeking professional help for her pain instead using marijuana she stated 
she did.7  
 
 Applicant is unaware if her current employer has a drug policy. She is not subject 
to random drug testing by her current employer. She believes one of her former 
                                                          
4 Tr. 39, 41-43, 56-58; 61-62; GE 1, 2; Answer to SOR. 
 
5 GE 1 at page 31.  
 
6 Tr. 22, 41, 44, 62. 
 
7 Tr. 41, 44-47, 58. 
 
 
4 
 
 
employers had a drug policy and she was required to take a pre-employment drug test, 
which she passed.8  
 
 Applicant maintains contact with the spouse of the friend who provided the 
marijuana cookie. They socialize together as a couple. She is unaware if they continue 
to use marijuana.9  
 
 Applicant testified she does not intend to use marijuana in the future. She 
believes she made bad decisions in the past when she used it. She understands she 
repeatedly violated the law by her use of illegal drugs. She has never taken any other 
illegal drugs. She believes she is dependable, reliable, and has no financial problems. 
She included in her answer to the SOR a statement that she does not smoke or 
otherwise damage her body using drugs. She does not take any prescription drugs. She 
provided a copy of drug test results for a sample she voluntarily provided on October 
20, 2014. The test results were negative for illegal drugs. She provided a statement to 
mitigate security concerns stating that she does not intend to any illegal substance “or 
else suffer revocation of clearance.”10 She provided a copy of her credit score and a list 
of professional organizations where she is a member.11   
 
 Applicant provided character letters that describe her as a trusted professional, 
who is credible and honest, both personally and professionally. They believe Applicant 
will show good judgment and follow all laws, rules, and regulations with regard to 
maintaining a security clearance.12 Applicant acknowledged that those providing 
character letters were unaware of the extent of her prior drug use. Only one of those 
providing a character letter was aware of her most recent marijuana use.13 
 
   Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
8 Tr. 36, 50-51. 
 
9 Tr. 41, 51-53. 
 
10 AE E.  
 
11 Tr. 22-23 48, 62-63; AE C and D. 
 
12 AE A. 
 
13 Tr. 63-64. 
 
5 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 I have considered the following disqualifying conditions for drug involvement 
under AG ¶ 25 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
 (b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and 
 
 (g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant used marijuana while holding a security clearance during her college 
internship from 1987 to 1989. She sporadically used marijuana from 1993 to 2011, and 
used it monthly from 2011 to May 2013. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant knew that marijuana use was illegal when she used it as a young 
college student while holding a security clearance. She may not have been aware of the 
seriousness of her actions at the time. However, she sufficiently understood the gravity 
of her actions because she disclosed her illegal use to her employer with whom she 
subsequently took a full-time position. She voluntarily abstained from marijuana use 
during her four years of employment at the agency. She resumed using it sporadically 
after she left that position in 1993. Beginning in 2011, she used it monthly until May 
2013. She fully acknowledged that she was aware using marijuana was illegal. She 
attributed her actions to making poor choices. She indicated she does not intend to use 
marijuana in the future, a promise she previously made to the agency while a young 
adult. It appears that part of her motivation to cease marijuana use is because she is 
seeking a security clearance and knows it is inconsistent with obtaining one. This is 
evidenced by her statements that after she left the agency, she continued to use 
marijuana, as she did not intend to return to the federal government for full-time 
employment. She stated on her SCA that she would not use marijuana while holding a 
clearance. Applicant’s conduct casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant continues to associate with the friends who provided her with the 
marijuana cookies. She asserted that she has not used marijuana since May 2013, but 
failed to submit sufficient evidence to support that assertion. She submitted a statement 
of intent not to use illegal drugs in the future with automatic revocation of clearance if 
violated. AG ¶ 26 (b) partially applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 47 years old and has a long history of substance abuse. She used 
marijuana as a young college student while holding a security clearance. She informed 
the agency where she worked at the time that her intent was not to use illegal drugs in 
the future. She abstained from marijuana use while holding a full-time job with the 
agency until 1993, when she left. She then illegally used marijuana sporadically until 
2011 when she began to use it monthly until May 2013. Applicant was aware her 
conduct was a violation of the law, but repeatedly chose to break the law. During those 
periods of time when it was to her benefit to comply, such as to maintain her security 
clearance, she did. When her security clearance was no longer a factor, she resumed 
her illegal conduct. Her actions were not infrequent, but spanned more than a 20-year 
period. The government expects its employees to exercise self-discipline and comply 
with the law at all times. Applicant continued engaging in prohibited behavior beyond 
her college years where youthful indiscretion was a factor in her poor decision-making. 
As an accomplished adult and professional, she made choices with little regard for the 
illegality of her actions. She indicated her intent to refrain from marijuana use in the 
 
8 
 
 
future, a promise she made in the past and broke. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me with substantial questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the drug involvement guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
