 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00262 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 11, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 On August 12, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR. On October 3, 2014, 
Applicant requested an expedited hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on October 27, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
 
2 
 
 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on November 3, 2014. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled, by video teleconference, on November 12, 2014.1 
 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through G, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held 
open until November 26, 2014, to allow Applicant an opportunity to submit additional 
documents. She submitted AE H and I, which were admitted without objection.2 DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 20, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR except ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, and 1.h. 
Her admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 28 years old. She graduated from high school in 2003. She has 
taken some college courses, but has not earned a degree. She married in 2005 when 
she was 18 years old. She divorced in 2010 and remarried in 2011. She has a three-
year-old child from her current marriage. Applicant enlisted in the Army in October 2005 
and was medically discharged in January 2006.3 
 
Applicant worked at various jobs from 2003 to 2008. She had periods of 
unemployment when transitioning from one job to another. Her husband was employed, 
and he paid all of the bills and was responsible for all of their financial decisions. In 
2007, they purchased a house for $110,000. The entire amount was financed. Their 
monthly payments were $1,050. Applicant stated that she was unaware of the specifics 
of their finances. She stated that her husband wanted them to have more income, and 
he found a job for her with a federal contractor working overseas.4  
 
In June 2008, Applicant began working for a federal contractor in Iraq, 
Afghanistan, and Kuwait. When she began her employment, she was earning 
approximately $70,000 to $75,000 annually. She later earned approximately $110,000, 
until she returned to the United States in October 2010. She was sending her money 
home for her husband to help pay their bills. He failed to pay their bills.5  
 
While working overseas, she believed her husband was paying their bills. He had 
a full-time job earning approximately $70,000 annually. In May 2009, while overseas, 
                                                          
1 Applicant affirmatively waived the 15-day notice requirement. 
 
2 Hearing Exhibit I is Department Counsel’s memorandum. 
 
3 Tr. 77, 91. 
 
4 Tr. 82-83, 86-89. 
 
5 Tr. 28, 37-39, 75-76. 
 
3 
 
 
she received a notice from the Red Cross that she needed to return home. She went 
back to the United States for a week. When she arrived, she and her husband’s house 
had been searched, and she learned her husband was in jail, charged with two counts 
of online solicitation of a minor. She learned her husband had provided his mother with 
their joint account information and his mother withdrew Applicant’s and her husband’s 
entire savings from the bank. Applicant and her husband also kept cash in their home. 
Applicant believes her mother-in-law also took the cash. Applicant stated her husband 
feigned ignorance about where their money went. She believed his mother took the 
money with his permission and used it pay for a lawyer. She estimated the total amount 
of money taken was approximately $36,000.6 
 
Applicant secured a protective order against her husband and hired her own 
lawyer. She was unaware of his illegal activities and later learned he also had multiple 
girlfriends. He was eventually convicted of the charges, received probation for ten 
years, and is required to register as a sex offender. Applicant filed for divorce. Her 
husband did not want a divorce and initially refused to sign the papers. Her husband 
received his vehicle and personal items as part of the property disposition. Her husband 
could not live in their house because it was close to a school and a park, and he was a 
registered sex offender. She agreed to be responsible for the mortgage and other 
marital debts because she wanted him to sign the divorce papers. She was unaware of 
all their debts. He did not pay any of their joint debts. She continued to pay their 
mortgage payment while she was employed. The divorce was final in March 2010. She 
became aware later that her husband had his debts discharged in bankruptcy.7  
 
Applicant met her second husband and returned to the United States in October 
2010 to get married. The contract she had been working on overseas expired. She 
anticipated returning to Iraq in January 2011, but learned she was pregnant and could 
not work overseas. She remarried in February 2011. She hired an attorney in February 
2011 to assist her in obtaining a loan modification on the mortgage for her house. The 
house is worth less than the amount of the mortgage. She continued to pay her 
mortgage until approximately February 2011 and then was unable because she was not 
employed. She was advised by her lawyer not to make payments on the mortgage while 
attempting a loan modification. She could not find another job where she was living.8  
 
After Applicant’s child was born in September 2011, she attended a police 
academy so she could pursue a job in law enforcement. She started in November 2011, 
but broke her leg and had to postpone completion of the course. She started again in 
May 2012 and completed the requirements for a law enforcement certificate in October 
2012. She paid for the class through the GI Bill. She began working for a sheriff’s 
department on November 1, 2012. She stated she worked full-time for part-time wages 
because the department did not have sufficient funding to pay her full wages. She left 
                                                          
6 Tr. 31-37, 76, 79. 
 
7 Tr. 37-40, 49-50, 78-82. 
 
8 Tr. 39-44, 48-52, 74. 
 
4 
 
 
the job in June 2014 when her husband, an active duty military member, was 
transferred to a different state. Since that transfer she has been unable to find 
employment. She presently has a job offer to work overseas, pending her security 
clearance determination. She intends on resolving the remaining debts once she has 
secured employment.9  
 
The debt is SOR ¶ 1.a ($36,000) is the past-due amount on Applicant’s 
mortgage. She took responsibility for the house after her first husband’s conviction and 
was decreed the property as part of her divorce. Her loan modification application is 
pending. She provided documents to show her actions.10 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($2,222) was to an online university. Applicant disputed 
the charge due to some discrepancies with the university and problems she 
encountered with financing her courses. The online university agreed to waive the 
balance of the debt, and she no longer owes it. The debt is resolved.11  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c ($412) is a credit card debt. Applicant believed she had 
paid the bill and had not received a notice advising her that she had a delinquent 
account. She contacted the creditor and received a letter in December 2013, confirming 
the account had a zero balance. The debt is resolved.12 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($220) is for a gas bill that her ex-husband failed to pay 
when he moved out of their house. Applicant was unaware the bill was in her name. 
She paid the bill and resolved the debt.13 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.e ($3,397) is for rent on an apartment Applicant and her ex-
husband leased in 2005 before they purchased their house. She was unaware she was 
on the lease because she and her husband were not married at the time, and she did 
not earn enough to pay for the rent. She believes the delinquency occurred when they 
moved from a one-bedroom to a two-bedroom apartment. She believed they had a 
month-to-month lease. She did not become aware of the delinquency until September 
2013. She is unable to pay the debt at this time. The divorce decree does not 
specifically address this debt.14  
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($458) is a cable bill. Applicant disputed this debt. She 
learned her ex-husband’s girlfriend fraudulently opened the account in Applicant’s 
                                                          
9 Tr. 67-73, 83. 
 
10 AE H and I attachments A, B, C, D, E, G, H. 
 
11 Tr. 53-54; AE A. 
 
12 Tr. 54-56; AE C. 
 
13 Tr. 44, 57-58; AE I attachment J. 
 
14 Tr. 58-60; AE H. 
 
5 
 
 
name. Applicant filed a police report and sent a dispute letter to the creditor. The 
creditor removed the account from Applicant’s credit report. The debt is resolved.15 
 
Applicant acknowledged the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($445) is for an electric bill on the 
house she owned with her ex-husband. It was incurred while she was working 
overseas. There was a question whether a new meter was installed with a new 
company. She researched and disputed the charge. She was advised by the creditor to 
file a police report for the unauthorized installation, which she did. The creditor agreed 
to waive the $300 early termination fee of the amount owed. Applicant paid the bill and 
resolved the debt.16 
 
Applicant successfully disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($259). She indicated 
there was a mistake and the creditor concurred that she never owed the alleged 
amount. She received a letter from the creditor advising her that the debt would be 
removed from his credit report.17 
 
Applicant was unfamiliar with the debt in SOR ¶ 1.i ($91) so she contacted the 
creditor to get information about the debt. The creditor was unable to tell her what the 
debt was for. She paid the bill so the debt could be resolved.18  
 
Applicant anticipated receiving approximately $500 on December 1, 2014, from a 
law enforcement pension plan that she no longer participates in. She intends to use that 
money to pay some of her delinquent debts.19 
 
Applicant provided character letters that describe her as a hard worker and a 
person of integrity. She is committed to achieving her goals. She works well with others 
and serves as a morale booster. She has a sense of duty and honor. She is a strong, 
honest, responsible, professional and trustworthy woman.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
15 Tr. 60-62; AE E. 
 
16 Tr. 63-64. AE I attachment I. 
 
17 Tr. 65-67; AE F. 
 
18 AE I attachment K. 
 
19 Tr. 94-95. 
 
6 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
7 
 
 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that are unpaid or unresolved. Applicant is unable 
to satisfy her debts at this time. These debts were incurred during her first marriage. 
She believed her husband was paying their bills while she was working overseas. She 
retained their house during the divorce settlement because he could not live there as a 
registered sex offender, due to its proximity to a park and school. I find there is sufficient 
evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant has resolved or paid the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, and 
1.i. AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(e) apply to these debts. Applicant acknowledges the remaining 
debts, but due to her unemployment she is unable to pay the debts at this time. AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply because Applicant still has debts that are not paid or resolved.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems began when her husband was arrested for online 
solicitation of a minor. During their marriage her husband was in charge of all of the 
finances. She was unaware and naïve about their finances. Applicant was working 
overseas and sending money home to pay their bills. Once her husband was arrested, 
his mother took all of her joint savings with her husband, approximately $36,000, and 
presumably used it for attorney’s fee. Applicant filed for divorce and was left responsible 
for many of the debts including the mortgage on the house. She paid the mortgage until 
she no longer had a job. She has been working with an attorney to obtain a loan 
modification, but the process is slow. She has paid many of the delinquent debts and 
acknowledges her responsibility to pay the remaining debts. She intends to pay them 
when she is able. The conditions that resulted in Applicant’s financial problems were 
beyond her control. She has acted responsibly in resolving most of the debts she could. 
She intends to pay the remaining debts once she secures employment. I find AG ¶ 
20(b) applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old hardworking woman. She enlisted in the Army, but was 
medically discharged. She earned a law enforcement certificate and worked in the field 
until her active duty husband was transferred. She has worked overseas for federal 
contractors, spending long periods of time away from home. She has not shirked her 
obligations. She was sending money home to her ex-husband, only to learn he was 
committing crimes and being unfaithful. She had never handled the finances in their 
marriage, but was confronted with the reality that she was now responsible for resolving 
many of the marital debts. She has paid or resolved most of the debts, but others 
remain to be resolved. She and her present husband live within their means. She has 
had difficulty finding employment, despite her extensive search. Applicant impressed 
me that she understands the gravity of following through and resolving all of the 
remaining financial issues. I believe she is committed to doing so. She intends to use 
money that will be returned to her from her law enforcement pension to help resolve her 
remaining debts. She is willing to take a job overseas, where she will not see her 
husband and small child for a lengthy period, so she can resolve her remaining financial 
issues. I find her remaining debts do not create a security concern. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
