 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-02073 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns related to Guideline F. Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance is granted. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On July 11, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
In a July 28, 2014, response, Applicant admitted all 11 allegations raised in the 
SOR and requested a decision without hearing. On October 15, 2014, counsel for DOD 
prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing six attachments to support the 
Government’s position in this matter. Applicant timely submitted a letter with five 
attachments in response to the FORM. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me on November 21, 2014. I have thoroughly reviewed 
 
 
 
 
2 
the FORM and other case file materials. Based on the materials submitted, I find that 
Applicant met his burden in mitigating financial considerations security concerns. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old gear issue specialist who has worked for his present 
employer since December 2013. Before that, he worked as a plumber for a decade. 
During that time, he endured layoffs from June 2009 to January 2010 and from May 
2010 until May 2013. In 2010, he was medically advised to find a different career due to 
the toll his plumbing work was taking on his knees, worsening an already severe case of 
osteoarthritis. In May 2013, he took a significantly lower-paying job that required a 
considerable commute in order to generate an income. He left that position when 
offered a higher salary at his current post. He was honorably discharged from the 
United State military in 2002 after 20 years of service. He is married and has three 
grown children. The October 2014 SOR alleges Appellant has 11 delinquent debts (1.a-
1.k) amounting to nearly $22,300.  
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant provided evidence that he has satisfied the 
debts noted at SOR 1.a ($1,430 tax lien) and 1.e ($6,343 balance reflected on 1099-C 
Form). He wrote that he also satisfied the debts at 1.b ($249) and i.h ($292), but no 
documentary evidence of their satisfaction was attached. The debts at issue all seem to 
have been created during, or became delinquent after, Applicant’s periods of 
unemployment or underemployment. Applicant wrote that he maintained contact with 
his creditors. There is no evidence that Appellant has received financial counseling. At 
the time the FORM was issued, following a Government review of Applicant’s materials, 
the Government estimated Applicant owed a little less than $15,000. This sum was 
calculated by adding the sum of the debts noted at SOR 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.i, 1.j, and 
1.k, debts he had not directly addressed in his SOR answer.  
 
 In response to the FORM, Applicant provided medical evidence showing his 
need to seek a new form of employment in 2010, and helping to link his periods of 
unemployment and health issues with his debts. He also provided notes tending to 
indicate that he paid the debt at 1.b in August 2014, although no actual receipt was 
submitted. He provided evidence that the debt for $292 at 1.h was paid, and that the 
collection actions against him noted in 1.g and 1.i for $1,233 and $2,251, respectively, 
had been closed after dispute, absolving him of these two obligations.  
 
 The balance owed for the remaining debts, noted at SOR allegations 1.c, 1.d, 1.f, 
1.j, and 1.k, amount to about $11,000, a substantially lower sum than originally reflected 
in the SOR. Applicant stresses that he only returned to work in May 2013, following a 
protracted period of unemployment and a notable period of underemployment. The 
progress he has made has been completed in the 10 months since starting his current 
job and returning to a sustainable wage. In that time, he has paid or successfully 
disputed 6 of the 11 debts at issue, reducing the total sum of the originally alleged debt 
by over half. His plan since returning to his past level of income has been to halt the 
 
 
 
 
3 
further acquisition of debt, maintain a workable budget, and devote all spare funds to 
debt repayment.    
 
     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant had 
multiple delinquent debts amounting to about $22,300. This is sufficient to invoke two of 
the financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance-related security concerns in this case: 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Although Applicant has not received financial counseling, he did acquire much of 
the debt at issue as the result of conditions beyond his control, such as periods of 
unemployment and underemployment, as well as poor physical health. During this time, 
he responsibly maintained contact with his creditors. He has been back to work for 
 
 
 
 
5 
about 10 months, earning a salary close to his former level of income. In that time, he 
demonstrated good faith and responsibly reduced both the sum of his debt and the 
number of debts by over half. He has not acquired more debt. He is living within his 
means and making significant progress on his obligations. He successfully disputed two 
of the debts at issue. Moreover, he is now in a less physically strenuous field, which 
should increase his likelihood of continued, uninterrupted employment. Given these 
circumstances and facts, AG ¶ 20(a) - AG ¶ 20(d) apply. In addition, AG ¶ 20(e) applies 
with regard to the two disputed debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
limited facts and circumstances noted in this case. I incorporate my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, others may have warranted additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old former plumber whose advanced osteoarthritis forced 
him to transition to another line of work during a protracted period of unemployment. 
Debts were acquired while he was unemployed, then underemployed. Less than a year 
ago, he found his present job, which has a salary range close to his previous salary as a 
plumbing professional. In that time, he has devised a workable budget, continued to 
work with his creditors, and reduced both the total sum of his delinquent debt and the 
actual number of delinquent debts by over half. He has budgeted to continue to satisfy 
his debts and is committed to doing so.  
 
This process does not require that an applicant satisfy all delinquent debts, only 
that he have a workable plan for addressing his debts, and documented evidence of 
successful implementation of that plan. Tracing his progress from SOR to FORM to his 
response to the FORM shows that his total debt situation has been improved 
considerably. There is no reason to suspect that he will not continue to make similar 
progress on his debts until they are all satisfied. I find that Applicant mitigated financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
