1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-00331
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahyrn Hoffmann,  Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Eric Eisen, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On March 18, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under  Guideline B (Foreign Influence).
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
(DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 20, 2014. A notice of
hearing was issued on October 29, 2014, scheduling the hearing for November 25,
2014.  Government Exhibits (GX) 1-5 were admitted into evidence without objection.
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A-F, which were admitted
without objection. The transcript was received on December 5, 2014. Based on a
review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
Applicant stated that he obtained a position of public trust based on a 2007 application. (GX 3)      1
2
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts
relating to Jordan. The request and the attached documents are included in the record
as HE I. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Facts, below.
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a
through 1.k, with explanations.
Applicant, who is 38 years old, was born in Jordan. After attending high school in
Jordan, Applicant went to Iraq to study for his undergraduate degree, but he did not like
studying there. After one year, Applicant left Iraq and returned to Jordan. From Jordan, 
applicant went to Israel, where he finished his undergraduate degree in January 2000.
(Tr. 26 ) He immigrated to the United States in April 2000 because he was awarded a
scholarship.  Applicant’s first wife sponsored him for his U.S. citizenship. He obtained a
scholarship to an American university. He received his Ph.D in astrophysics. Applicant
became a naturalized citizen in May 2007. After divorcing his first wife in 2007,
Applicant married his second wife in 2009. (GX 1) Applicant worked for his current
employer, as a professor, since July 2012. (GX 1) This is his first request for a security
clearance with the DOD.   1
The SOR alleges foreign influence security concerns about Applicant’s spouse,
mother, father in-law, mother-in-law, siblings, and siblings-in-law. They are citizens and
residents of Jordan. (GX 1) Applicant has one sister and a brother-in-law who are
citizens and residents of the West Bank. One sister-in-law lives in Kuwait, but is a
Jordanian citizen.
Applicant’s current wife is a dual citizen who holds a Jordanian passport. She
became a U.S. citizen in October 2012. She holds a Jordanian passport, dated 2013.
(AX F) She also holds an American passport. Applicant’s wife is willing to destroy the
Jordanian passport but she cannot return it to Applicant’s Facility Security Officer (she
is not an employee) and she is concerned about relinquishing it to the Jordanian
government because it might draw attention to Applicant. 
Applicant’s wife maintains contact with her mother and father by telephone. She
speaks to them about once a week. (Tr. 104) None of her family know about the nature
of Applicant’s work. 
Applicant’s father, who was a medical doctor, is deceased. His mother is a
citizen and resident of Jordan. However, she has a green card and spends time in the
United States with Applicant. (Tr. 53, AX E) When his mother returns to Jordan,
3
Applicant speaks to her about once a week. (Tr. 61) She intends to become a U.S.
citizen. (Tr. 89) She has no connection to the Jordanian government.
Applicant’s brother is a Jordanian citizen and resident. Applicant’s brother has an
educational consulting firm. Applicant speaks to him about once every other month.
Applicant has three sisters who are Jordanian residents and citizens. Applicant has a
sister who is a resident of the West Bank. This sister is still a Jordanian citizen.
Applicant speaks to his sisters about four times a year. (Tr. 56) 
Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are Jordanian citizens and residents.
His wife maintains contact with them. They do not know anything about the nature of
Applicant’s work. Applicant’s father-in-law is retired and has no connection with the
Jordanian military or the government. Applicant saw them on his visit to Jordan in 2013.
Applicant has three brothers-in-law who are Jordanian citizens and residents. He
has a brother-in-law who is a citizen and resident of the West Bank. They have no
connection to the military or the Jordanian government.
Applicant has a brother-in-law who is a Syrian citizen and resides in Jordan. He
does not have much contact with him, and last saw him when he was in Jordan in 2013.
Applicant has a sister-in-law who is a Jordanian citizen and resides in Kuwait.
Applicant’s wife has sponsored her for U.S. citizenship. (AX F, Tr. 59)
Applicant does not maintain contact with any extended family members in
Jordan.  Nor does he maintain any contact with friends or former students. (Tr. 59) He
renounced his Jordanian citizenship and destroyed his Jordanian passport in August
2007. (GX 2)
Applicant and his wife have traveled to Jordan several times in the past few
years for medical reasons. They sought help from a fertility clinic. After numerous
attempts in the United States and spending thousands of dollars, they decided to try In
vitro fertilization (IVF)VF in Jordan because the treatment is quite affordable. (Tr. 44)
The last trip was in July 2013. (Tr. 70) Applicant notified his employer about the trip.
Applicant travels to Jordan and other countries for work conferences and meets
individuals from around the world. He disclosed the contacts on his security clearance
application. The nature of his scientific work involves collaboration with many foreign
nationals. The contacts are for research purposes.
Applicant and his wife have U.S. bank accounts. He earns approximately
$130,000 annually. (Tr. 103) Applicant has no assets or property in Jordan. (GX 2) He
has a 401(k) valued at about $70,000.
Applicant submitted eight letters of recommendation from former professors,
colleagues, and project managers. Each attests to his leadership skills, dependability,
and ethics.  A professor who has known Applicant for at least ten years attests to is
4
outstanding work effort and creativity. He noted that Applicant is willing to help when
needed. (AX A)
A former colleague describes Applicant as “thoroughly American.” He
appreciates the freedoms that are available to him both professionally and personally in
the United States. Applicant has worked many years without incidents that would cast
any doubt on his personal discipline or loyalty. Applicant has pursued his professional
life through many years of education and postdoctoral fellowships. (AX B)
Applicant’s current employer noted that Applicant has been involved with various
areas of defense programs and wrote several classified reports. Dr. A states Applicant
has the highest integrity. Applicant is the key man on at least two projects. His current
manager states that Applicant is greatly respected within the program. He has an
outstanding research record covering several areas.  (AX C)
A retired Naval Officer and research staff member who knows Applicant states
that he has observed nothing in Applicant’s character, actions, or words that give him
concern about Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. (AX D)
Applicant is involved in his community. He votes in local and national elections.
He enjoys the opportunities that are available in the United States. He has no desire to
return to Jordan or the Middle East to live. 
Administrative Notice
Jordan
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is a constitutional monarch ruled by King
Abdullah II. According to the State Department’s 2013 Human Right Report, Jordan’s
three most significant continuing human rights problems are: citizens’s inability to
change their government peacefully; mistreatment and allegations of torture by security
and government officials; and restrictions on freedom of expression and freedom of
assembly.
The U.S. Department of State assesses the threat of terrorism in Jordan as high.
Terrorist groups have employed Improvised Explosive Devices in attacking Americans
and other foreign nationals. The Department of State remains concerned about the
continued threat of terrorist attacks, demonstrations, and other violent actions against
U.S. citizens and interests overseas. Travelers to Jordan should be cognizant of the
fact that Al-Qaida in Iraq affiliates have carried out terrorist activities against U.S. and
Jordanian interests there.
The government of Jordan considers U.S.-Jordanian dual nationals to be
Jordanian citizens. Jordanian authorities may not inform the U.S. embassy of arrests,
detentions, or accidents involving such dual citizens. Jordanian law subjects dual
citizens to certain obligations, for example, males under the age of 37 are required to
register for service in the Jordanian military. 
5
Under Jordanian law, any adult male may prevent a female or child relative from
leaving Jordan by registering a hold on their travel with the Jordanian authorities. This is
possible even if the child or woman hold only U.S. nationality. Jordanian authorities
consider disputes surrounding travel holds as private family matters, and the Embassy
is limited in its ability to intervene. 
In security clearance adjudications, the identity of the country should be
considered along with other considerations such as whether the country is known to
target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information or is associated with terrorism.
Jordan is a constitutional monarchy ruled by a king, with the assistance of a Council of
Ministers selected by the king, and a bicameral National Assembly. The country has
followed a pro-western policy of close relations with the United States for at least six
decades, and is a strategic partner in the war on terror.
Gaza-West Bank
Following the mobilization of forces along Israel’s border and the outbreak of the
1967 Six-Day War between a number of Arab states and Israel. Israel seized the West
Bank, Gaza Strip, and East Jerusalem. Israel’s occupation of the West Bank and Gaza
Strip remains to the present day. In 1994, the Palestinian Authority (PA) was given
limited self-rule over the West Bank and Gaza Strip, subject to supervening Israeli
control. In 2007, Hamas, a designated Foreign Terrorist Organization (FTO), took over
the Gaza Strip and has exercised de facto control over the territory to the present day.
The Fatah-led PA exercises limited civil and administrative control over the West Bank.
However, the division of responsibilities and jurisdictions between the PA and Israel in
the West Bank is complex and subject to change. On November 29, 2012, the United
Nations voted to “accord to Palestine non-member observer State status.” The United
States is concerned that this unilateral move by the Palestinians may further impede
already stalled negotiations over a two-state solution.
The State Department urges U.S. citizens to exercise caution when traveling to
the West Bank. Several groups operating in Israel, the West Bank, and Gaza have
been designated as FTOs, such as Hamas. The threat posed by terrorist groups
operating in the occupied territories, including the West Bank, is significant. Foreigners,
including U.S. citizens, have been kidnapped and killed in the past. Many of these
groups are openly hostile to the United States and U.S. interest. Furthermore, travel to
and out of the West Bank by U.S. citizens of Palestinian, Arab, or Middle Eastern
descent may result in detention and prolonged questioning, without being provided
consular access. In addition, the State Department reports serious human rights
problems throughout the occupied territories, to include arbitrary arrest and torture,
often with impunity; some of which was reportedly committed by PA security forces on
detainees. Corruption and poverty remain significant problems in the region. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
6
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
The U.S. Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven
by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
 Id.      7
7
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline B (Foreign Influence)
The security concern under Guideline B is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
A disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member,
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). A
disqualifying condition also may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group,
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶
7(b).
Applicant’s mother, in-laws, siblings, and Applicant’s wife’s family are citizens
and residents of Jordan. Applicant and his wife maintain contact with them. Security
concerns could arise in connection with the potential that hostile forces might seek
protected information from Applicant by threatening harm to his immediate extended
family. Based on this evidence, AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are raised.
Since the Government produced evidence to raise  disqualifying conditions in AG
¶¶ 7(a) and (b) the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the
Government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
8
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it,
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States,
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.  See ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  Nevertheless, the
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is
associated with a risk of terrorism.
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Jordan
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, or
his mother, siblings, or other family members living in Jordan, nevertheless, it is not
possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. International terrorist groups are
known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively as capable state intelligence
services, and Jordan has a significant problem with terrorism. Applicant’s relationship
with his mother, siblings and other family members create a potential conflict of interest
because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his
desire to assist family members in those countries by providing sensitive information. 
Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.”  AG ¶ 8(a). The totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well
as each individual family tie must be considered.  ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App.
Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) can mitigate concerns when “there is no
conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(c) can
mitigate concerns if “contact of communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or
exploitation.” 
AG ¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant’s mother and siblings do
not know the nature of Applicant’s work. He keeps in touch with them by phone. He
9
talks to his mother more than his siblings. His loyalty and connections to his family living
in Jordan are positive character traits. However, for security clearance purposes, those
same connections negate the possibility of mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), and Applicant
failed to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships
with relatives living in Jordan] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”
AG ¶ 8(b) applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s “deep and
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant
connections to the United States. He has lived in the United States since 2000 and has
pursued his academic career in the United States. He is deeply invested in his work. He
was naturalized in 2007. He married his second wife who is a dual citizen but is willing
to surrender her Jordanian passport. Applicant has no children. 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the
potential conflict of interest created by his relationship with his family living in Jordan.
His mother lives in the United States part of they year and has a green card. She
intends to become a U.S. citizen. He communicates with his mother by phone once a
month or more and with his siblings once or twice a year. There is no evidence,
however, that terrorists, criminals, the Jordanian government or those conducting
espionage have approached or threatened Applicant, or his family. As such, there is a
reduced possibility that Applicant or his family living in Jordan would be specifically
selected as targets for improper coercion or exploitation. Of course, the primary risk to
his family living in Jordan is from terrorists and other lawless elements and not the
Jordanian Government.
In sum, Applicant’s connections to his mother, siblings, and other family
members living in Jordan are significant. He is close to his mother and does sometimes
communicate with his siblings by phone. He travels for work and has gone to Jordan for
medical reasons in 2013.  Applicant’s connections to the United States are strong.  He
has no desire to return to Jordan or the Middle East to live. He is committed to his
personal and professional life in the United States. His wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen
who lives with him in the United States. There is substantial mitigation in this case.
Applicant spoke about his undivided loyalty to the United States.  His connections to the
United States heavily outweigh his connections to his family in Jordan. He has such
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States that he can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. Foreign
influence security concerns are mitigated under Guideline B.  Even if security concerns
are not mitigated under Guideline B, they are mitigated under the whole-person
concept, infra.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
10
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen. He is an educated man, who lives with his wife
in the United States. His mother lives in the United States part of the year and intends
to become a U.S. citizen. His financial assets are in the United States. Applicant has
strong personal and professional ties to the United States.
 A Guideline B decision concerning Jordan must take into consideration the
geopolitical situation and dangers there. The country is dangerous because of violence
from terrorists and other lawless elements Terrorists continue to threaten Jordan, the
interests of the United States, and those who cooperate and assist the United States.
Jordan does not fully comply with the rule of law or protect civil liberties in many
instances. The United States and Jordan are allies in the war on terrorism. Jordan and
the United States have close relationships in diplomacy and trade. They also have
profound policy disputes.
 Applicant’s mother-in-law, father-in-law and siblings are citizens and residents of
Jordan. He maintains contact with them. His connections to his family in Jordan make
Applicant more vulnerable as a target of coercion by lawless elements in Jordan. His
family in Jordan will be at a greater risk if his clearance is granted. They have no
knowledge of Applicant’s work. However, his primary duty is to his own wife who is a
U.S. citizen. He has no desire to live in Jordan or the Middle East. His entire
professional career is in the United States. He will seek advice to resolve any issues
that may arise in the future with the help of his employer. For all these reasons,
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under foreign influence.  
11
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
