 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02965 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 2, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline E. DOD CAF acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOD CAF could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On September 12, 2014, 
Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case decided on the written record 
in lieu of a hearing. On October 6, 2014, the Government compiled its File of Relevant 
Material (FORM) that contained documents identified as Items 1 through 5.  
 
2 
 
On October 8, 2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
forwarded to Applicant a copy of the FORM with instructions to submit any additional 
information and objections within 30 days of its receipt. On October 15, 2014, Applicant 
received the FORM. He timely submitted additional matters that he marked as Items 6 
and 7. Department Counsel had no objection to the additional matters. The case was 
assigned to me on December 5, 2014. Items 1 through 7 are entered into the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 25-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
that employer since March 2013. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2011 and a master’s 
degree in 2012. He has never been married and has no children. He may have held a 
security clearance as an intern at a Navy command from May 2010 to August 2010 and 
from June 2011 to August 2011.1 
 
 The SOR listed two falsification allegations under Guideline E. The first alleged 
that Applicant falsified his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-QIP) 
dated March 26, 2013, by deliberately failing to disclose his marijuana use between 
June 2007 and September 2011. The second alleged that he submitted a false 
response about his marijuana use during an interview with a DOD investigator. In his 
Answer, Applicant admitted the e-QIP falsification, but denied the interview falsification.2 
  
 On March 26, 2013, Applicant submitted an e-QIP. In Section 23 of the e-QIP, he 
was asked whether, in the last seven years, he illegally used any drugs or controlled 
substances. He responded “No” to that question.3 
 
 On August 26, 2013, an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
interviewed Applicant. During that interview, Applicant reportedly stated: 
 
[Applicant] was asked during subject interview if he had ever used 
marijuana. [He] stated no. [He] was then confronted with the following 
information: Sources state in previous investigation that [Applicant] used 
marijuana. [Applicant] used marijuana in college (discrepant). [He] first 
began using marijuana in the summer of 2007. [He] last used marijuana in 
the summer of 2011. [He] was unable to provide exact months of usage. 
Between summer of 2007 and summer 2011, [he] used marijuana (est)   
5-6 times. [He] used marijuana with [a friend]. [Applicant] would use a 
marijuana cigarette or a bowl to smoke loose-leaf marijuana. The 
marijuana was obtained by [the friend]. The setting of use was [the 
friend’s] apartment. [Applicant] used marijuana 5-6 times from summer of 
2007 – summer of 2011. [He] did not experience any financial difficulties 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
2 Items 1 and 3. 
3 Item 4. 
 
3 
 
from obtaining the drug. [He] is not dependent on marijuana. [His] drug 
use ended because [he] did not like the effect of marijuana, and was 
leaving school and wished to gain employment. [He] stated “it was time to 
grow up.” [He] has no intent of using marijuana in the future. The effect of 
marijuana caused [him] to mellow out and become lazy. [He] has never 
sold, supplied, grown or cultivated drugs. [He] never tested positive for 
drugs. Marijuana has no impact on [his] personality, judgment, reliability, 
or ability to hold a confidence. Marijuana has no impact on [his] work, 
school, home, family, or friends. [He] has never been arrested, charged, or 
cited. [The friend] is aware of [Applicant’s] drug usage. 
 
[Applicant] has never been ordered or voluntarily sought treatment for 
drug use. [He] has no association with drug culture as a result of this 
usage. [He] failed to list this drug usage on case papers because [he] had 
a prior investigation with [a Navy command], in which he did not list drug 
use, and wanted to ensure the current investigation’s papers were 
consistent with the prior investigation. [He] failed to provide initial 
background with drug use information because subject wanted current 
case papers to be consistent with prior case papers.4 
 
In interrogatories signed on July 31, 2014, Applicant indicated that the results of 
the OPM interview accurately reflected information that he provided to the investigator, 
but he also stated, “To my knowledge, during the interview between 8/22-9/6 (8/26), I 
did not initially deny using marijuana. I had a strong feeling as to why I was being 
interviewed again and volunteered the information when asked the first time.” Under 
Paragraph E3.1.20 of the Directive, an authenticating witness is required for DOD 
reports of background investigations to be received and considered by an administrative 
judge. In this case, Applicant did not authenticate that portion of the OPM interview 
indicating that he initially denied using marijuana during the interview of August 26, 
2013. No other evidence was presented to authenticate that portion of the interview. 
Consequently, that portion of the results of interview is unauthenticated and is excluded 
from consideration in this proceeding.5 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated, 
 
To subparagraph a, I admit that I falsified information on the e-QIP form. I 
cannot think of anything now that could possibly justify my reasoning at 
the time and I understand lying about it is much worse than my actual use. 
I am an honest person and what I did was irresponsible.6 
                                                          
4 Item 5. 
5 Item 5. In Applicant’s Response to the FORM, he claimed the OPM investigator made false 
statements. Based upon the above determination about the application of Paragraph E3.1.20 of the 
Directive to his report of interview, his challenges to the OPM investigator are no longer an issue.  
6 Item 3. 
 
4 
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant stated that he “has acknowledged his 
misbehavior, recognizes the mistake of lying, and hopes to be given a ‘second chance’”. 
Furthermore, he provided letters of reference that describe him as trustworthy, reliable, 
and honest.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AGs. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the AGs list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
                                                          
7 Item 6; Applicant’s Response to the FORM. On page 6 of his Response to the FORM, Applicant 
indicated he lied on two occasions, which were apparently lies in the e-QIP and during the prior 
investigation.  
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
Applicant admitted he falsified his e-QIP of March 26, 2013, by failing to disclose 
his illegal drug use. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. The portion of Applicant’s OPM report of 
interview indicating that he initially denied using marijuana was not authenticated. 
Because that unauthenticated portion of the interview was excluded from consideration, 
insufficient evidence exists to conclude that Applicant made a false statement during his 
OPM interview. The Government failed to establish SOR ¶ 1.b. AG ¶ 16(b) does not 
apply.8 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
                                                          
8 In the FORM, Department Counsel indicated that AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d) also applied. However, 
the SOR only alleged falsifications, which are adequately addressed in AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b).   
 
6 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
unauthorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security clearance process. Upon being 
made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 Applicant deliberately falsified his e-QIP in March 2013. He did not promptly 
correct that falsification, but waited until he was confronted by an investigator about his 
marijuana use. He subsequently accepted responsibility by admitting that he submitted 
a false statement, but such action is insufficient to eliminate the serious security 
concerns in this case. His falsification is recent and undermines the security clearance 
process. None of the above mitigating conditions fully apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a young man. His friends and colleagues indicated that he is an 
honest individual; however, the evidence established that he is not truthful. Besides the 
alleged falsification, Applicant also indicated that, during a prior investigation as an 
intern, he did not disclose his drug usage. Doubts about his truthfulness remain. He 
failed to meet the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
    
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
