1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-01278
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on July 22, 2013. The Department of Defense (DOD) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 5, 2014, detailing security concerns
under Guideline D, sexual conduct, and Guideline J, criminal conduct. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(AG), implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
GE 1; GE 2; Tr. 29-31.1
2
Applicant received the SOR on June 17, 2014, and he answered it on June 25,
2014. Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge with the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). Department Counsel was prepared to proceed
on September 2, 2014, and I received the case assignment on September 4, 2014.
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on October 2, 2014, and I convened the hearing as
scheduled on October 22, 2014 by video-teleconference. The Government offered
exhibits (GE) marked as GE 1 through GE 4, which were received and admitted into
evidence without objection. Applicant testified. He submitted one exhibit (AE) marked as
AE A, which was received and admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 3, 2014. I held the record open for Applicant to
submit additional matters. Applicant timely submitted AE B - AE D, which were received
and admitted without objection. The record closed on November 17, 2014.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Notice
Applicant received the notice of the date, time and place of the hearing less than
15 days before the hearing. I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8. of the
Directive to receive the notice at least 15 days before the hearing. Applicant
affirmatively waived this right under the Directive. (Tr. 11)
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR.
His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He also provided additional
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete
and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 51 years old, works occasionally as a part-time computer
technician for a DOD contractor. He began this employment in 2010 on an as-needed
basis, and he has not worked since 2011. Applicant attends college full-time, working
towards a degree in information systems. He anticipates receiving his bachelor’s degree
sometime in 2015. Applicant completed an associate’s degree in telecommunications
engineering in 2001 and several certificate programs since that time.1
Applicant married his first wife around February 1989, and they divorced in 1999
because of her drug use. They had a daughter, who is 24, and two sons, who are 21
and 20. The court awarded Applicant sole legal and physical custody of his three
children, whom he raised as a single parent. For several years after his divorce,
Applicant did not date or go out to meet women. He chose to remain at home to provide
a stable environment for his children. In 2006, Applicant married his second wife, and
they divorced in 2008. Applicant married his third wife in October 2009. They provide
shelter and care for a disabled 37-year-old cousin. His wife manages the finances and
GE 1; Tr. 22-28, 31, 45-47.2
GE 4; Tr. 23, 48-49.3
GE 4; Tr. 23.4
GE 4.5
3
oversees the daily living needs of this person, whose intellectual ability is about age 12.
Applicant also has a 26-year-old daughter, who does not live with him or near him.2
Applicant maintained approximately four computers in his home. One laptop
computer belonged to him, and only he used this computer. He also had three computer
towers and monitors, at least one of which had been set up for all members of the
household to use. Each household member had his or her own account, access code,
and password.3
In August 2007, Applicant’s second wife called the police to report that she had
found child pornography on Applicant’s computer two months earlier. After talking with
Applicant’s second wife, the police came to Applicant’s home to discuss the report.
Applicant gave the police permission to search his home. At the end of their search, the
police removed three computer towers, a laptop, a thumb drive, and a box of
miscellaneous computer storage items, such as CDs and DVD-Rs.4
Over more than seven months, the police conducted an investigation. The police
interviewed his second wife and his three children. The police also conducted a forensic
review of Applicant’s computers and other materials taken from his home. Applicant’s
second wife told the police that she believed that she saw sexually-explicit pictures of a
five-year-old child. Applicant’s youngest child, who was 13 at the time, acknowledged to
the police that he typed the term “porn” on the computer, and then accessed a site titled
“teen porn”.  He saw pictures of naked girls on this website, but did not know whether
he saved the material. He thought the computer automatically saved the material.
Except for this, his youngest child denied seeing any inappropriate material involving a
young child or other inappropriate material. The two older children denied seeing any
inappropriate material on the computer. After the forensic review, the police again
interviewed Applicant’s daughter because the forensic review showed four pictures of a
naked girl on the daughter’s computer. The daughter revealed that the girl in the picture
was a former friend and that the pictures were “selfies” taken by the former friend. The
police also spoke with the former friend who confirmed that she had taken the pictures
and sent them to her boyfriend, who may have sent them to Applicant’s daughter.5
During the investigation, Applicant initially stated that there might be child
pornography on his computer, which he believed his youngest son and the disabled
person may have downloaded. Throughout further conversations with the police,
Applicant denied that he had “pulled up the child pornography”, but eventually admitted
that he might have looked at the pictures. He continued to state that he believed his
children had accessed these pictures and that he had deleted the pictures. The forensic
GE 4; Tr. 49.6
GE 2-GE 4; Tr. 24, 31-33.7
Applicant’s supervisor  was aware of his probation and reviewed his work computer regularly for pornography.8
Tr. 34-35, 59-60.
AE A-AE D; Tr. 33-34, 42-43, 60-61, 68.9
4
examination of these computers found 11 pictures of female children under the age of
18 posing provocatively in a deleted file on Applicant’s computer profile. The police later
showed the 11 pictures to a sexual assault nurse examiner, who, based on her training
and experience, determined that the subject of the pictures were females under age 18
and that six of the pictures were of children under age 15. She did not specifically
identify any pictures of female children age five or other very young children.6
At the conclusion of their investigation, the police drafted an arrest warrant, which
was served on Applicant and resulted in his arrest on April 19, 2008. The police charged
Applicant with 11 counts of sexual assault, sexual exploitation/child, and possession of
material [child pornography], all felony charges. At his hearing on July 9, 2008, the
prosecutor dismissed 10 charges. Applicant pled guilty to one image charge. The court
deferred judgment and his sentencing, then placed him on probation for four years. The
terms of his probation required him to attend sexual counseling, be on supervised
probation, and register as a sex offender. Applicant attended group sexual therapy once
a week for four years. Initially, he met with his probation officer once a week, but his
probation officer later reduced the meetings to twice a month or less, and Applicant
registered as a sex offender. He also paid the fines imposed by the court.7
Applicant complied with the terms of his probation. During his probation, his three
children remained in his home, with court approval, as the police investigation did not
reveal that the children had been sexually abused or otherwise harmed by Applicant.
His probation officer randomly visited Applicant’s home more than 20 times during the
fours years of his probation. These visits included an inspection of his computer for
pornography.  The probation officer did not find any incidents to report and no negative8
interactions at Applicant’s home. At first, Applicant was not allowed access to
computers, but eventually he and the probation department signed a computer use
agreement, which allowed Applicant to use computers for work and college. Applicant
complied with the terms of this agreement. The probation office advised that Applicant
did well while being supervised and that his probation terminated successfully on
September 16, 2012. Applicant’s sexual therapy treatment ended on September 24,
2012, when his probation concluded. While in treatment, Applicant completed and
passed a sex history polygraph and maintained a consistent record of passing
maintenance polygraphs. Applicant was not diagnosed with any sexual problem nor was
further treatment recommended. As a result, in an order dated July 21, 2014, the court
dismissed his case and directed that he be removed from the sex offender list. Applicant
is no longer a registered sex offender.9
Applicant testified that he had viewed pornography since he was 18 years old, but that his use increased10
around 2004. Tr. 31-32.
Response to SOR; GE 2; GE 4; Tr. 49-52, 54-58, 63-64.11
Tr. 44, 55-58.12
Tr. 41.13
5
As previously stated, Applicant denied to the police that he downloaded the child
pornography images found on the computers in his house. When he met with the
investigator, he acknowledged that he had 10 pictures of teenage girls on his computer.
He told the investigator that he thought these girls were 18 or older. In his response to
the SOR, Applicant stated that he had an addiction without being more specific. He
used this term at the hearing, but, on cross-examination, he explained that he did not
think he continued to have an addiction because he no longer viewed pornography.
Throughout the hearing, Applicant acknowledged that he looked at child pornography.
He stated that he did not specifically seek out child pornography, but that as he viewed
pornography on the internet, he started looking at various aspects of pornography,
including child pornography. He believed his child pornography viewing began about
one year before he started dating his second wife because that is when his overall
pornography viewing increased.  He did not recall looking at a five-year-old, nor did he10
clearly remember specifically downloading child pornography. He acknowledged that
some of the pictures he saw were of underage girls and that some he could not tell if
they were underage.11
Applicant learned from his sexual therapy group how to critically evaluate his
thinking about his conduct, particularly about choices he was making in a sexual
context. He learned to always be aware of what he was doing and why, and to
recognize clues in his conduct and emotions. Although he no longer attends a sexual
therapy program, he sets limits for himself, and he stays within his limits. He follows the
concepts he learned during his four years in his sexual therapy program. He
acknowledged making poor decisions and choices with this conduct and that he cannot
blame anyone but himself.12
As one of his limits, Applicant no longer views pornography. He acknowledged
that if he did, this activity would become a problem. His wife provides support to him to
stay away from pornography.13
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
6
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior
AG ¶ 12 expresses the security concern as:
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or
7
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual.
AG ¶ 13 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has
been prosecuted;
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and,
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion
or judgment.
Applicant viewed pornography on his personal computer at home, which is not
illegal. However, he expanded his viewing of pornography to include periodic viewing of
child pornography, which raises a security concern about his judgment and vulnerability
to coercion, exploitation, and duress. A security concern has been raised under AG ¶¶
13(a), 13(c), and 13(d).
The sexual conduct guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 14(a) through ¶
14(d), and the following are potentially applicable:
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; and 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet.
Applicant last viewed child pornography around 2007 following his second wife’s
complaint to the police. His actions were private and discreet. Although time has passed
since he last viewed child pornography in the privacy of his home, his decision to view
child pornography continues to raise concerns about his judgment. Based on the record,
Applicant has only partially mitigated the security concerns raised by his sexual conduct
under AG ¶¶ 14(b) and 14(d). Partial mitigation under Guideline D is insufficient to
resolve the security concerns in Applicant’s favor.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
8
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes the disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns.
I have considered all the conditions, and the following are potentially applicable: 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.               
In April 2008, the police arrested and charged Applicant with 11 counts of sexual
assault, sexual exploitation/child, and possession of material, all felony charges. A
security concern has been established under AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c).
The Criminal Conduct guideline also includes examples of conditions that can
mitigate security concerns. I have considered mitigating factors AG ¶ 32(a) through ¶
32(d), and the following is potentially applicable:
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
Applicant has not been convicted of a crime. The prosecutor dismissed 10 of the
11 charges. Applicant pled guilty to one charge, and the court deferred judgment and
sentencing conditioned upon Applicant’s successful completion of all the terms outlined
in his probation of four years. Applicant completed all the terms of his probation, and the
court dismissed his case with no conviciton. During these years, he attended sexual
therapy once a week. He did not commit any criminal acts and avoided conduct that
could cause further criminal charges. It has been more than six years since this arrest.
Applicant has shown remorse for his past conduct. He continues to attend school to
improve his skills, and the record does not reflect any recent negative work history. He
has mitigated the security concerns about his criminal conduct under AG ¶ 32(d).   
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
9
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
provided a stable and caring home environment for his children and did not expose
them to his pornography habit. Despite the reason for his arrest, the police found no
evidence of harm to his children from his conduct, and the court approved the continued
placement of his children in his home during his probation. The record lacks any
definitive evidence that he viewed sexually explicit pictures of very young children. His
second wife told the police she thought she observed a picture of a five-year-old girl, but
the expert did not conclude that the pictures found on Applicant’s computer had any
pictures of children this young. Applicant is beginning to take full responsibility for his
decision to view child pornography on his personal home computer. It is true that his
youngest son viewed teen pornography prior to Applicant’s arrest; however, Applicant
also viewed these pictures and other child pornography. This conduct is egregious and
his son’s actions do not negate his conduct. Applicant showed a great reluctance to
take responsibility for his conduct for a long time. He now acknowledges his conduct
and is working on remaining away from pornography. However, I do not find that
Applicant has provided sufficient evidence to show that he has fully accepted his
conduct and has set enough parameters to show that he will not again view
pornography. If he does view it, he readily admits a problem can arise. His judgment,
and thus his trustworthiness, remain a security concern.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his criminal conduct
under Guideline J, but he has not mitigated the security concerns raised about his past
sexual conduct.
10
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline D: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
