 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 14-00840 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his past financial problems 
and alleged personal conduct. He suffered a period of financial trouble after being laid 
off. Over the past four years, he addressed and resolved his past-due debts. His past 
financial problems no longer raise a concern about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. He inadvertently failed to list his debts on his 
security clearance application. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 22, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD), in accordance with DOD 
Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive), issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and 
Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
to establish his eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
On August 20, 2014, a notice of hearing (NOH) was issued setting the hearing 
for September 18, 2014. The hearing was held as scheduled. Government Exhibits 
(Gx.) 1 – 5 and Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A – I were admitted into evidence without 
 
2 
 
 
objection. Applicant testified, called his business partner as a witness, and requested 
time post hearing to submit additional documents in support of his case. I granted his 
request and he timely submitted Ax. J – R, which were admitted without objection. The 
hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on October 1, 2014, and the record closed on 
October 15, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following findings of fact:1 
 
 Applicant is in his late thirties and is married with three minor children. He is the 
owner-operator of a small business and is seeking a government contract in support of 
the DOD. The potential contract requires that all key management personnel, to include 
Applicant, possess and maintain a security clearance. This is Applicant’s first 
application for a security clearance. (Tr. at 9-10, 92-95; Gx. 1) 
 
Applicant recently went through a period of financial turmoil after being laid off by 
his previous employer in May 2010. His family’s finances were already tight before the 
lay off and afterwards his decreased income was insufficient to keep pace with his 
family’s recurring monthly expenses. Applicant fell behind on his mortgage and several 
other debts. The SOR lists 11 delinquent accounts, to include a substantial past due 
mortgage debt. (Tr. at 44, 52-57) 
 
Applicant testified and submitted documentation of his efforts over the past four 
years to repay his debts. Applicant and his wife worked with their mortgage lender and 
their loan was modified. Applicant submitted documentation showing that the mortgage 
is current. He has prepaid his mortgage by three to four months, in order to provide his 
family some breathing room in case of future financial issues. Applicant testified that 
when he originally purchased his home in 2005 he was approved for a loan of 
approximately $500,000. Although the prospect of a bigger home, in a better 
neighborhood was tempting, Applicant recognized the financial risks such a large 
obligation might pose in the future. Instead, he and his wife purchased their current 
home for approximately $220,000. The current mortgage balance on the home is 
approximately $180,000.2 (Tr. at 46, 86-91; Ax. B) 
 
Applicant also submitted documentation of satisfying five of the largest non-
mortgage related SOR debts. These five SOR debts total about $8,000.3 Starting in 
2011, Applicant satisfied these debts through agreed-upon payment plans or lump sum 
payments. (Tr. at 45-51, 101-102, 105-107; Ax. F– H, Ax. M – N, Ax. Q)  
                                                          
1 In reaching my findings of fact, I have made only those inferences reasonably supported by the 
evidence and, where necessary, resolved any potential conflict raised by the evidence.  
 
2 Applicant’s previously delinquent mortgage debt is listed at SOR ¶ 1.b.  
 
3 These five SOR debts (and evidence of payment) are: 1.a (Ax. G), 1.c (Ax. R), 1.d (Ax. F), 1.f (Ax H), 
and 1.g (Ax. M - N).  
 
3 
 
 
Applicant states that he paid the remaining five SOR debts, which together total 
less than $1,000. He submitted documentation regarding a partial $250 payment 
towards satisfaction of one of these remaining minor SOR debts. He was awaiting 
payment confirmation regarding these debts at the close of the record. (Tr. at 50-51, 83; 
Ax. E, Ax. J, Ax. M, Ax. P, Ax. R) 
 
 Applicant submitted his security clearance application (SCA) in November 2013. 
He failed to disclose his delinquent debts in response to relevant questions regarding 
his financial record. He started filling out the SCA at around 2200 (10 p.m.), after a 12-
hour plus workday and putting his children to sleep. He did not realize the amount of 
detailed background information that needed to be supplied. He had to stop on several 
occasions to gather the requested information, to include biographical data and other 
pertinent information regarding his extended family members. He voluntarily disclosed 
and provided detailed information regarding his past problems with alcohol. The 
questions regarding his financial record were at the tail end of the SCA. Applicant 
recalls reading the questions about his financial record around 0300 (3 a.m.). He was 
unsure whether he had any delinquent debts, as he had recently modified and brought 
current his mortgage. At the time, his mortgage account was the only debt that he knew 
had been delinquent. He believed that he had never been more than one to two months 
late in paying his mortgage. He did not want to wake his wife, who was in charge of the 
family’s finances. In hindsight, Applicant now realizes that he should have stopped, 
electronically saved the SCA, and then after speaking with his wife and pulling a credit 
report completed the SCA. He denies intentionally falsifying his SCA. Two months after 
submitting his SCA, Applicant fully discussed his financial issues with a background 
investigator. (Tr. at 42, 64-74, 77-79, 97-108; Gx. 1 – 2; Ax. O) 
 
 Applicant started his business a few months after being laid off in May 2010. He 
recruited a longtime friend as a business partner. He was completely upfront with his 
business partner about the personal financial problems he was experiencing. His 
business partner has a favorable opinion regarding Applicant’s reliability, credibility, and 
trustworthiness. (Tr. at 32-38) 
 
Applicant testified that the first few years of the business came with some 
significant personal financial sacrifices. He still earns less than he did at his old job, as 
he pays himself far below his earning potential in order to allow the business to flourish. 
He has received higher year-end bonuses with each passing year as the business has 
started to see its profits gradually increase. His wife secured a higher paying job to 
offset his reduced income. He and his wife now manage their family’s finances together 
and they have established a family budget. He files and pays his taxes on time, and has 
not accrued any other delinquent debt. (Tr. at 44, 52-62, 74-77, 95-97; Ax. K; Ax. O) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are only eligible for access to 
 
4 
 
 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative judge must consider 
the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations, the guidelines 
list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible 
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative 
judge applies the guidelines in a  common sense manner, considering all available and 
reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to establish their eligibility.  
 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an 
administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered 
for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
Moreover, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.4 However, a judge must decide each case based on its 
own merits because there is no per se rule requiring disqualification.5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall 
in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” E.O. 
10865 § 7.6 Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance amounts to a finding that an 
applicant, at the time the decision was rendered, did not meet the strict guidelines 
established for determining eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
4 See also, ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance.”).  
 
5 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
6 See also, ISCR Case No. 11-13626 at 4 (App. Bd. July 25, 2014) (“an adverse decision under the 
Directive is not a determination that the applicant is disloyal. Rather, such a decision signifies that the 
applicant has engaged in conduct or has otherwise experienced circumstances that raise questions about 
his or her judgment and reliability.”). 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The potential security concern regarding an applicant with financial problems is 
explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
Applicant established that he satisfied the non-mortgage related SOR debts, and 
that he has addressed and is paying his mortgage in a timely fashion.7 However, the 
gravamen of the security concern raised by the SOR, namely, that Applicant’s past 
financial problems raise a concern about his current fitness to hold a security clearance, 
is not automatically dispelled by the resolution of the SOR debts. In resolving questions 
raised about an individual’s current suitability to hold a clearance, an administrative 
judge should critically and impartially examine the circumstances leading to the 
accumulation of delinquent debt and efforts, if any, to resolve the underlying financial 
situation “in order to arrive at a conclusion as to whether the applicant possesses the 
judgment and self-control required of those who have access to national security 
information.”8 A judge’s common sense evaluation of said circumstances is guided by 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
In the present case, Applicant’s history of financial problems triggers application 
of the disqualifying conditions listed at AG ¶¶ 19(a)9 and 19(c).10 Applicant’s 
circumstances also raise the following mitigating conditions under the financial 
considerations guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
                                                          
7 Although Applicant did not submit documentation to corroborate his assertion that the remaining minor 
SOR debts were satisfied, I am satisfied that these debts have been paid based on his credible testimony 
and the documentation he provided to substantiate his claims of debt repayment as to the major debts 
listed in the SOR. ISCR Case No. 14-00504 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2014) (unfavorable decision reversed 
where individual submitted evidence of debt repayment of more than half of the SOR debts). 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 10-00925 at 2 (App. Bd. June 26, 2012). See also, ISCR Case No. 12-04554 at 3 (App. 
Bd. July 25, 2014); ISCR Case No. 13-00311 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 24, 2014).  
 
9 Inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.  
 
10 A history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
6 
 
 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant established AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(d). His past financial trouble was 
caused by unemployment. After regaining his financial footing, Applicant responsibly 
and in good faith addressed his delinquent debts. Although Applicant did not submit 
evidence of financial or debt counseling, he has taken a number of concrete steps 
evincing financial reform. Of particular note is his decision to prepay his monthly 
mortgage payments to provide himself sufficient financial flexibility in case of future 
financial trouble. Applicant is also now fully cognizant of his family’s finances and, with 
his wife’s substantial help, has worked out a budget to keep track of and control their 
expenses. Applicant’s demonstrated track record of meaningful debt repayment and 
fiscal reform mitigates the security concerns raised by his recent financial trouble.11  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct security concern is explained at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his SCA by failing to 
disclose his delinquent debts. Deliberate falsifications of a SCA raise the disqualifying 
condition listed at AG ¶ 16(a).12 
                                                          
11 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-04806 (App. Bd. July 3, 2014) (favorable decision affirmed because 
applicant provided clear evidence of financial reform). 
 
12 Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire . . . or similar form used to . . . determine security clearance eligibility. 
 
7 
 
 
 It is axiomatic that the security clearance process depends upon the honesty of 
all applicants and begins with the answers provided in the SCA. However, the omission 
of material, adverse information standing alone is not enough to establish that an 
individual intentionally falsified his or her SCA. An omission is not deliberate if the 
person genuinely forgot the information requested, inadvertently overlooked or 
misunderstood the question, or sincerely thought the information did not need to be 
reported. An administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.13 
 
 Applicant did not intentionally omit his delinquent debts when he was filling out 
his SCA during the early morning hours of November 2013. He genuinely believed that 
he did not have any debts to report, because he had recently modified and brought 
current his mortgage. At the time, this was the only debt that he knew had been 
delinquent. The hour of the day, his general level of exhaustion, and lack of attention to 
his family’s finances conspired together to lead Applicant to mistakenly conclude that he 
did not have any debts to report. Although Applicant’s arguably questionable decision to 
press on in completing the SCA with the limited information he had regarding his 
finances calls into question his judgment, he did not deliberately fail to disclose his 
delinquent debts. He now recognizes the extreme care that must be exercised in filling 
out an SCA and similar forms. Based on all the evidence, it is unlikely that he will show 
similar poor judgment in the future.  
 
 Additionally in finding that Applicant did not deliberately falsify his SCA, I took 
into account that this was his first SCA. Also, he voluntarily disclosed far more damning 
information regarding his past on his SCA and fully discussed his financial issues during 
his background interview that took place just two months after submitting his SCA. 
Applicant’s candor and openness about other aspects of his past on his SCA and 
regarding his financial problems during the security clearance interview are inconsistent 
with the expected conduct of an individual who is deliberately trying to hide or minimize 
potentially adverse background information. Furthermore, I had an opportunity to 
observe Applicant’s demeanor at hearing and found his testimony credible. Accordingly, 
I find that Applicant did not deliberately falsify his SCA.14 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
                                                          
13 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-15935 (Appl. Bd. 
Oct. 15, 2003). 
 
14 In reaching this conclusion, I recognize that a judge is not required to accept an applicant’s assertions, 
especially if such assertions are contradicted by record evidence, implausible, or internally inconsistent. 
In the present case, Applicant’s testimony was credible, plausible, and consistent throughout.  
 
 
8 
 
 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).15 I hereby incorporate my above comments and 
highlight some additional whole-person factors.  
 
Applicant experienced financial trouble after losing his job. He decided to take 
control over his future and start his own business. He recruited a longtime friend as a 
business partner and, from the outset, disclosed to his business partner the financial 
problems he was facing. Notwithstanding the financial pressures of starting a new 
business, Applicant did not disregard his past financial obligations. He responsibly 
addressed his past-due debts and, over the course of the past four years, took control 
of his finances. His past financial problems no longer raise a concern about his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He is now aware of the importance of 
responsibly managing his personal finances and the other stringent demands placed on 
those granted a security clearance. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no 
questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.k:         For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
15 The non-exhaustive list of adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the 
conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) 
the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
