 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01187 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 19, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On June 16, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On October 14, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was provided to Applicant 
on October 23, 2014, and it was received on October 30, 2014. Applicant was afforded 
 
2 
 
 
an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant provided additional information. The case was assigned to me on 
December 5, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. These admissions are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 27 years old. He is not married and has no children. He attended 
college from August 2006 to December 2010, but did not earn a degree. He has worked 
for a federal contactor since October 2013. 
 
 Applicant listed on his security clearance application (SCA) that he was 
unemployed from November 2005 to May 2006, September 2006 to June 2007, and 
July 2010 to May 2012. 
  
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c and 1.f through 1.h alleged delinquent student loans in 
the approximate total amount of $25,123. He explained in his response to the FORM, 
that he attempted to pay for college through student loans. He was unable to finish 
college. He could not pay his student loans until he found full time employment. He was 
underemployed and unemployed for periods of time. He now has a full-time job and a 
reliable vehicle. He contacted the three creditors servicing his student loans and is 
participating in rehabilitation loan programs. Each requires consistent monthly payments 
for a period of months before the loans will be taken out of default status. The 
agreements require monthly payments of $266, $50 and $5. Applicant provided proof he 
made payments on the first plan. The other two agreements were recently signed and 
payments will be due in the succeeding months.1 
 
 The debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($1,660) and 1.e ($278) are medical debts. One is a 
dental bill Applicant incurred when he was trying to enlist in the Air Force, but due to 
reductions, he was not able to join the Air Force. The other is a bill for when he broke 
his foot. He incurred these debts while attending college. Applicant stated in his 
response to the FORM that both debts are paid. He provided documentation to show 
the first debt was paid in full. He did not provide documentation that the second debt 
was paid.2 Regarding the debt in SOR ¶1.i ($904), a cell phone debt, Applicant believed 
he had canceled the cell phone plan after receiving two consecutive months of incorrect 
bills for $1,000. The creditor corrected the mistake. Applicant did not realize the plan 
was not canceled. He intends to settle the debt and budget his income so he can offer a 
lump sum payment to resolve the debt.3 
                                                          
1 Response to FORM with attachments. 
 
2 Response to FORM with attachments. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant worked with his local credit union to create a written budget that allows 
him to follow his transactions and monitor his expenditures. He follows his budget 
closely. He also was counseled by his pastor on his personal finances and the 
importance of maintaining his credit, not purchasing items using credit, and the negative 
aspects of using credit. Applicant does not have any credit card or consumer debts. He 
noted he has not incurred any new debts since he found full time employment.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered the following under AG & 19: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant was unable to pay his student loans and they became delinquent. He 
also had three other delinquent debts that he was unwilling or unable to pay. I find the 
above disqualifying conditions apply to these facts. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s student loans are in a rehabilitation status. He is budgeting so he can 
make a lump sum settlement offer to resolve the cell phone debt. The debts are recent 
and not yet resolved. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant was unable to pay his student loan debts during periods of 
unemployment and underemployment. These were conditions beyond his control. For 
the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. Since obtaining full time employment he has arranged payment plans to 
rehabilitate his student loan debts. He paid two medical debts and is saving to make a 
settlement offer on a cell phone debt. Applicant has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. Applicant worked with a credit union to develop a 
budget and monitor his transactions. He has been counseled on the importance of 
maintaining good credit and not exceeding its limits. Applicant has no other delinquent 
debts and appears to be living within his means. I find there are clear indications that 
Applicant’s financial problems are under control, and he is resolving his delinquent 
debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
6 
 
 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 27 years old. He accumulated substantial student loan debt that 
became delinquent when he had difficulty finding full time employment. Since becoming 
employed he has made arrangements with the student loan creditors to rehabilitate his 
loans. He paid two medical debts and is budgeting to resolve a cell phone debt. 
Applicant is monitoring his budget and does not have other delinquent debts. The 
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
