 
1 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02527 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The six charged-off accounts 
listed in the Statement of Reasons (SOR), totaling more than $47,000, have been or are 
being resolved. He did not falsify his security clearance questionnaire. The financial 
considerations and personal conduct security concerns have been favorably resolved. 
Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on July 18, 2014, 
the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns, because DoD adjudicators could 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
not find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue 
Applicant’s security clearance. On August 7, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and 
requested a hearing. On September 26, 2014, I was assigned the case. On October 6, 
2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing 
for the hearing convened on October 22, 2014. I admitted Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 
through 5 and Applicant’s Exhibits A through C, without objection. Applicant and his wife 
testified at the hearing. 
 
The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. 
Additional material (Ex. D through F) was submitted and admitted into the record 
without objection. On November 3, 2014, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted the delinquent, charged-off 
accounts and denied intentionally falsifying his May 2012 Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old and is currently working with an insurance company and 
seeks a security clearance. (Tr. 27) In April 2013, he was terminated from his job due to 
not having a clearance. He now works as a temporary employee making $13 per hour. 
He has been able to find employment for only six of the last 18 months. Applicant called 
no witnesses other than himself and his wife, and produced no work or character 
references. Applicant takes full responsibility for his debts and is attempting to pay 
them. (Tr. 26) As of the hearing date, all the delinquent debts have been resolved 
except for a charged-off department store account (SOR 1.e, $2,350) and a charged-off 
credit card account (SOR 1.a, $7,197). (Tr. 34, 38)  
 
 In May 2009, Applicant honorably retired from the U.S. Navy as an E-6. (Ex.5) 
He had worked in information technology (IT) support. (Tr. 28) While in the Navy, he 
held a top secret clearance for approximately 15 years. (Ex. 5, Tr. 31) He is rated as 
80% disabled by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs for which he receives $1,600 
monthly. (Tr. 40) He receives an additional $1,600 in military retirement. (Ex. 3, Tr. 40)  
 
Two years before retirement, Applicant purchased a home in the Midwest near 
his last duty location. (Ex. 3) In June 2011, Applicant moved by himself to the east coast 
to accept a DoD contractor position paying $52,000 annually. The position paid less 
than what he made in the Navy. (Tr. 28, 32) He made the move when he was unable to 
find a job in his career field at his retirement location. (Tr. 26)  
 
Applicant’s daughter had two years remaining in high school and she stayed with 
Applicant’s wife in the home. In June 2010, he moved from his east coast location to 
another mid-western state to accept a position as a senior service desk technician 
paying $72,000. (Ex. 3, Tr. 28) The position lasted until June 2012. (Tr. 30) The cost of 
 
3 
maintaining two households had a detrimental impact on Applicant’s finances. (Ex. 3, 5) 
In October 2012, he obtained a job paying $57,000 annually, which ended in April 2013, 
because he did not have a clearance. (Ex. 3, Tr. 52) He is the sole support for his wife, 
daughter, and grandchild. (Tr. 33) 
 
 In September 2011, Applicant contacted a debt assistance company (DAC) to 
create and implement a debt re-payment program. (Ex. 3, SOR Answer) He currently 
sends the DAC $350 monthly. (Tr. 36, 50) The monthly amounts he contributed varied 
due to variations in his income. At various times, he has paid between $200 and $1,900 
monthly. (Tr. 36) However, even when unemployed, he continued to send funds to the 
DAC. (Tr. 19) The DAC receives a fee of 8% of the total amount of debt enrolled in the 
program. As of August 2014, the DAC had settled 10 of Applicant’s 15 accounts. (Tr. 
26) The settled debts and amounts paid are set forth in Ex. 3. As of August 2014, five of 
the six SOR debts were still in negotiations with the DAC. The $3,935 department store 
account (SOR 1.d) was not in negotiations because the creditor had agreed to settle the 
debt for $1,620, which was paid in June 2013. (Ex. 3, Tr. 37)  
 
 In October 2014, the credit lender in the jewelry store collection account (SOR 
1.b, $5,3772) agreed to settle the debt for $2,688. (Ex. A, D) The credit lender in the 
credit card collection account (SOR 1.c, $2,965) agreed to settle the debt for $2,788. 
(Ex. B) The settlement amounts have been paid. (Tr. 3, 37) Payments were made from 
the DAC to the creditor. (Tr. 36) 
 
Applicant was indebted to a bank on a $27,990 charged-off account. When he 
contacted the holder of the note, he was told the bank (original creditor) had charged off 
the account in January 2012 and sold it to the current credit collection agency in 
February 2012. The collection agency stated its company is a passive debt buyer that 
does not initiate collection calls or generate demand letters, but places accounts for 
collection with its network of branch offices. (Ex. C) Applicant has not been contacted by 
any collection agency concerning this debt. In the October 3, 2014 letter, the current 
status was listed as closed – cancelled. (Ex. C) 
 
 In November 2014, the credit lender in the department store collection account 
(SOR 1.e, $2,350) agreed to settle the debt for $1,541. (Ex. E) The settlement 
agreement requires Applicant to make five monthly payments of $308, starting on 
November 30, 2014. He owes approximately $5,000 on a military department store 
account, which was not an SOR debt. (Tr. 39) The collection agency agreed to accept 
$100 monthly on the $5,000 debt. (Ex. F) When his payments to the DAC end, he will 
add the amount he had been paying to the DAC to what he pays on this credit card 
account. (Tr. 49) 
 
 In May 2012, in response to the e-QIP (Ex. 1) financial questions listed in Section 
26, Applicant answered “no.” In September 2011, when he started with the DAC, he 
turned over all his debts to them and they were paying the creditors. (Tr. 20, 43) When 
he completed his e-QIP, the DAC was actively contacting his creditors and was 
                                                          
2 The SOR incorrectly lists the amount of this debt as “$5,3277.” (SOR, Tr. 14) 
 
4 
negotiating with the creditors to address his delinquent accounts. When completing his 
e-QIP, he did not believe he had debts or accounts in collection, charged off, 
suspended, or cancelled. He asserts he never intentionally withheld information or 
falsified information on his e-QIP. (Ex. 5) At the hearing, the Government does not 
dispute Applicant’s assertion that he did not intentionally falsify his e-QIP. (Tr. 59) 
 
 Applicant believes that if he had been employed full time, all of the debts with the 
DAC would have already been paid. (Tr. 27) He is current on the mortgage on his home 
where he was living when he retired from the Navy. (Tr. 41) He believes that home has 
a fair market value of $170,000. (Ex. 3, Tr. 42, 47) He receives $1,525 in monthly rent 
on the home. (Tr. 48) At his current location, he rents. He has paid off the loan on his 
2006 vehicle. (Tr. 50) He has taken a personal financial management class and 
received consumer credit counseling. (Tr. 51) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
5 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant had six charged-off 
accounts totaling approximately $50,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
6 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems started in 2009, after leaving the Navy. He was 
unable to find a job in his career field at his retirement location, where he also owned a 
home. He moved to the east coast, accepting a job paying less than what he received 
on active duty. His wife and daughter stayed behind in their home. The expense of 
maintaining two households had a detrimental impact on his finances. He has been 
employed only 6 of the last 18 months. He currently receives $13 per hour. His previous 
job was terminated because he did not have a clearance.  
 
A year before Applicant submitted his e-QIP, he sought the assistance of a DAC, 
which contacted his creditors and negotiated settlements to resolve 13 of 15 delinquent 
accounts. Two of the SOR debts have yet to be resolved. Since employing that 
company, he has made monthly payments of various amounts and made payments 
even when he was unemployed.  
 
Applicant has acted in good-faith to resolve his delinquent accounts. Good-faith 
requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. Applicant has kept in contact with his 
creditors. “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due 
to circumstances outside his or her control, the Judge could still consider whether 
Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when dealing with those financial 
difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. January 12, 2007)(citing ISCR 
Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. November 29, 2005); ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 
(App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. December 1, 1999). 
Applicant acted reasonably under the circumstances by maintaining contact with his 
 
7 
creditors and hiring the DAC to negotiate settlements on his delinquent accounts. AG & 
20(b) applies. 
  
Under AG ¶ 20(a), Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by being 
unable to find a job where he retired and having to maintain two households. He paid 
the DAC even when unemployed, which shows a willingness and determination to 
address his delinquent accounts. Once the two remaining debts are addressed, it is 
unlikely he will again incur financial problems. AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant was unable to find work after leaving the Navy, had 
limited employment during the last 18 months, and had the additional burden of 
maintaining two households. These are events beyond his control and he acted 
reasonably under the circumstances. AG & 20(b) applies. 
 
Under AG & 20(c), Applicant attended a personal financial management class 
and received consumer credit counseling. It appears his financial problems are being 
resolved or are under control. Under & 20(d), Applicant has resolved all but two of the 
SOR debts and the DAC is attempting to resolve those remaining debts. Applicant has 
been in the repayment program since 2011. Applicant’s long involvement with the DAC 
is a good indication that he will continue with the program until all of his debts are 
resolved. AG & 20(c) and & 20(d) apply. 
 
Applicant’s handling of his finances does not raise a concern about his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern under this guideline is as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15)  
 
Applicant’s answers to questions on his 2006 and 2012 security clearance 
applications, together with responses during corresponding subject interviews raise the 
question of whether the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 apply:  
 
(a) deliberate omission concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and, 
 
 
8 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative.  
 
Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks whether the 
person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to properly 
safeguard classified or sensitive information. Authorization for a security clearance 
depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. If a person 
conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process cannot function 
properly to ensure that granting access to classified or sensitive information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government.  
 
When Applicant completed his 2012 e-QIP, he had turned his debts over to the 
DAC, which was actively negotiating with his creditors on his behalf and paying other 
creditors. Having turned all of his debts over to the DAC in 2011 and made monthly 
payments to the DAC thereafter, he did not believe any of his debts or accounts were in 
collection, had been charged off, suspended, or were more than 120 days delinquent. 
He asserts he never intentionally withheld information or falsified information on his e-
QIP and the Government does not dispute this assertion.  
 
Applicant’s explanation for his e-QIP answers is reasonable and credible. While 
there is a security concern for a deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a 
material fact in any written document or oral statement to the Government when 
applying for a security clearance, not every omission, concealment, or inaccurate 
statement is a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. It is deliberate 
if it is done knowingly and willfully with intent to deceive. I find Applicant did not 
deliberately fail to provide correct and accurate answers on the security clearance 
application. The disqualifying conditions do not apply. I find for Applicant as to personal 
conduct.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
9 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. In 2009, Applicant honorably retired 
from the Navy with an 80% disability rating. He was unable to find a job in his career 
field in his retirement location. He found a job in a different state, moving there alone. 
His wife and daughter stayed in their home so his daughter could complete high school. 
The position he obtained paid less than his Navy income and required maintaining two 
households. 
 
In 2011, Applicant knew he had financial problems and sought assistance. 
Through the DAC he had resolved all but two of the SOR debts. His active participation 
in the DAC program gives confidence he will continue with the DAC until the last two 
debts are resolved. He asserts he would have already paid the delinquent accounts had 
it not been for periods of unemployment. But even while unemployed, he continued 
making payments to the DAC to allow the company to continue negotiating with and 
paying his creditors.  
 
Having hired the DAC in 2011, Applicant did not falsify his 2012 e-QIP because 
the company was actively negotiating with his creditors and resolving his delinquent 
accounts. He believed his answers were correct. There was no falsification.  
 
Of course, the issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid—it is whether his 
financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. 
(See AG & 2(a)(1).) Applicant maintained contact with his creditors and has been 
actively engaged in a repayment program since 2011. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me without questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security 
concerns arising from his financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:   For Applicant 
  
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
 
10 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
  
