1 
  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00174 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant was delinquent on a 
judgment and six collection accounts totaling more than $14,000. In July 2014, his debts 
were discharged in bankruptcy. Clearance is granted. 
 
History of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on February 14, 
2014, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns. DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
2 
On May 31, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR, and he elected to have the 
matter decided without a hearing. Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM), dated October 2, 2014. The FORM contained seven attachments. On October 
20, 2014, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to 
file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially 
disqualifying conditions. Applicant had 30 days in which to submit any material in 
response to the FORM. A response was due on November 19, 2014. As of December 
8, 2014, no response had been received.  
On December 15, 2014, I was assigned the case. Department Counsel was 
asked to provide information related to Applicant’s bankruptcy. That material was 
included as Ex. A.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted owing the judgment and six 
collection accounts listed in SOR. He asserted, but failed to document, that the debts 
were included a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. After a thorough review of the pleadings, and 
exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old electrician who has worked for a defense contractor 
since October 2010, and seeks to obtain a security clearance. He was unemployed2 
from January 2010 through June 2010 and June 2003 through November 2006. (Item 5) 
The FORM contains no documentation of work or character references. He provided no 
documents concerning his delinquent accounts.  
 
 In September 2013, Applicant had a Personal Subject Interview (PSI). In March 
2011, a $4,712 judgment (SOR 1.a) was entered against him on a truck loan. (Item 6) 
The judgment appeared on his September 2009 credit bureau report. (Item 7) He stated 
the vehicle had continuous problems, and he voluntarily returned it. (SOR Answer) He 
asserted he was also making monthly payments this debt until he filed for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy protection, but, again, provided no documentation showing payments. 
 
 Applicant had an $8,435 collection account (SOR 1.f) for a car debt. He asserted 
he was unable to make payments due to a garnishment of his wages and he voluntarily 
returned the car. (SOR Answer) He provided no additional information about the 
garnishment. He stated he was making payments on this debt prior his bankruptcy filing, 
but provided no documentation. 
 
 During the PSI, Applicant was asked about and admitted each of the SOR debts 
except for the $145 medical collection account (SOR 1.c), about which he was never 
questioned in his PSI. The $41 library collection debt (SOR 1.g) was delinquent in 
December 2008, prior to the start of his current employment. He asserted the library 
debt had slipped his mind, but was included in his Chapter 7 filing. (SOR Answer) He 
                                                          
2 Applicant worked in the marine industry and was laid off in January 2010 and November 2006. The lay-
offs were not caused by work performance or issues at work. (Item 6)  
3 
asserts he “was not financially stable to take care of [these] debts at the time” for four 
collection accounts (SOR 1.b, $225; SOR 1.c, $145; SOR 1.d, $779; and, SOR 1.e, 
$151). (SOR Answer) Each of the four debts became delinquent after Applicant was 
employed at his current job. (Item 7)  
 
 Applicant provided no documentation establishing the amount of payments he 
made on the debt prior his bankruptcy filing. He provided no bankruptcy documents to 
establish which debts were included in the bankruptcy or showing the debts had been 
discharged. However, court records indicate Applicant and his wife had a standard no-
asset Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge. The Discharge of Debtors Order was issued in 
July 2014. (Ex. A) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
4 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had a judgment and six collection accounts totaling more than $14,000. 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG 
¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
5 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s seven SOR debts included a judgment and six collection accounts. 
The judgment (SOR 1.a, $4,712) and a collection debt (SOR 1.f, $8,435) resulted from 
vehicle loans. These represent more than 90% of the SOR debts. The other five debts 
total just over $1,300. The other collection debts included two medical debts (SOR 1.b, 
$225 and SOR 1.c, $145), a telephone service debt (SOR 1.d, $779), and a library debt 
(SOR 1.g, $41). The only SOR debt related to credit card accounts is a $151 debt (SOR 
1.e).  
 
Applicant stated he had “continuous problems” with the one vehicle. The 
mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because he provided no 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the disputed account. The other car was 
surrendered when a garnishment made continuing with his payments impossible. From 
the amount of delinquent obligations alleged, it does not appear Applicant was living 
beyond his means.  
 
 Applicant indicated he had been unemployed from January 2010 through June 
2010 and June 2003 through November 2006, which were events beyond his control. 
He provided no information as to how the unemployment financially impacted his ability 
to pay his delinquent debts four and a half years later or how the unemployment led to 
his filing for bankruptcy protection.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There is no 
documentation Applicant received counseling as part of his bankruptcy filing. The 
mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply because Applicant has failed to 
document payment on any of the delinquent accounts. He asserted he made monthly 
on the two largest delinquent debts until he filed for bankruptcy, but failed to provide any 
documents showing payment on this debt.  
 
 A bankruptcy filing does not preclude an administrative judge from making an 
adverse security clearance decision. Nor does bankruptcy preclude consideration of the 
6 
overall history of financial problems, including evidence indicating that he had been less 
than diligent in addressing his financial problems.3 Furthermore, a discharge in 
bankruptcy does not, in itself, prove that an applicant has changed the financial habits 
that led to the debts discharged in bankruptcy or that his past financial difficulties are 
not likely to recur."). Cf. Marshall v. District of Columbia Government, 559 F.2d 726, 
729-30 (D.C. Cir. 1977) 
 
In July 2014, Applicant’s debts were discharged. There is no showing which 
debts were included in his bankruptcy. However, in a no-asset Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
failure to list the debts does not affect their discharge. Absent fraud, in a no-asset 
bankruptcy, all unsecured, nonpriority debts are discharged when the bankruptcy court 
grants a discharge, even when they are not listed on a bankruptcy schedule. See Judd 
v Wolfe, 78 F.3d 110, 114 (3d Cir. 1996); Francis v. Nat’l Revenue Service, Inc., 426 
B.R. 398 (Bankr S.D. FL2010), but see First Circuit Bucks Majority on Discharge of 
Unlisted Debt in No-Asset Case, American Bankruptcy Institute, 28-9 ABIJ 58 (Nov. 
2009). There is no requirement to re-open the bankruptcy to discharge the debt. Collier 
on Bankruptcy, Matthey Bender & Company, Inc. 2010, Chapter 4-523, ¶ 523(a3)(A). 
Some categories of priority obligations are not discharged by bankruptcy, such as tax 
debts, student loan debts, and child support obligation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
                                                          
3 While a discharge in bankruptcy is intended to provide a person with a fresh start financially, it does not 
immunize an applicant's history of financial problems from being considered for its security significance. 
See, e.g., DISCR Case No. 87-1800 (February 14, 1989) at p. 3 n.2 ("Although bankruptcy may be a legal 
and legitimate way for an applicant to handle his financial problems, the Examiner must consider the 
possible security implications of the history of financial debts and problems that led to the filing of 
bankruptcy.”). 
 
7 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. Two of the debts were for medical 
treatment, one was a telephone bill, one for an overdue library book, and two related to 
vehicle purchases. Only a $151 debt appears to be related to a credit card account. 
There is no indication of misconduct or irresponsible behavior. 
 
Applicant works at a shipyard. Following the receipt of the SOR he filed for 
bankruptcy protection, and his debts were discharged in July 2014. The amount of 
delinquent debt was modest -- $14,000. There is no showing he has incurred additional 
debts since his discharge.  
  
The issue is not simply whether all her debts are paid—it is whether his financial 
circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 
2 (a)(1).) Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
