 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00112 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric Eisen, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were primarily caused by his and his wife’s 
immaturity and inexperience in financial matters, and the downturn of the U.S. financial 
and real estate markets. Although he should have been more diligent addressing his 
financial problems, he resolved all of his delinquencies and his financial situation is 
under control. Considering the circumstances of this particular case, Applicant’s past 
financial problem does not show he currently lacks judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness. Clearance granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 10, 2013. The 
Department of Defense (DOD) issued him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) on March 4, 2014.1 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 28, 2014, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The Government was ready to proceed on August 27, 2014. 
Applicant was deployed overseas and requested his hearing be scheduled between 
September 22 and October 2, 2014. The case was assigned to me on August 28, 2014. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued the notice of hearing on 
August 29, 2014, scheduling a hearing for September 22, 2014.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits (GE 1 through 5). Applicant 
testified and presented exhibits (AE) 1 through 7. All exhibits and the documents 
attached to his answer to the SOR were admitted without objection and made part of 
the record. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 2, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the SOR factual allegations 
with explanations. After a thorough review of all the evidence, including his testimony 
and demeanor while testifying, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old logistics coordinator employed by a defense 
contractor. He received his General Education Development (GED) and nurse 
assistance training certificates before he enlisted in the U.S. Army in 2002. He served in 
the Army from September 2002 to September 2005, when he was honorably discharged 
with the rank of specialist (E-4). After his discharge, he worked one year for a private 
company. He married his wife in December 2003, and they have a three-year-old 
daughter. His wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen, born in a Central American country.  
 
Applicant has been working for government contractors since February 2006. He 
was hired by his current employer, a government contractor, in October 2012. Because 
of his duties providing support to deployed U.S. personnel, Applicant has worked and 
lived overseas for the greater part of every year since he started working for 
government contractors.  
 
Applicant submitted his first SCA on July 10, 2013. In response to the financial 
questions (Section 25), he disclosed that he had financial problems, including a 
foreclosed mortgage and several delinquent financial accounts. The subsequent 
background investigation revealed the five smaller delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, 
totaling $8,923, and a past-due mortgage in the amount of $65,000, for a total of 
$73,923. 
 
Applicant acknowledged his debts and has taken responsibility for his actions. He 
explained that his delinquent debts were the result of his and his wife’s immaturity and 
lack of financial knowledge. In 2006, he and his wife purchased a home for $326,232, 
with an adjustable rate mortgage from 9 to 15 percent interest. They made the 
mortgage payments until 2008, when the real estate market conditions changed and his 
higher interest rates started. After that, he was financially unable to pay the mortgage 
and his family’s day-to-day living expenses.  
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant contacted the mortgage holder and attempted to refinance the loan, 
modify the mortgage, or do a short sale of the property. However, the mortgage holder 
refused to accept Applicant’s offers. His wife started working part time in an effort to 
increase the family’s income, but her employment was sporadic. Ultimately, Applicant 
was advised that his only remedy was to walk away from the mortgage and allow the 
foreclosure to take place.  
 
Concerning the remaining delinquent debts, Applicant explained that he has 
been working overseas for extended periods of time since 2006. His wife took care of 
the family’s finances while he was deployed. He credibly testified that he was not aware 
of any delinquent debts. He provided his wife most of his earnings, and he assumed 
that she was timely paying their debts. 
 
Applicant became aware of the delinquent debts when he requested a credit 
report at about the same time he submitted his July 2013 SCA. Shortly thereafter, he 
requested information about the delinquent debts and tried to identify the legal creditors 
to resolve the debts. He testified that it was difficult for him to contact creditors and 
resolve his debts while working overseas. Although many of the debts were beyond the 
statute of limitations, Applicant contacted the creditors and paid the debts because he 
wanted to show financial responsibility. Applicant’s documents reflect that between July 
2013 and his hearing, he paid four debts alleged in the SOR (¶¶ 1.b-1.c, 1.e, and 1.f); 
and resolved SOR ¶ 1.a (the state dismissed the tax lien). 
 
Concerning the foreclosed mortgage, Applicant testified that the home was sold 
after the foreclosure. He contacted the mortgage holder and was informed that he did 
not have any outstanding deficiency or liens filed against him resulting from the 
foreclosure. Under state law, the mortgage holder had one year from the date the 
foreclosure certificate was issued to file any deficiency claims against Applicant, and 
none was filed. 
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his financial situation. To avoid any future 
financial problems, he is now handling the household finances personally. He monitors 
his financial situation via applications that help him track his accounts and monitor his 
credit reports. He understands that he is required to maintain financial responsibility to 
be eligible for a security clearance. 
 
Applicant has been successful at his job. He is considered a stellar performer. 
His references consider him to be honest, reliable, and trustworthy. He also received 
high marks for his work ethic and exceptional leadership skills. 
 
Applicant appears to be in a solid financial situation. He is earning $10,000 a 
month, and his wife is working part time. They have approximately $3,000 of disposable 
monthly income after paying their expenses. A review of Applicant’s credit reports 
shows that he is living within his financial means. There is no evidence of any additional 
delinquent debts. Applicant’s financial problems are under control. He was candid and 
 
4 
 
 
upfront during the security clearance investigation process. He disclosed his financial 
problems in his 2013 SCA, and was forthcoming at his hearing.  
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
Applicant and his wife purchased a house above their financial means. Because 
of their inexperience in financial and real estate matters, they purchased the house 
using an adjustable-rate mortgage under less than favorable terms. After two years, 
they were unable to continue making their mortgage payments and pay their debts and 
day-to-day living expenses. Because of the real estate and financial market downturns, 
he was unable to sell the house, refinance, modify the mortgage, or do a short sale of 
the house. Additionally, he accumulated five delinquent debts. Financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 
19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Financial considerations mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 20(a) through (e) apply in 
part. AG ¶ 20(a) has partial applicability because Applicant’s financial problems are 
recent. However, I find that his financial problems occurred under circumstances that 
are unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. He has learned his lesson. He took control of his family 
finances, and he is monitoring his financial accounts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable because the 2008 U.S. financial and real estate 
downturns were beyond Applicant’s control. He maintained contact with the creditor and 
attempted to resolve his financial problem. Notwithstanding, he should have been more 
diligent monitoring and addressing his delinquent accounts. AG ¶¶ 20(c), (d), and (e) 
are partially applicable. There is no evidence he received financial counseling; however, 
he paid four of the debts alleged in the SOR after they may have become non-
collectable, and he has no financial responsibility for the foreclosed mortgage. He 
resolved all his delinquent debts. Although Applicant had a legal basis to dispute the 
alleged debts, he paid them to show his financial responsibility. 
 
Applicant appears to be in a solid financial situation. His income is sufficient for 
him to pay his debts and maintain financial responsibility. He is living within his means, 
and there is no evidence of any additional delinquent debts. Considering the evidence 
as a whole, I find that Applicant’s financial problems occurred under circumstances 
unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant served in the Army three years and received an honorable discharge. 
He has worked for government contractors since 2006, and this is his first SCA. He is 
considered to be an excellent performer and valuable employee. Except for the SOR 
allegations, there is no other evidence of financial problems or any other security 
concerns. Applicant demonstrated financial responsibility handling the alleged debts. 
There is no evidence that he currently has a financial problem. He has learned a hard 
lesson and I find that his financial problems are unlikely to recur and do not show he 
currently lacks judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
