 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -----------                                              )  ISCR Case No. 14-01536 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns regarding his family members, who are 
citizens, residents, or citizen-residents of Egypt.  Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On June 30, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an undated letter, Applicant admitted all four allegations raised and requested 
a hearing. I was assigned the case on October 20, 2014. On October 28, 2014, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice setting the hearing for 
November 14, 2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered two documents, which were accepted into the record 
without objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-2. Ex. 2 is a request for administrative notice 
 
 
 
 
2 
regarding certain facts related to the country of Egypt. Applicant gave testimony, 
introduced one witness, and introduced a packet of materials that was accepted into the 
record without objection as Ex. A. The transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received on 
November 25, 2014. The record was then closed. Based on a through review of the 
case file, I find that Applicant carried his burden in mitigating security concerns arising 
under Guideline B.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice  
 
Department Counsel submitted a Request for Administrative Notice regarding 
certain facts about the nation of Egypt. Administrative or official notice is the appropriate 
type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration 
and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). The most common basis 
for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is to notice facts that are either well 
known or from Government reports.  
 
Egypt  
 
Egypt is the most populous country in the Arab world. In the past, it has been a 
strategic partner of the United States and the countries have enjoyed a strong friendly 
relationship. The United States is facing a series of challenges stemming from dramatic 
changes in Egypt. Its recently deposed President, Muhammad Morsi, is part of the 
Muslim Brotherhood, and the extent of his cooperation with the United States on some 
security and economic matters was unclear. He was deposed by elements of the 
Egyptian military and analysts are concerned about the impact of this change on the 
Egyptian democracy, relationships of Egypt and Israel, and continued cooperation with 
the United States on intelligence and terrorism-related issues. Moreover, the Muslim 
Brotherhood maintains widespread followers in Egypt and may be able to regain power.  
 
Political protests and demonstrations have turned violent numerous times in the 
past year. There are instances of instability, public disorder, and extremist activity in 
Egypt. Following the revolution of January 2011, the number of criminal incidents has 
increased throughout the country, including crimes against foreign visitors. This is likely 
attributable to a reduction in overall police presence and diminished authority of police 
on the street.  
 
Due to the political climate after the January 2011 revolution, there is a 
potentially more permissive operating environment for terrorist groups, including al- 
Qaeda, which the U.S. State Department designated a foreign terrorist organization.  
 
Egyptian human rights abuses are common. Violent clashes with police and 
military at demonstrations are a continuing concern. Problems also include torture, 
arbitrary arrests, limits on the judiciary, and restrictions on civil liberties.  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
The threat of terrorism in Egypt remains high and transnational terrorist groups 
and local terrorist groups pose threats in Egypt despite Egypt’s aggressive pursuit of 
terrorists and extremism. In 2003, Egypt discovered and disrupted a terrorist plot 
against U.S. interests. Between 2004 and 2006, Egypt suffered a series of deadly, 
coordinated terrorist bombings, which caused many deaths and hundreds of injuries, 
including U.S. citizens. Although the Egyptian government took measures against the 
perpetrators of the attacks, there is a persistent, indigenous threat of terrorist activities. 
In April 2009, the Egyptian government uncovered a Hezbollah cell clandestinely 
operating in Egypt.  
 
Terrorists use overt, covert, and clandestine activities to exploit and undermine 
U.S. national security interests. These nongovernmental terrorist organizations currently 
target the United States for intelligence collection through human espionage and other 
means. Some such terrorist groups conduct intelligence activities as effectively as state 
intelligence services. Egypt persists in fighting such factions within its borders and 
abroad.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old design coordinator who has worked for the same 
defense contractor since July 2013. He was born and raised in Egypt. In 2005, his aunt 
got Applicant and his family members green cards to come to the United States. After 
high school graduation that year, he came to the United States to continue his 
education and be near his elder sister, with whom he is very close. She had come to the 
United States in 1999 and already was a United State citizen.  
 
From 2006 until 2013, Applicant attended a local university, earned an 
associate’s degree, a bachelor’s degree in civil engineering, and worked several jobs in 
order to pay for his education. In the interim, after a five-year waiting period following his 
receipt of a green card, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen, formally renounced 
Egyptian citizenship, and surrendered his Egyptian passport in 2011. Since graduation, 
he has worked for his present employer. He is happy with his work, career choices, and 
professional prospects. 
 
 Remaining in Egypt as residents and citizens are Applicant’s mother, father, and 
brother. All three work in the private sector as a semi-retired dentist, semi-retired 
physician, and veterinarian/farmer, respectively. They speak with Applicant on the 
phone about family issues, but do not discuss Applicant’s work. Applicant speaks with 
his parents once or twice a week, and infrequently speaks with his brother by telephone. 
Most of the rest of Applicant’s family, such as uncles, aunts, and cousins, are U.S. 
citizens or residents seeking U.S. citizenship. Tr. 22. None of them have a nexus to a 
foreign military or receive state benefits. They are financially well-situated, but do not 
live extravagantly.  
 
 In his security clearance application, Applicant also noted some friends as 
foreign contacts from Egypt living in the United States. Of those individuals, one male 
 
 
 
 
4 
friend has since become a U.S. citizen; one has become a citizen and resident of 
Canada; one has a green card and is seeking U.S. citizenship; and a fourth currently 
lives in the United States with a work permit. None know of Applicant’s work. Today, 
most of Applicant’s friends and associates are U.S. citizens Applicant has met since 
coming to the United States. He has readily assimilated into his new culture and 
environs. 
 
 Applicant has no investments, business or real property interests, or financial 
holdings abroad. His bank account and retirement accounts are maintained here. He is 
happy within his community and with his extensive interaction with his older sister and 
her family. He is very active with his local church, where he works with fellow 
parishioners and youth groups. He also volunteers for various community activities. It is 
his intent to remain in the United States, continue to build a life here, and maintain his 
closeness with his sister and her family.  
 
Applicant’s last trip to Egypt was three years ago; he has no present intention of 
returning. His mother visits every year or two. His father generally does not travel due to 
ill health, but may attempt to visit the United States at the end of 2014. Applicant is up-
to-date with all of his security-related training and certifications. His facility security 
officer wrote him a positive recommendation that uses superlative terms.  
 
 Applicant’s main reason initially for moving to the United States was to be close 
to his elder sister. She played a significant role in his upbringing and continues to be a 
strong influence in his life. She became a U.S. citizen a number of years ago. She 
encouraged Applicant to move to the United States to seek new opportunities. They 
have lived together while in the United States. Applicant is close to her family, especially 
her children, with whom he spends a great deal of time. She recommended Applicant 
for his present position. She has a security clearance. Despite parents and a sibling 
abroad, they constitute their own supportive and nurturing family unit here in the United 
States.   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
 
 
 
5 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the 
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, 
or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but 
not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target United States citizens to obtain protected information 
and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
As a threshold issue, it is noted that while Egypt does not target United States citizens 
to obtain protected information. However, nongovernmental terrorists operate in, and 
terrorist activities take place, within its borders. Moreover, while Applicant has affection 
for his parents and brother, it is clear that his familial loyalty to his elder sister and her 
family is reciprocal and superior to his relationships with his kin in Egypt.  
 
It is undeniable that Applicant has ties of affection for his parents and brother in 
Egypt. By telephone, he speaks with his parents weekly, and less frequently with his 
brother by telephone. He has visited his family abroad and his mother visits the United 
States, where it may be assumed she meets with her children and other extended 
family living in the United States. Such ties maintained with citizens and residents of 
Egypt constitute a heightened risk of foreign influence. Disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 
7(a) and (b) apply:  
 
AG ¶ 7(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 7(b) connection to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology 
and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country 
by providing that information. 
 
In finding disqualifying conditions applicable, I specifically note that AG ¶ 7(a) 
requires substantial evidence of a heightened risk. The heightened risk required to raise 
a disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. Heightened risk denotes a risk 
greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a foreign 
government or substantial assets in a foreign nation. As noted, terrorist activities have 
transpired within Egypt. This fact is sufficient to find a heightened risk exists in this case. 
In addition, foreign family ties can pose a security risk even without a connection to a 
foreign government. This is because an applicant may be subject to coercion or undue 
influence when a third party pressures or threatens an applicant’s family members. 
Under these facts, a third party coercion concern potentially exists in Egypt. Therefore, 
the evidence provided is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
 
 
 
 
7 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S., and 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests. 
 
Applicant has the burden to demonstrate evidence to refute or mitigate the allegations.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties to persons in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that relative, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. Here, Applicant's parents 
and brother are residents and citizens of Egypt; Applicant’s foreign friends who posed 
earlier concerns have moved or become citizens of either the United States or Canada. 
The nature of the foreign country must be considered in evaluating the likelihood of 
exploitation. The United States and Egypt have a long, amicable history, and a joint 
interest in fighting terrorism. It is unlikely that Egypt would take an interest in Applicant 
or his relatives, especially given their unobtrusive lifestyles and activities, and there is 
no evidence indicating Egypt profiles or compromises its citizens as a method to gain 
sensitive information from its allies. Moreover, it is unlikely that Applicant would have to 
choose between the interests of his family in Egypt and the interests of the United 
States. AG ¶ 8(a) applies.  
 
Moreover, it was Applicant’s extraordinarily close ties to his elder sister that 
brought him to the United States. As her family grew, so did his closeness to both her 
family and to the United States. Ultimately, he chose to settle permanently in the United 
States as a U.S. citizen, where he has since developed strong ties to both the country 
and his community. Today, he is active with his church and with various community 
organizations. He is thriving professionally. He has made new friends to replace those 
left behind abroad. He maintains warm relations with his parents and brother in Egypt. 
They speak by phone weekly and his mother visits the United States regularly. 
Otherwise, they maintain a quiet life in Egypt with no knowledge of their son’s work. 
They have no apparent nexus to the Egyptian government or military, or to terrorist 
forces. Between his sister and her family in the United States and those abroad, his 
loyalties are to his family here, as has been apparent since he first chose to immigrate, 
then become a citizen of the United States.  Applicant has no intention of returning to 
Egypt to live. He maintains no financial, real property, or other interests in Egypt. I 
conclude that Applicant would choose his significant U.S. ties over his foreign 
connections, in the event a conflict of interest arose. AG ¶ 8(b) applies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the three guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Most of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under the above guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a direct and affable 27-year-old man. He has worked as a design 
coordinator for the same employer since July 2013. Born and raised in Egypt, he 
accepted his aunt’s offer of sponsorship to come to the United States, at least in part to 
be with his older sister. He and his sister are very close. They lived together for a time, 
and he is now an integral part of her direct family. Since coming to the United States, 
Applicant has earned a bachelor’s degree in engineering, become a United States 
citizen, renounced his Egyptian citizenship, and started his professional career. 
Applicant is now entrenched in his community where he is active with his church, 
various volunteer activities, and with new friends he has made since coming to this 
country. He intends to stay in this country as a resident and citizen. 
 
In Egypt, Applicant has his parents and a brother. They maintain regular 
telephonic contact and Applicant’s mother regularly visits the United States, but their 
relationship does not appear to be as close as the bond he shares with his elder sister 
and her immediate family. Regardless, his family in Egypt live low-key lives which draw 
little attention or scrutiny. They do not know what Applicant does for a living. There is 
scant likelihood they would be the cause for any coercion by a foreign government or 
terrorist organization to compromise Applicant. As for Applicant’s former associates of 
Egyptian citizenship or residence, all have left Egypt and are now citizens or residents 
of either the United States or Canada, diminishing their status as security concerns. 
 
When disqualifying conditions are raised, the burden is then placed on an 
Applicant to proffer facts and evidence in mitigation of the security concerns raised. 
Here, Applicant presented sufficient information about himself, his sister and her family 
in the United States, his family in Egypt, and the country at issue to mitigate foreign 
influence security concerns. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
