 As defined in Chapter 3 and Appendix 10 of DOD Regulation 5220.2-R, as amended (Regulation).1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 14-00671
)
)
Applicant for Position of Trust )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant incurred delinquent debts through circumstances beyond his control.
His current finances are sound and he showed good judgment in resolving his debts in
a timely and organized manner. It is unlikely he will experience financial problems in the
future. His request for eligibility to occupy a position of trust is granted.
Statement of the Case
On August 27, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position  for his1
job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
 Required by the Regulation, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive).2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were3
published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
2
investigation and his responses to interrogatories from DOD adjudicators, it could not be
determined that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant
Applicant’s request for a position of trust.  2
On June 6, 2014, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts which raise trustworthiness concerns addressed through the adjudicative
guidelines (AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F). On July 7, 2014, Applicant3
responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on September 29, 2014, and I convened a hearing
on October 22, 2014. Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4. Applicant presented
testified and presented Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - I. All exhibits were admitted without
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 7, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant did not file his federal
tax returns for tax years 2006 through 2010 until 2013 (SOR 1.a); that he did not file his
state tax returns for tax years 2005 through 2010 until 2013 (SOR 1.b); and that he
owes $44,366 for three delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.c - 1.e). In response,
Applicant admitted with explanations all of the SOR allegations. In addition to the facts
established by Applicant’s admissions, and based on all available information, I make
the following findings of fact:
Applicant is 41 years old and works for a national health insurance company on a
contract that supports the administration of medical insurance benefits to U.S. military
members and their families. He works as an applications development systems analyst.
He was hired for his current position in August 2013. His performance evaluations in
September 2013, February 2014, and September 2014 reflect outstanding technical
expertise, high value to the contract, excellent reliability, and solid performance. (Gx. 1;
Gx. 2; Ax. H)
Applicant worked in the same job for the same employer and as a subcontractor
to that employer from October 2002 until August 2007. He left his employment by
mutual agreement with his supervisors because of his attendance and performance
problems. Applicant has since been diagnosed with, and is receiving treatment for a
panic disorder and agoraphobia. Applicant’s condition prevents him from driving, and
makes ordinary social and work situations difficult or impossible to endure. (Answer; Gx.
1; Gx. 2; Ax. F; Tr. 14 - 15)
3
Applicant began receiving professional mental health treatment in February
2006. Until May 2013, he saw several different doctors and there were gaps in his
treatment and variations in the treatments and medications they provided. Applicant first
saw his current doctor for about eight months in 2010, and began seeing him again in
May 2013. Applicant is able to succeed in his current job because he has a better
understanding of his condition and is being treated effectively for it. The job location is
close enough to his house that he does not have to drive, and he has a trusting
relationship with his coworkers and a different supervisor than before. (Answer; Gx. 1;
Gx. 2; Ax. F; Tr. 58 - 65)
For the next six years after leaving his position in 2007, Applicant was generally
unemployed because he was unable to find a job he could perform given his
psychological limitations. Occasionally, he found part-time independent work as an
applications developer. He supported himself for about three years using his personal
savings, but eventually turned to credit cards to make ends meet. He applied for
disability benefits but was unsuccessful. At the time he submitted his EQIP, his house
was in foreclosure and he was attempting to resolve that obligation through a short sale.
This debt is alleged at SOR 1.e. In July 2014, he borrowed $20,000 from his father and
was able to bring his mortgage current. The loan was formalized in a written agreement
whereby Applicant is repaying his father twice monthly through automatic debits from
Applicant’s bank account. Although Applicant has good cash flow, a single large infusion
of cash was needed to satisfy the mortgage lender’s terms and cease foreclosure.
(Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Gx. 3 - 4; Ax. E; Ax. I; Tr. 43 - 44)
As alleged in SOR 1.a and 1.b, Applicant did not file his federal or state income
tax returns between 2005 and 2010. In response to DOD interrogatories, Applicant
established that he had filed all of his past-due returns and is up to date on his income
tax obligations in general. At his hearing, he provided additional documentation of his
resolution of his tax issues and that he does not owe any unpaid taxes as a result of his
late filings. (Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. B)
Applicant has settled the credit card debts alleged in SOR 1.c and 1.d. He has
also begun to rebuild his savings. A personal financial statement provided with his
response to interrogatories shows he has at least $2,000 remaining each month after all
of his monthly expenses. Since he started repaying the loan to his father, he estimates
he has about $1,000 remaining each month. He is meticulous in his approach to his
finances, as shown by a loan he made to help a friend. As with the loan he received
from his father, Applicant reduced the terms of the loan to writing and obtained the
recipient’s signature to formalize the agreement. (Gx. 2; Ax. C ; Ax. D; Ax. G; Tr. 56)
 Regulation, ¶ C3.6.15. 4
 Regulation, ¶ C6.1.1.1. 5
 Regulation, ¶ C8.2.1. 6
 Directive. 6.3.7
4
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  In4
deciding whether a person should be assigned to an ADP position, it must be
determined that his or her loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that it is
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.  The Regulation also5
requires that DOD contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the
Directive before any adverse determination may be made.6
The Directive requires that each decision be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,7
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of eligibility for a position of trust.
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a
position of trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. A person who has
access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government
based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in
ensuring applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of
one who will protect sensitive information as his or her own. Any reasonable doubt
5
about an applicant’s suitability for access should be resolved in favor of the
Government.
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support all of the SOR allegations. The facts
established raise a trustworthiness concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed
at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations). As to AG ¶ 19(a), the record shows
Applicant was unable, not unwilling, to repay his past-due debts.
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
All of these mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s financial difficulties occurred
because he lost his job. He lost the job because he has a mental health issue that was
6
not then being properly managed. He remained unemployed or underemployed for six
years, and he was able to get by for a few years on savings he already had. He is now
being treated for his mental health problems and is fortunate to have returned to his old
job, which is a perfect fit for him. Since he has been earning steady income again, he
has resolved all of the financial issues addressed in the SOR. Before he lost his job in
2007, Applicant managed his money in a responsible and prudent manner. Now that he
is again employed, he has resumed saving his money and meeting all of his financial
obligations. The circumstances that led to his financial problems either no longer exist
or are being addressed in a way that will help avoid similar problems in the future. 
Applicant has mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised by his financial problems.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has demonstrated excellent
judgment and maturity in addressing his financial problems. He has taken responsibility
for addressing the underlying causes of his earlier difficulties. A fair and commonsense
assessment of all available information shows that the Government’s concerns about
Applicant’s trustworthiness have been satisfied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national
security for Applicant to occupy a position of trust. Applicant’s request for ADP eligibility
is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
