 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00153 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline M, use of 
information technology systems; and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 13, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudication 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline M, use of information technology systems; and Guideline E, 
personal conduct. DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG). 
 
 
2 
 
 
On May 22, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on September 30, 2014. The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
who received it on October 14, 2014. Applicant was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He did not 
submit any further information. The case was assigned to me on December 5, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he denied all the Guideline M allegations, but 
failed to either admit or deny the Guideline E allegations. However, since the Guideline 
M allegations are all cross-alleged under Guideline E, I will take his nonresponse to 
these allegations as denials. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 30 years old. He is single and has no children. He currently works as 
a security engineer. He began working for his current employer in August 2013. He 
holds a master’s degree. He has no military service and has never held a security 
clearance.1 
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) gaining unauthorized access 
to webpages, servers, and personal information of random persons stored on personal 
and corporate information systems between February and April 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.a); (2) 
uploading and deleting files from privately-owned webservers without proper 
authorization between February and April 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.b); (3) uploading programs 
onto information technology systems (ITS) without authorization, which allowed him 
browser and root access to servers between February and March 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.c); (4) 
using default credentials without authorization to sign into privately-owned network 
printers between February and April 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.d). 
  
 Applicant’s security clearance application was certified in September 2013. He 
responded affirmatively to a question concerning his use of ITS, which specifically 
asked if he had illegally or without proper authorization accessed or attempted to 
access any ITS within the last seven years. When asked to describe the nature of the 
incident, Applicant wrote the following concerning his actions in February 2013:    
 
With cleverly crafted google queries, l was able to find documents that 
people had uploaded to the internet that contained information including 
their usernames and passwords for websites or servers. I attempted to log 
in to these systems to look around. There are, I would estimate, about 
1,000 incidents of this nature, If I could successfully log in to whichever 
system the credentials belonged to, I did one of three things: 1. In the 
majority of cases l looked around the file system of various log files to see 
what its owner was using it for. If another unauthorized user had obviously 
                                                          
1 Item 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
been modifying the system, I deleted malicious files, killed their processes, 
and occasionally blocked the IP of someone if they were obviously 
intruding. In a few cases, I contacted the owners to alert them to the 
security risk. 2. If the system was a web server, I uploaded a modified 
version of the b374k shell to have browser access to the server. 3. If l had 
root access, I created a new root user to have later access to the server.2 
 
 He described a second incident involving unauthorized access in February 2013 
by stating, “Some network printers have public IP addresses and a web interface, so 
google finds them. I used default credentials to sign into some printers to see what 
capabilities and settings they had.”3 
 
 He was also asked in the application if, in the last seven years, he illegally or 
without authorization modified destroyed, manipulated, or denied others access to 
information residing on an ITS, or attempted to do so. He responded affirmatively and 
described his actions in February 2013 as follows: 
 
As indicated in the section on unauthorized accesses, I gained access to 
machines because people posted their usernames/passwords online. I 
deleted files on machines if the files were plainly unwanted by the 
machine's owners.4 
 
 He further responded affirmatively when asked if, in the last seven years, he 
introduced, removed, or used hardware, software, or media in connection with any ITS 
without authorization. He explained his affirmative response by stating, “As stated 
previously, I removed malicious software from machines that I did not have permission 
to access.”5 
 
 In Applicant’s answer, he offers explanations for the way he completed his 
security clearance application. He stated that although he did not have written or verbal 
authorization to access the accounts, he believed permission to access them was 
implied because of the availability of the public servers. He also stated that he took 
these actions as an “academic research activity” and that he followed all the 
“responsible disclosure” rules, which are known in the computer security community. He 
did not provide written documentation of these rules or any other documents that would 
corroborate his position.6  
 
                                                          
2 Item 4. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
4 Item 4. 
 
5 Item 3. 
 
6 Item 4. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s specific responses to the SOR allegations are as follows: SOR ¶ 1.a: 
He admitted he did not have written permission to access the system, but he had login 
credentials that were publicly available and linked from Google; SOR ¶ 1.b: He admitted 
to uploading one file to multiple webservers. This file allowed him access to the server. 
He deleted files if there was documentation indicating that they were malicious; SOR ¶ 
1.c: He denied uploading or installing any programs on the systems that he accessed. 
He stated that he only used programs that were previously installed on the systems to 
gain access; SOR ¶ 1.d: He stated that the printers he accessed were publicly 
available. He concludes his answer by stating the following: 
 
All of these instances took place over a short period of time, while I was in 
school. I was academically interested in the structure of real-world 
computers and networks. I realized quickly that this was an inappropriate 
way to gain the skills that I was interested in, and I stopped completely. 
My behavior does not show a pattern over a wider time frame, either 
before or after. 7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
7 Item 3. 
 
 
5 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems:  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliably and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information.  
AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I considered the following relevant: 
(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or 
component thereof; and 
 
(b) illegal or unauthorized modifications, destruction, manipulation, or 
denial of access to information, software, firmware, or hardware in an 
information technology system. 
 
 Applicant accessed numerous (his estimate was 1,000) ITS without 
authorization, including private or sensitive information. He also uploaded an 
 
6 
 
 
unauthorized program (b375k) and deleted files without authorization. Both AG ¶ 40(a) 
and AG ¶ 40(b) apply. 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 and considered 
the following relevant:  
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s conduct was intentional, recent, and occurred on numerous 
occasions. Although he claims to have acted in furtherance of his academic curiosity, he 
also admitted that he quickly realized that what he was doing was wrong. His actions 
show a degree of unreliability, untrustworthiness, and bad judgment. Additionally, 
insufficient time has passed to determine whether he has truly learned from these 
incidents and modified his behavior. AG ¶ 41(a) does not apply.   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is relevant: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group.  
Applicant’s action in accessing personal computer files without authorization, 
demonstrates untrustworthy and unreliable behavior. He knew his actions were wrong, 
yet he gained such unauthorized access about 1,000 times. AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e) 
apply. 
 
7 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other 
inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
  Applicant’s conduct in gaining unauthorized access to unknown persons’ 
computer files 1,000 times is not minor. It casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. He acknowledged his wrongdoing, but 
he provided no evidence that he has taken positive steps to alleviate the factors that 
caused his actions, nor provided sufficient evidence establishing that such behavior will 
not recur. AG ¶ 17(d) partially applies. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s youth and 
explanation for why he engaged in the concerning behavior. However, Applicant’s 
blatant disregard for the privacy of others when he accessed their computer files without 
 
8 
 
 
authorization raises a significant security concern involving his trustworthiness and lack 
of good judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline M, 
use of information technology, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline M:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph    2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
