 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-03249 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 5, 2012, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP; SF 86). On August 6, 2014, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 25, 2014, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed 
on October 1. 2014, and I received the case assignment on October 2, 2014. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on October 29, 2014, and I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on November 19, 2014. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which 
were received without objection. Applicant testified. He did not submit any exhibits at 
 
2 
 
 
the hearing but asked permission to submit some later. I granted Applicant’s request to 
keep the record open until December 3, 2014, to submit additional matters. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 28, 2014. On December 3, 
2014, he submitted Exhibits A to J without objection. The record closed on December 3, 
2014. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a, 
1.b, and 1.c of the SOR, the only allegations, with explanations. He also provided 
additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. He has a high school equivalency diploma. He has 
taken some college classes. Applicant works for a defense contractor and has since 
2004. His income is about $40,000 annually. He currently has a security clearance and 
has had one since about 2003. Applicant is married and has three children. (Tr. 10-23, 
41; Exhibits 1-5) 
 
 Applicant admitted he used marijuana in 2007. He started using marijuana in 
2007 because of stress in his personal finances and marriage. He remembers using 
marijuana four or five times during a four month period in the summer of 2007. Applicant 
does not intend to use marijuana again. (Tr. 23, 24; Exhibits 1-5) 
 
 Applicant admitted using OxyContin, Xanax, and Vicodin in 2007. He used the 
Vicodin because his cousin had some. The Xanax he used because he was having 
panic attacks and was under financial stress. He argued with his wife about the finances 
and other marital issues. His aunt gave him the Xanax from the supply she had for her 
anxiety. He did not use much, he admitted. His relatives had prescriptions for these 
medications and they gave them to him to help him with his problems. He used the 
OxyContin with a cousin in 2000, not 2007 as alleged in the SOR. He also used 
Adderall with the cousin in 2000. Applicant stopped using the OxyContin and Adderall in 
2001 when he got married because he changed his lifestyle. He stated he had no 
intention to use these three medications without a prescription again in the future. His 
wife knew he was using the medications when he used them and that caused added 
marital friction. (Tr. 23-28, 36, 45, 47; Exhibits 1-5) 
 
 Applicant still has panic attacks sometimes. He has not had them in a while, he 
testified. He has spoken with a physician about the chest pains he gets when he has 
anxiety and that he has anxiety attacks. Applicant has not personally tried to do 
anything about his anxiety except endure it. He has family members who were 
diagnosed with schizophrenia and is concerned about using any medication for anxiety 
or panic attacks. He does not want to be on medication all the time because he has 
seen what that condition has done to his family members. (Tr. 28, 29, 52) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant stated on his June 2009 e-QIP that he had not illegally used any 
controlled substances as listed in Question 23 thereof. He also stated that he had not 
used a controlled substance when he had a security clearance in response to the 
second part of the question in Question 23 of the 2009 e-QIP. Both of these answers 
Applicant attested were “true, correct, and complete” in the signature block of the e-QIP. 
Applicant knew his answers were false and misleading at the time he wrote them. 
Applicant stated he was not thinking properly when he did not disclose his drug use in 
2009 because he was interested in keeping his job to support his family. He was also 
afraid of getting in trouble. He was also afraid at his hearing that he would be arrested 
and imprisoned for his drug use and failure to disclose it on his e-QIP. (Tr. 29-32, 53, 
54; Exhibits 1-5) 
 
 Applicant reported to his security officer in 2012 that in 2009 that he had some 
financial delinquencies, including a garnishment action and a lien on his house, and that 
caused the 2012 e-QIP to be completed after those disclosures. As stated, Applicant 
admitted he failed to disclose his illegal drug use because he was afraid of losing his 
job. However, in September 2012 Applicant reported to the security office at his 
employer that he used controlled substances in the past. He did so to relieve his 
conscience of that burden. Another e-QIP was completed in October 2012 with 
disclosures about his past illegal drug use. (Tr. 32, 33, 47; Exhibits 1-5) 
 
 Applicant received two reprimands from his supervisors. The first was in 2010 
when he damaged a piece of furniture he was moving and the second in 2012 when he 
made a “stupid comment” to his new supervisor. At the same time in 2012 Applicant 
reported his past controlled substance use in 2000, 2001, and 2007 because he was 
going to his church more frequently and was trying to change his lifestyle and trying to 
be honest. Applicant also admitted that in 2000 he used Adderall, which ordinarily is 
used for attention deficit problems. He also used LSD three times in 2000 according to 
his 2003 sworn statement and his 2012 disclosure. He never considered himself an 
addict and never stole anything to support his drug use. Applicant has never attended 
any drug counseling program because he never though of himself as an addict. 
Applicant has not used any controlled substances to include prescription medicines 
illegally since 2007 and has no intention to resume any use. (Tr. 33-38) 
 
In 2003 when he first applied for a security clearance Applicant signed a 
statement in which he declared he would not use illegal substances in the future. 
Applicant acknowledged his actions in 2007 were wrong and contradicted his previous 
declaration not to use illegal substances. He explained that in 2007 he experienced 
significant stressors in his life and he used drugs to escape those stressors. Since 2007 
he has learned tools to effectively manage his stress. Applicant changed the marital 
environment in his home. He frequently attends a church and participates in some of its 
activities. He does not obtain medications from his family members as he did in 2007. 
He has built up a support network in his church and family. Applicant has been 
abstinent from such drug or medication use since 2007. (Tr. 47-51, 55; Exhibits A to J)  
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant submitted six certificates of appreciation for his participation in various 
company and community activities, dating back to 2005. Applicant’s pastor submitted a 
statement about Applicant and his wife participating in the church’s activities, including 
the children’s’ religious program. The pastor has known Applicant for 10 years. A senior 
program manager at Applicant’s company submitted a letter attesting to his hard work 
and integrity. Applicant’s wife submitted a statement that he does not use illegal 
substances and cares deeply about his family. They are trying to raise their sons to 
have good characters. Finally, a manager at his employer wrote that Applicant is very 
helpful and hard working on the job. This person considers Applicant to be truthful and 
trustworthy. (Exhibits A to J) 
 
 Applicant was contrite and sincere in his presentation. His answers to questions 
were given without hesitation. He testified he wanted to be honest about his 
background. He stated he wanted to do what was right. His total testimony is credible. 
(Tr. 35, 38) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; and, 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
6 
 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources. 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity.  
 
 Applicant used LSD and OxyContin in 2000. He used marijuana in 2007 several 
times, along with Xanax and Vicodin for his anxiety attacks. Those medications were 
prescribed for relatives, who shared them with Applicant to relieve his symptoms. 
Applicant did not disclose his illegal drug use on his 2009 e-QIP. Applicant had a 
security clearance since 2003 and continued to have it in 2007 when he used 
marijuana, Xanax, and Vicodin.  
 
 Applicant deliberately omitted and concealed his illegal use of controlled 
substances in response to the specific questions in Section 23 of the 2009 e-QIP. AG ¶ 
16 (a) applies. 
 
 Applicant used illegal substances and medications not prescribed for him. He 
used marijuana and the other controlled drugs while holding a security clearance in 
2007. These actions are covered by the guidelines for drug involvement in AG ¶ 25 (g) 
and criminal conduct in AG ¶ 31 (a). These are several adjudicative issues that indicate 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations that indicate Applicant may not properly safeguard 
protected information under AG ¶16 (c).   
 
 Applicant’s conduct in 2000 and 2007 involving the use of illegal or controlled 
drug substances creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. His 
conduct, if publicly known, would affect Applicant’s personal, professional, or community 
standing. Applicant’s church participation and relationship with his sons would be 
affected if his drug use while he held a security clearance was known. His relationship 
with his employer would also be adversely affected. AG ¶ 16(e) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Four 
conditions may apply: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
 
8 
 
 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and, 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
 Applicant told his security officer in 2012 about his financial debts and that 
disclosure led to the preparation of a new e-QIP in which he disclosed his illegal drug 
use. Applicant made the disclosure because he wanted to do the correct thing and 
relieve himself of the burden of his past actions. AG ¶ 17 (a) applies because Applicant 
made good-faith efforts to correct the omissions from his 2009 e-QIP, though they were 
not as prompt as they should have been. He made his disclosure before he was 
confronted by any authority figure.  
 
 Applicant’s behavior was infrequent during the past 14 years and so much time 
has passed that his actions do not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. The circumstances were also unique in that the stress in his life occurred in 
widely separated times in his life. AG ¶ 17 (c) applies. 
 
 Applicant has taken positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, and 
factors in his life that caused his original problem. He is more mature now, with a viable 
marriage and three sons for whom he cares. He is very involved in his church activities. 
He disclosed his actions voluntarily to his security officer and has been forthright in all 
other disclosures. His inappropriate behavior in the past is unlikely to occur because he 
knows how wrong his actions were in 2000 and 2007. His testimony at the hearing 
revealed how concerned he is about his past conduct and the need he feels to avoid 
such conduct in the future. AG ¶ 17 (d) applies.  
 
 Applicant’s voluntary disclosure about his illegal drug use seven years ago, his 
frequent church participation, and renewed commitment to his family show he took 
positive steps to reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress. AG ¶ 17 (e) applies.  
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant appeared sincere in his 
contrition for his past misdeeds relating to his drug use. He did commit these acts as an 
adult. Their duration in 2000 and 2007 were relatively short. He did it voluntarily to 
relieve himself of anxiety and stress, not thinking of another way to address his 
concerns and problem. He has not used the controlled substances since the summer of 
2007 and then it was only a few times. Those substances were not heroin or other 
illegal narcotics, but medicines prescribed to other family members. He used them 
without a physician’s prescription, which was wrong to do. However, Applicant has 
changed his behavior and stated that he has no interest in resuming his past usage. 
There is no likelihood of a recurrence based on Applicant’s non-use for the past seven 
years.  
 
Applicant admitted he did not make a full disclosure in 2009 about his illegal drug 
use because he was afraid of losing his job. He has a high school education and a 
family to support. His concern is understood but disclosure should have been made 
regardless of his motive. His religious involvement in the past seven to ten years has 
sharpened his conscience, making it important to him to be truthful in all matters. He 
explained that was why he made the disclosure in 2012 about his drug use in 2000 and 
2007. His self-motivated disclosure counts in his favor.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his personal conduct. I 
conclude the whole-person concept for Applicant. 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
