 
1 
 
 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00204 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. He has an unpaid $22,000 
repossession obligation and four additional delinquent accounts totaling more than 
$11,000. He provided false answers on his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP). He failed to rebut or mitigate the security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on March 14, 
2014, the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
security clearance. On April 2, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
hearing. On May 14, 2014, I was assigned the case. On July 14, 2014, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the hearing to be 
convened on July 17, 2014. For good cause that hearing was continued. On July 30, 
2014, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing 
for the hearing convened as scheduled on August 12, 2014. I admitted Government’s 
Exhibits (Ex) 1 through 5. Applicant testified, but provided no documents.  
 
The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional information. 
Additional material (Ex. A through H) was submitted and admitted into the record 
without objection. On August 19, 2014, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied two debts (unpaid rent SOR 1.g, 
$4,231, and cable charges SOR 1.h, $3,391) and admitted the remaining charged-off, 
collection, and past-due accounts. He neither admitted nor denied falsifying his 
September 2013 e-QIP (SOR 2.a). I incorporate Applicant’s admissions as facts. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old field manager who has worked for a defense contractor 
since August 2013, and seeks a security clearance. (Tr. 18) He has worked full-time for 
the same employer since March 2012. (Tr. 22, 37, 56) His annual salary is $72,000. (Tr. 
40) From February 2002 through August 2011, he served in the U.S. Army. (Ex. 1) He 
separated with an honorable discharge as a staff sergeant (E-6). (Tr. 31) He receives 
$1,000 monthly in U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) benefits. (Tr. 82) His total 
annual income is approximately $84,000. 
 
Applicant called no witnesses other than himself and produced no work or 
character references. At the hearing he provided no documents concerning his 
delinquent accounts.  
 
In April 2011, Applicant was released from the Army, and he used vacation time 
and “RR time” until August 2011 when his actual separation from the Army occurred. 
(Tr. 23) After separating from the Army, Applicant was unemployed one month, from 
August 2011 through September 2011. (Ex. 5, Tr. 21) At the hearing, he asserted the 
period of unemployment was longer because he had been released from duty prior to 
his actual separation date. (Tr. 24) When Applicant left the Army, he received a letter 
from a DoD contractor offering employment. (Tr. 32) When the contract was not funded, 
he did not receive a job. (Tr. 32) He was employed as an engineer from September 
2011 through July 2012,2 when he obtained employment with his current employer. (Ex. 
1) Upon leaving the service, he was required to repay a portion of the $12,000 
reenlistment bonus he had received in 2009. (Tr. 30, 50, 119)  
 
                                                          
2 During Applicant’s employment with this company he was unemployed the month of February 2012 (Tr. 
55) 
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant is married and has four children ages 8, 10, 11, and 13. (Tr. 43) His 
wife is currently not working outside the home. (Tr. 41) His mother-in-law is currently 
staying in his home. (Tr. 43) When not living with him, he sends his mother-in-law $100 
monthly and pays an additional $80 monthly for her telephone. (Tr. 46, 47)  
 
 Applicant states he needs a clearance to do his job. He asserted he attended 
several finance courses and financial planning seminars. (SOR Answer) In August 
2013, his employer referred him to credit counseling, which he received on-line. (Tr. 58) 
In the on-line financial course, which he described as extensive, he learned about 
priorities, contacting debtors and creditors, challenging debts, how to fix a credit report, 
how late payment notices affect credit, collection agencies, and accountability for one’s 
debts. (Tr. 61, 62, 66) At the date of the hearing, he was currently receiving online 
financial counseling from an independent financial counselor. (Tr. 67) He is trying to 
teach his children better financial management. (Tr. 62)  
 
 The counseling started before he completed his September 2012 e-QIP. (Tr. 59) 
He asserted he would pay off a good percentage of the delinquent debt if given a year’s 
time. In April 2014, he again asserted that significant progress would be made if given 
the opportunity to maintain a clearance. (SOR Answer) A military department store 
credit card debt was paid by garnishment. (Tr. 63) The garnishment started in February 
2013 and $700 monthly was taken from his pay to collect the $5,000 debt. (Tr. 63) He 
has contacted four of his delinquent creditors. (Tr. 65)  
 
In October 2013, Applicant was questioned about each of his debts. (Ex. 5) In 
April 2014, he admitted the debts were his debts. (Tr. 118, SOR Response) Since 
October 2013, one debt has been paid by garnishment. At the time of the hearing, 
August 2014, no other debts had been paid.  
 
 While in the Army, Applicant had three loans (SOR 1.b, $4,379; SOR 1.c, $2,781; 
and SOR 1.d, $2,741), which were paid by allotment. The allotments stopped when he 
separated from the Army. One debt is 120 days or more past due and the other two 
loans have been charged off. 
 
 At the time of the hearing, Applicant had $28,000 in his checking account and 
$7,000 in a 401(k) retirement plan. (Tr. 71, 72) Six months ago, he borrowed $3,000 
from his retirement plan which he used to purchase handicap equipment for his mother-
in-law. (Tr. 72, 122) He has earmarked $20,000 from his checking account to pay taxes. 
(Tr. 73) His company had paid him $20,000 to pay his federal taxes. (Tr. 121)  
 
 Since June 2014, Applicant has had a large amount of overtime. The week 
before the hearing he had worked 77 hours. The week before that it was 90 hours. (Tr. 
75) Applicant’s annual salary is $72,000 based on a 50-hour work week. (Tr. 76) During 
the two months prior the hearing, from mid-June 2013 to mid-August 2014, he worked 
650 hours for his employer. (Tr. 119) He owes between $8,500 and $9,000 on a 2010 
Dodge car. (Tr. 78) He has made timely $440 monthly payments on the car for two and 
a half to three years. (Tr. 78, 79) He asserts his rent and all other monthly debts are 
current. He has a company credit card with a zero balance and a debit card. (Tr. 81) His 
 
4 
 
 
 
monthly net remainder (income less monthly payments) is approximately $1,000. (Tr. 
82)  
 
 In October 2013, Applicant was questioned concerning his financial 
delinquencies. (Ex. 5) In August 2005, his wife purchased a truck on which payments 
were made until June 2007. (Ex. 2, 3, Tr. 123) The truck was repossessed, and in 
August 2007, the account was charged off. (Ex. 2, 3, Tr. 83, 123) As of October 2013, 
he had no intention of making payments on the $22,000 debt (SOR 1.a), but intended to 
wait for the seven-year statute of limitations to render the debt unenforceable. (Ex. 5) 
During the interview, he stated the $4,231 collection account was for a loan and that he 
would be making arrangements to pay the delinquent debt. (Ex. 5) At the hearing, he 
stated this was an amount that a rental company was attempting to collect for unpaid 
rent. He stated he obtained orders for assignment to Turkey and the rental company 
would not let him out of the lease.  
 
 Applicant agreed he was at least 120 days past due on a $4,379 delinquent loan, 
which he stated he would make arrangements to pay. (Ex. SOR 1.b) In his October 
2013 interview, he stated he was making payments on the $2,781 charged-off account 
(SOR 1.c). He was unable to recall the amount he was currently paying on the debt. He 
alleged he was making arrangements to pay off the $2,741 account (SOR 1.d). He 
asserted he was making arrangements to pay off the $430 credit card account (SOR 
1.e), $113 credit card account (SOR 1.f), $4,231 loan (SOR 1.g), $806 loan (SOR 1.i), 
$656 loan (SOR 1.j), $400 loan (SOR 1.k), $271 loan (SOR 1.l), and the $120 loan 
(SOR 1.m). (Ex. 5)  
 
 On Applicant’s September 2013 e-QIP, he indicated his wages had been 
garnished to pay a $5,000 delinquent account. He indicated the garnishment paid the 
account in full. In response to the question in Section 26, which asked him about 
repossessed property, default on debts, debts turned over to a collection agency, 
accounts charged off, suspended or cancelled, or debts more than 120 days delinquent, 
he answered “no.” (Ex. 1) Applicant asserts he did not understand the question and did 
not believe he was 120 days past due on any account. (Ex. 5) At the hearing he stated 
he completed the form while he was overseas and did not have any financial documents 
with him. (Tr. 114) However, he had reviewed his credit report the month before 
completing his e-QIP when he started financial counseling. (Tr. 143) He also stated he 
believed his September 2014 e-QIP was only an update and related only to debts not 
included on his earlier e-QIP. (Tr. 114) He stated he did not mean to be untruthful. (Tr. 
115) 
 
 Following the hearing, Applicant settled and paid off the delinquent $430 
charged-off account listed in SOR 1.e and the $113 charged-off account in SOR 1.f. 
(Ex. D, E, G, and H) He paid a $120 collection account for insurance (SOR 1.m) and a 
$400 collection account for insurance (SOR 1.k) He made a $109 payment and a $218 
payment on a $656 debt (SOR 1.j) and asserts he is going to make three more 
payments to pay off the debt. (Ex. E). He made a $268 payment on a $3,133 debt (SOR 
1.c) and asserts he is going to make a total of 12 payments total of the same amount to 
pay off the debt. (Ex. E). He had made three payments totaling $455 toward the $806 
 
5 
 
 
 
telephone bill listed in SOR 1.i. (Ex. E and H) He asserted he was working towards his 
goal of being debt free while maintaining his current bills in good standing. (Ex. F)  
 
 In September 2003, shortly after joining the Army, Applicant made a sworn 
statement concerning his financial problems. At that time, he had delinquent credit card 
accounts and utility accounts. (Ex. 4) He attributed his financial difficulties to getting a 
credit card at a young age and not having the knowledge or experience to deal with the 
debt.  
 
 Applicant wishes to reconcile his financial problems and needs a clearance and a 
job to make that happen. (Tr. 116-117) He wants to pay his debts, but is hesitant 
because of job security. (Tr. 131) He has money in the bank, but should he not receive 
a clearance he would need those funds to pay living expenses. (Tr. 142)  
 
 Following the hearing, Applicant provided documentation that he did not owe the 
cable debt (SOR 1.h, $3,391), that he had paid two insurance debts (SOR 1.k, $400; 
SOR 1.m, $120 and two credit card debts (SOR 1.e, $430; SOR 1.f, $113). (Ex. A, E, F, 
and H) He also documented having made eight payments on three other delinquent 
debts (SOR 1.i, $806; SOR 1.j, $656; SOR 1.c, $2,781). He showed he had paid $2,160 
following the hearing.  
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Pickup truck 
repossessed 2005. 
(Tr. 83)  
 
 
 
$21,969 Unpaid. In 2005, while Applicant was station in 
Korea, Applicant’s wife traded in their car for the 
truck. (Tr. 83) Monthly payments were $500 to 
$600, which he made until June 2007. The 
vehicle was repossessed and the debt charged 
off. (Ex. 2, Ex.3, Tr. 83, 123) He acknowledged 
owing the debt and stated that if he needed to 
pay the debt he would. (Tr. 85)  
b Loan account 120-
days past due. 
Terms required 
$287 monthly 
payments. (Tr. 124) 
$4,379 
 
Unpaid. In June 2010, Applicant obtained the 
loan while on active duty. It went past due when 
payments stopped in 2011 when he left the 
service. (Tr. 85) He plans to pay the debt. 
c Loan account 
charged-off. Terms 
required $175 
monthly payments.  
 
$2,781 
 
One payment made. (Ex. E) After leaving active 
duty, Applicant failed to make payment on the 
loan opened in August 2009. (Tr. 87, 124) 
Following the hearing he provided 
documentation he had made one $268.08 
payment. (Ex. E) He asserted that was the first 
of 12 payments settling the $3,133 debt. (Ex. A) 
   
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
d Loan account 
charged-off. 
 
$2,741 Unpaid. Applicant failed to make payment on 
the loan obtained in November 2009, after 
leaving active duty. (Tr. 87, 124) 
e Credit card account 
charged off.  
$430 Paid. Following the hearing, he paid $300 to 
settle the debt. (Ex. D) 
f Bank charged-off 
bank account.  
$113 Paid. As of the hearing, Applicant had not 
contacted the creditor. (Tr. 97) Following the 
hearing he paid $128.94. (Ex. A, E) 
g Collection for upaid 
rent.  
$4,231 Unpaid. Applicant left his apartment to take a 
job in Turkey. He was charged rent for breaking 
the lease and for damages. (Tr. 98)  
h Cable bill. 
 
 
 
$3,391 Not owed. In 2009, Applicant contacted the 
creditor. (Ex. B) He asserts he returned the 
cable company’s equipment. (Tr. 99) He asserts 
he has documentation from the cable company 
that he owes nothing. (Tr. 101) He has not 
contacted the collection agency since 2009 
regarding this debt. However, the cable 
company signed off on his paperwork when 
Applicant cleared the post. (Ex. C, Tr. 103, 129) 
i Telephone 
company collection 
account.  
$806 Paying. He has made four payments following 
the hearing. (Ex. E, H) He made payments of 
$150, $205.69, $150, and $100. (Ex. A, F, H)  
j Payday loan 
collection account. 
$656 Paying. Following the hearing, he paid $109.37 
and $218.74 on the debt. (Ex. E, F, H)  
k Insurance company 
collection account. 
$400 Paid following the hearing. (Ex. F, H) 
l Collection account $271 
 
Unpaid. Applicant asserted he had sent the 
creditor an email and was awaiting a response. 
(Tr. 112) 
m Insurance company 
collection account. 
$120 
 
Paid following the hearing. (Ex. F, H) 
  $42,288 Total debt listed in SOR 
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
7 
 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
8 
 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant had delinquent accounts 
totaling approximately $42,000. Half of the debt (SOR 1.a, $21,969) was due to the 
2007 truck repossession. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
The mitigating factors for financial considerations fail to fully mitigate the security 
concern. Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by not obtaining the job he 
anticipated after leaving the U.S. Army. The defense contractor did not receive the 
contract and, therefore, Applicant did not receive the job. When he left the Army, he had 
to repay a portion of the $12,000 reenlistment bonus he had received in 2009. After 
leaving the Army, he was unemployed one month, from August 2011 through 
September 2011. Since March 2012, he has been employed full-time with his current 
employer with an annual salary is $72,000 and receives $12,000 annually in VA 
disability benefits. From October 2013, the date of his PSI, until the hearing, ten months 
later, the only debt he had paid was by garnishment.  
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. When he left the 
Army, his allotments ended and the loans being paid by those allotments remain 
delinquent as does the 2007 truck repossession debt. Because he has multiple 
delinquent debts and his financial problems are continuing in nature, he receives 
minimal application of the mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s handling 
of his finances, under the circumstances, casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant had a short period of unemployment after leaving 
the Army. However, he has been employed full time since March 2012. Given sufficient 
opportunity to address his financial delinquencies, he has made minimal efforts at 
addressing his debts. He has failed to act timely or responsibly under the 
circumstances. He failed to resolve his debts and failed to significantly reduce his 
delinquencies. AG & 20(b) does not apply. 
 
At the date of the hearing, Applicant was currently receiving online financial 
counseling from an independent financial counselor. (Tr. 67) In August 2013, his 
employer referred him to credit counseling. At that time, he asserted he would pay off a 
good percentage of the delinquent debt if given a year’s time. He repeated this 
assertion in his October 2013 PSI. In April 2014, he again asserted that significant 
progress would be made if given the opportunity to maintain a clearance. However, as 
of the hearing, only one credit card debt was paid by garnishment. A promise of future 
performance, no matter how sincere, is insufficient to demonstrate a track record of 
meeting financial obligations. Without evidence of steps taken to implement a plan to 
resolve indebtedness, a good-faith effort cannot be substantiated. 
 
For AG & 20(c) to apply a person must have received counseling and there must 
be clear indications the problem is being resolved or is under control. Having paid 
$2,160 is not sufficient for me to find there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved. AG & 20(c) does not apply 
 
 Under AG & 20(d), Applicant has paid four of the 13 debts, made payment on an 
additional three debts, and provided documentation that he does not owe the cable 
debt. Following the hearing, he paid $2,160 on this delinquent accounts totaling more 
than $42,000. AG & 20(d) applies to the cable bill and the seven debts he had paid or is 
paying.  
 
 
10 
 
 
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) applies to the cable bill. He provided 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of this disputed account. I find for him as to 
SOR 1.h, $3,391.  
 
Applicant asserts he would like to pay his debt and would like to get his financial 
house in order. But he has failed to act aggressively, timely, or responsibly to resolve 
his delinquent debts. The remaining delinquent debts totaling more than $33,500 have 
yet to be addressed by Applicant and remain a security concern.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 provides two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in regard to falsification of Appellant’s security clearance application: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
 On Applicant’s September 2013 e-QIP, he indicated his wages had been 
garnished to pay a $5,000 delinquent account, and the obligation has been paid in full. 
However, when questioned about repossessed property, debts in default, debts turned 
over to a collection agency, accounts having been charged off, suspended or cancelled, 
or debts more than 120 days delinquent, he answered “no.” He stated he answered as 
he did because he did not understand the question and did not believe he was 120 days 
past due on any account. He was overseas at the time and did not have any financial 
documents with him. He also said he believed the September 2013 e-QIP was only an 
update and related only to debts not included on his earlier e-QIP and did not mean to 
be untruthful.  
 
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline, E, 
personal conduct, which Applicant failed to mitigate. Applicants are expected to give full 
and frank answers during the clearance process. Applicant’s failure to disclose full and 
completed information about his financial problems on his clearance application 
 
11 
 
 
 
constitutes a deliberate falsification or evasiveness inconsistent with the candor 
required of applicants.  
 
 Applicant had started financial counseling the prior month and should have been 
very aware of his current finances. Even if he did not know how delinquent his accounts 
were he knew he had three loans taken out while he was in the Army that remained 
unpaid and he would certainly have been aware of the repossession of his truck. 
However, he chose to list a single delinquent account that had been paid.  
 
The Government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose adverse information in 
a timely fashion, not when it is perceived to be personally advantageous or convenient. 
Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information about himself provides 
some indication of his willingness to report inadvertent violations or other concerns in 
the future, something the government relies on to perform damage assessments and 
limit the compromise of sensitive information. Applicant’s conduct suggests a 
willingness to put personal needs ahead of legitimate government interests. I resolve 
Guideline E against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is some evidence in favor of 
mitigating Applicant’s conduct. After a lengthy period of inaction during which he did not 
address his past delinquent accounts, after the hearing, he paid $2,160 on his 
delinquent accounts.  
 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant either had no ability or no intention of paying his delinquent accounts. His 
long-standing failure to repay his creditors, at least in reasonable amounts, or to 
 
12 
 
 
 
arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. 
 
The concept of “meaningful track record” includes evidence of actual debt 
reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required to establish 
that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is for him 
to demonstrate he has established a plan to resolve his delinquent debt and has taken 
significant action to implement that plan. I must reasonably consider the entirety of 
Applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that plan 
is credible and realistic. There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all 
outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan may provide for payment 
on such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts 
actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all Applicant’s debts have been paid – they have 
not – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a 
security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Applicant would like to pay his delinquent debt, 
but has made only minimal payments. He has $8,000 in the bank, but does not wish to 
use that money to address his delinquent debts because he may need that money for 
living expenses should he not obtain a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations and personal conduct.  
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
warranted. Should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance 
with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, he may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. However, a clearance at 
this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f: For Applicant 
 
13 
 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h – 1.k:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.l:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
   
 
