 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 14-01575   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
December 11, 2014 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant accumulated approximately 26 delinquent debts totaling $16,168. 
Applicant failed to address any of his delinquencies. Resulting security concerns were 
not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On November 25, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SF-86). On June 5, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the 
DOD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 2, 2014, and requested that his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. (Item 3.) 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on September 8, 2014. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was 
provided to Applicant on September 10, 2014, and he was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM.  
 
 Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM 
on September 19, 2014, and timely returned the receipt to the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). He did not provide additional information in response to 
the FORM within the 30-day period. DOHA assigned the case to me on November 20, 
2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 26 years old. He has worked for a Government contractor since 
October 2013. He is a high school graduate. He is single and reported no children. (Item 
6.)  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant owes approximately $16,168 in delinquent debt to 26 
creditors. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.n, 1.p, 1.r though 1.y and denied the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.o, 1.q, and 1.z, with little 
explanation. (Item 3.) His debts are found in the credit report dated January 1, 2014. 
(Item 5.) After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, and exhibits I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Every entry on Applicant’s January 2014 credit report is a collection account and 
corresponds with a delinquent account alleged in ¶¶ 1.a through 1.z of the SOR. 
Applicant indicated that his debts were attributable to a period of unemployment, low 
paying jobs, and to a move out of state. (Item 4; Item 6.) He was unemployed from 
August 2013 to October 2013, March 2013 to July 2013, April to May 2012, and 
February 2009 to March 2011. (Item 4.)  
 
 Fifteen of Applicant’s debts (¶¶ 1.c through 1.n, 1.r, 1.t, and 1.v) are related to 
unpaid medical debts incurred as a result of Applicant not having medical insurance. 
Three of Applicant’s debts are for unpaid traffic tickets that have been delinquent since 
2009 (¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.w). He is also delinquent on: a cable bill (¶ 1.o); a loan from a 
jeweler (¶ 1.p and duplicated in ¶ 1.x); a security system account (¶ 1.q and duplicated 
in ¶ 1.z); an electric bill (¶ 1.s); a telephone bill (¶ 1.y.) and one other unidentified 
account (¶ 1.u.). (Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant indicated in an email that he has contacted a hospital charity to seek 
help with his medical bills. He also indicated he was going through transportation 
problems. However, he offered no further explanations or documentation regarding the 
 
 
3 
 
 
current status of his debts or his ability to repay these delinquencies. (Item 7.) He failed 
to submit evidence of financial counseling, a budget, or income statement. He submitted 
no evidence concerning the quality of his professional performance, the level of 
responsibility his duties entail, or his track record with respect to handling sensitive 
information and observation of security procedures. He provided no character 
references describing his judgment, trustworthiness, integrity, or reliability.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
 
4 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Since 2009, Applicant accumulated over $16,000 in delinquent debt that he has 
been unable or unwilling to satisfy. The evidence raises both security concerns, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debt began accumulating in 2009. He remains delinquent 
on all of the debts listed on the SOR. He did not demonstrate that future financial 
problems are unlikely to occur. His reliability and trustworthiness in managing 
delinquent debts remain a concern. The evidence does not support the application of 
AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant’s debts are due to several periods of unemployment and 
underemployment. However, he failed to provide evidence that he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances or that he has attempted to resolve his debts since becoming 
employed by a Government contractor in 2013. Some of his debts are relatively small, 
including two different $32 collections, yet they remain unsatisfied. Applicant has made 
little effort to act responsibly with respect to his debts. AG ¶ 20(b) has limited 
application.  
 
 Applicant failed to provide evidence that he participated in financial counseling or 
that he had a plan to fully resolve his debts. Further, AG ¶ 20(c) has no application as 
there are not clear indications that his delinquent debt is under control. AG ¶ 20(d) does 
not apply because Applicant failed to show he has made a good-faith effort to repay any 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve his debts. 
 
 Applicant failed to dispute any of his SOR alleged debts. AG ¶ 20(e) has no 
application.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
 
6 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 26-year-old 
employee of a defense contractor. He remains delinquent on all of the SOR-listed debts. 
He failed to establish a track record of responsibly managing his finances. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a through 1.z:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
