 As defined in Chapter 3 and Appendix 10 of DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, as amended (Regulation).1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ADP Case No. 14-02255
)
)
Applicant for Position of Trust )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by circumstances beyond her control.
She demonstrated good judgment in addressing her past-due debts. Her request for
eligibility to occupy a position of trust is granted.
Statement of the Case
On November 27, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position  for her1
job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
 Required by the Regulation, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive).2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006. These guidelines were3
published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
2
investigation, DOD adjudicators were unable to determine that it is clearly consistent
with the interests of national security to grant Applicant’s request for a position of trust.  2
On July 30, 2014, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
alleging facts which, if proven, raise trustworthiness concerns addressed through the
adjudicative guideline (AG)  for financial considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely3
responded to the SOR (Answer) and requested a hearing. The case was assigned to
me on September 30, 2014, and I convened a hearing on October 22, 2014.
Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) presented
Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 5. Applicant testified and presented Applicant’s Exhibits
(Ax.) A - H. All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing
transcript (Tr.) on November 7, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that in 2005, Applicant filed for
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection and completed a repayment plan in March 2010
(SOR 1.a); and that she owed $8,424 for 11 delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.b -
1.l). Applicant admitted, with explanations, the allegations at SOR 1.a - 1.f and 1.h - 1.l.
She denied SOR 1.g because she could not verify that it was her debt. In addition to the
facts established by Applicant’s admissions, and based on all available information, I
make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 51 years old and was hired by her current employer in March 1994.
She has been eligible for a position of trust since at least June 2003. Applicant has a
good record at work and was promoted to a supervisory position in 2012. She holds a
bachelor’s degree in business management with a minor in marketing. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr.
9, 25, 27)
Applicant was married from December 1997 until obtaining a divorce in August
2013. She has two children, ages 15 and 9. She and her husband separated in
December 2005, because he had become addicted to drugs, had lost his job, and
routinely stole money from her that would otherwise have been used for family
expenses. In 2007, Applicant’s ex-husband was ordered to pay her $147 weekly for
child support. To date, he is nearly $60,000 in arrears on that obligation. (Answer; Gx.
1; Gx. 2; Ax. H; Tr. 24, 34)
As a result of her husband’s conduct, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy
protection in 2005. The petition declared $169,000 in liabilities against $130,000 in
assets. Applicant successfully completed a wage earner’s debt repayment plan in 2010.
(Answer; Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Gx. 5; Ax. A; Tr. 36 - 39)
 Regulation, ¶ C3.6.15. 4
 Regulation, ¶ C6.1.1.1. 5
 Regulation, ¶ C8.2.1. 6
3
When she submitted her EQIP in 2012, she disclosed her Chapter 13 bankruptcy
and she listed eight new past-due medical debts she had incurred since 2010. In 2009,
Applicant underwent hip replacement surgery to correct a congenital muscular-skeletal
condition that became debilitating. She was out of work for nearly four months for the
surgery and subsequent rehabilitation. In 2010, she required emergency surgery and
was again out of work, this time for about two months. In 2011, her son required
emergency surgery and Applicant lost more time from work to care for him. Applicant
had little paid time off each year and quickly used up her paid leave after each of these
medical events. Additionally, she was only covered for about 80% of the costs of the
medical services required over this three-year period. The debts alleged at SOR 1.b - 1.l
are for medical bills she could not pay in addition to her regular living expenses (e.g.,
rent, car insurance, utilities, etc.), which have always been current. Applicant and her
family have not experienced any additional medical problems since 2011. (Answer; Gx.
1 - 4; Tr. 39 - 41, 58 - 60)
In early 2013, Applicant started contacting creditors to arrange repayment plans.
However, she was only able to make nominal payments on one of her debts, not
alleged in the SOR. However, as of the hearing, she had paid the debts alleged at SOR
1.e, 1.f, and 1.h - 1.l. She also has begun repaying the debts at SOR 1.b - 1.d through
structured repayment plans. The debt at SOR 1.g no longer appears on Applicant’s
credit report and she has been unable to find any information about that debt. (Answer;
Ax. A - G; Tr. 41 - 48)
Applicant’s current finances are sound. She estimates that she has about $250
remaining each month after expenses. Her expenses include $100 in combined monthly
payments to the SOR 1.b - 1.d creditors. Applicant has about $6,200 in retirement
savings; her car is paid for; she timely pays her rent and other regular monthly
obligations; and she has always filed and paid her income taxes on time. Applicant
volunteers in her community and at her church, and there is no indication she has ever
mishandled sensitive information at work. (Answer; Tr. 48 - 56)
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  In4
deciding whether a person should be assigned to an ADP position, it must be
determined that his or her loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that it is
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.  The Regulation also5
requires that DOD contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the
Directive before any adverse determination may be made.6
 Directive. 6.3.7
4
The Directive requires that each decision be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,7
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of eligibility for a position of trust.
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a
position of trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. A person who has
access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government
based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in
ensuring applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of
one who will protect sensitive information as his or her own. Any reasonable doubt
about an applicant’s suitability for access should be resolved in favor of the
Government.
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support all of the SOR allegations. The facts
established raise a trustworthiness concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed
at AG ¶ 18, as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
5
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations). As to AG ¶ 19(a), the record shows
Applicant has been unable, not unwilling, to repay her past-due debts.
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
and
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control.
All of these mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s bankruptcy petition was
necessitated by the deterioration of her marriage when her husband became addicted
to drugs. She successfully completed her obligations under a repayment plan. Her more
recent debts resulted from unforeseen emergency medical procedures for her and one
of her children between 2009 and 2011. She was only partially covered for those
services. Because she lost significant time from work due to her medical issues, she did
not have enough income to pay her medical bills while also supporting her family. Her
family’s medical problems are not likely to recur and Applicant has now satisfied all but
three of the debts alleged in the SOR. She also has established regular payment plans
for the other three debts. Applicant’s response to her financial problems was reasonable
given her circumstances and are reflective of good judgment. While she has not
received financial counseling, the record shows her financial problems are under
control. All of the foregoing supports application of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶
20(a) - (c). The trustworthiness concerns raised by Applicant’s financial problems are
mitigated. 
6
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant has paid or otherwise resolved her
past-due debts, which arose from circumstances that are not likely to recur. As a single-
mother receiving none of the court-ordered child support from her ex-husband,
Applicant has demonstrated sound judgment and reliability in response to her financial
problems. She is active in her community and her church, and she was candid and
forthright in response to the Government’s information. A fair and commonsense
assessment of all available information shows that the Government’s concerns about
Applicant’s trustworthiness have been satisfied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.l: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national
security for Applicant to occupy a position of trust. Applicant’s request for ADP eligibility
is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
