 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02791 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted the personal conduct security concerns, but he did not mitigate 
the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 16, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E (personal 
conduct) and F (financial considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 7, 2014, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On August 29, 2014, Department 
Counsel requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to 
me on September 23, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
 
2 
 
issued a notice of hearing on September 30, 2014, scheduling the hearing for October 
23, 2014. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through P, which were admitted without objection. The 
record was held open until November 17, 2014, for Applicant to submit additional 
information. He submitted documents that were marked AE Q through HH and admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 3, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2003. He served in the U.S. military from 1982 until he 
retired in 2003. He attends college in pursuit of a bachelor’s degree. His first marriage 
ended in divorce in 2005. He married his current wife the same year. He has an adult 
child and three minor stepchildren.1 
 
 The SOR alleges a past-due mortgage loan with a $129,506 balance (SOR ¶ 
1.k), four unpaid judgments (SOR ¶ 1.a - $1,241; SOR ¶ 1.b - $14,793; SOR ¶ 1.c - 
$9,123; and SOR ¶ 1.p - $141), the underlying debts of $12,415 (SOR ¶ 1.l) and $1,347 
(SOR ¶ 1.r) that resulted in two of the judgments, and 25 additional delinquent debts. 
The judgments and debts were all listed on at least one credit report.  
 
 Applicant stated that he was unaware of the extent of his financial problems 
because his ex-wife and his current wife handled the family’s finances. He also 
indicated that he had additional expenses when some of his in-laws came to live with 
him and his wife.2 The alleged debts are discussed below. 
 
 Applicant had a bank credit card that was opened in 2004. He stopped paying 
the account in 2006. The bank charged off $1,241 in 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.r). The bank 
obtained a $1,241 judgment against Applicant in 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.a.). When he was 
interviewed for his background investigation in March 2013, Applicant stated he had no 
knowledge of the debt or the judgment. He stated that he would research the debt, and 
if it was determined to be his debt, he would pay it by the end of the year. In his 
response to the SOR, Applicant indicated that the bank agreed to settle the debt for 
$741, payable through six automatic monthly debits of $123, starting on August 25, 
2014. Applicant established that he made payments of $123 on August 25, 2014, and 
$101 on October 27, 2014. He did not indicate why there was no September payment.3 
 
 Applicant bought a vehicle in 2005 that was financed through a loan. His credit 
reports indicate the high balance on the loan was $25,798, with monthly payments of 
$529 for 73 months. Applicant stated that it was a used vehicle that developed 
mechanical problems after the one-year warranty expired. He did not want to pay for a 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 12-13, 25, 28-33; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 25, 28-32, 52-53, 55-56, 67; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 46-48; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4; AE C, Q, R. 
 
3 
 
vehicle with mechanical problems, and he voluntarily returned the vehicle. The finance 
company charged off $12,415 in 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.l) and obtained a judgment of $14,793 
against Applicant in 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.b). Applicant stated that he never received notice 
that there was a deficiency owed or a judgment against him. He indicated that he was in 
the process of contacting the law firm handling the judgment and he would make 
arrangements to satisfy the debt.4 
 
 Applicant took out a loan to buy an above-ground pool at his house. The loan 
became delinquent, and the creditor obtained a $9,123 judgment against Applicant in 
2009 (SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant indicated the judgment was paid when he refinanced the 
mortgage loan on his house. The February 2013 credit report indicated that his 
mortgage loan was $27,502 past due with a balance of $102,693. When he was 
interviewed for his background investigation in March 2013, Applicant stated that he did 
not recognize the mortgage loan. His March 2014 credit report indicated a mortgage 
loan to the same bank that was $4,752 past due with a balance of $129,506 (SOR ¶ 
1.k).5  
 
 Applicant indicated that he refinanced his mortgage loan, but he was unsure 
what financial institution had the original mortgage loan or who did the refinancing. He 
wrote in his response to the SOR that the mortgage loan was refinanced in June 2014. 
In a post-hearing exhibit, he wrote about the judgment: “Yes I did fall behind, but I 
caught the payments up and continued to make up to date payments until I refinanced 
my home in 2013.” He testified that the payment for the judgment was reflected on the 
settlement documents for the refinanced mortgage loan. He did not provide a copy of 
the settlement documents. He submitted a copy of his mortgage loan account statement 
dated October 16, 2014. The principal balance of the loan was listed as $129,506. 
Applicant stated the refinanced mortgage loan is up to date, but the statement shows no 
payment in the month since the last statement and $952 paid year to date.6 
 
 A judgment of $141 was obtained against Applicant in 2008 for unpaid dental 
services. Applicant stated that he was unaware of the debt and the judgment until he 
was interviewed for his background investigation in March 2013. At that time he stated 
he would look into the judgment and pay it by the end of the year if it was his debt. He 
paid the judgment in November 2014.7 
 
 Applicant paid the $101 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h in September 2014. He paid 
the $65 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.ff in August 2014.8 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 35-39, 51, 67-68; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4; AE Q. 
 
5 Tr. at 52-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4; AE Q. 
 
6 Tr. at 42-45, 52-53, 65-66; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4; AE Q, S. 
 
7 Tr. at 72-73; GE 2-4; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE Q, X. 
 
8 Tr. at 60; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE E, P, Q, GG. 
 
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.q alleges a delinquent debt of $3,032 owed to a bank. Applicant told the 
background investigator in March 2013 that he had no knowledge of the debt, but he 
would research it and pay the debt that year if it was his. Applicant and the bank agreed 
to settle the debt through six monthly payments. The first payment of $272 was made in 
October 2014.9 
 
 Applicant and his wife have a joint checking account. At least eight of the debts in 
the SOR were for checks written between 2008 and 2013 that were returned to the 
creditors for nonsufficient funds (SOR ¶¶ 1.e - $285 to supermarket; 1.g - $208 to 
pharmacy; 1.i - $145 to hair salon; 1.j - $73 to hair salon; 1.o - $40 to school lunch 
program; 1.cc - $80 to school lunch program; 1.dd - $76 to U.S. Postal Service; and 
1.ee - $66 to school lunch program). Some of the checks were written by Applicant’s 
wife. Applicant was questioned about many of the returned checks in March 2013. He 
stated that he would research them and pay them by the end of the year if they were his 
debts. He provided documentation that he paid seven of the returned checks in August 
and September 2014. He stated that the remaining returned check (SOR ¶ 1.g) was 
paid, but he did not provide any documentation.10 
 
 Applicant denied owing the remaining debts. SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($600), 1.f ($1,228), 
1.m ($4,434), and 1.n ($1,933) allege delinquent debts owed to telecommunications 
companies and cable television providers. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f 
have been deleted from Applicant’s credit report after a dispute. The debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.m, and 1.n are listed on the most recent credit report. There is no evidence 
that they have been deleted.11 In his SOR response, Applicant wrote about the $4,434 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.m:  
 
Upon contacting [creditor], they stated that this amount was for early 
termination fees for multiple lines of service. They have agreed to set up a 
payment plan on the balance. They are sending a proposed arrangement 
for review to settle the debt. 
 
He later wrote: 
 
I am unaware of this debt. I am checking into this to verify. I currently have 
[an account with the same company]; they have not indicated to me that I 
owe anything. [Creditor] states that this debt is for early termination fees, 
awaiting statement of record from [creditor].12 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.t, 1.u, 1.x, 1.y, 1.aa, and 1.bb were deleted from 
Applicant’s credit report after a dispute. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.s, 1.v, and 1.w 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 73-74; GE 2-4; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE H, Q, Y. 
 
10 Tr. at 55-65, 70-71, 74, 77-78; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2-4; AE D, F, G, M-O, Q, T, V, W, DD-
FF, HH. 
 
11 Tr. at 54-55, 58, 68-70; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4; AE B, Q. 
 
12 AE Q. 
 
5 
 
were listed on the February 2013 credit report. They were not listed on the March 2014 
credit report.13 
 
 Applicant stated that he is committed to addressing his delinquent debts. He still 
has a joint checking account with his wife. He is attempting to take control of the family’s 
finances, but he admitted that it was “way overwhelming,” and that he did not “have it 
fully grasped as of yet.”14 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
January 2013. Under the financial questions, he listed his repossessed vehicle and a 
$350 credit card debt that he stated was delinquent at one point, but had been paid. He 
did not list any additional delinquent debts.15  
 
 Applicant denied intentionally falsifying the SF 86. He stated that he was 
unaware of the extent of his financial problems.16 Having considered all the evidence, I 
find that he did not intentionally falsify the SF 86.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
                                                          
13 Tr. at 63, 74-77; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4; AE B, I-L, Q, Z, AA, BB. 
 
14 Tr. at 26, 56, 63-64, 81; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A, Q. 
 
15 GE 1. 
 
16 Tr. at 79-80; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE Q. 
 
6 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
  The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
  AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
  Applicant did not intentionally provide false information on his SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) 
is not applicable. SOR ¶ 2.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling to pay his 
financial obligations. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.r and 1.l are the underlying debts that resulted in 
the judgments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. When the same conduct is alleged twice 
in the SOR under the same guideline, one of the duplicative allegations should be 
resolved in Applicant’s favor. See ISCR Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 
3 (same debt alleged twice). SOR ¶¶ 1.r and 1.l are concluded for Applicant. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
8 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant’s finances have been in disarray for several years. He completely 
abrogated his financial responsibilities. It is not unusual for one spouse to handle the 
family’s finances, but Applicant’s apathetic attitude went far beyond the norm. There 
were numerous bad checks written, including three to a school lunch program. Applicant 
was asked about his delinquent debts during his background interview in March 2013. 
Despite his statement to the investigator that he would research the debts and pay them 
by the end of the year, minimal action was taken before the SOR was issued in July 
2014. 
 
  Applicant receives mitigation credit for paying three debts and seven of the 
returned checks. He was given time to provide documentation that the remaining 
returned check was paid, but he failed to do so. He has payment plans for two debts, 
but he only proved that he made one payment for one debt, and he made August and 
October payments on the other debt. A number of debts were deleted from Applicant’s 
credit report. Because Applicant has no real idea what he owes, I am not convinced 
those debts were removed because they were not Applicant’s responsibility. 
Nonetheless, I am giving Applicant the benefit of the doubt, and I am resolving the paid 
debts, deleted debts, debts in payment plans, and the mortgage loan in Applicant’s 
favor. 
 
  Judgments for $14,793 (SOR ¶ 1.b) and $9,123 (SOR ¶ 1.d) were awarded 
against Applicant in 2009. Applicant has not made any payments toward the $14,793 
judgment. He stated that the $9,123 judgment was paid when he refinanced his 
mortgage loan. He gave inconsistent statements as to when the refinancing occurred: 
2013 and June 2014. If the judgment was paid through refinancing, a settlement 
document would reflect that payment. Applicant did not submit a settlement document. 
The mortgage statement he submitted does not support his position. The returned 
check to the pharmacy (SOR ¶ 1.g) and two of the debts owed to telecommunications 
companies (SOR ¶¶ 1.m and 1.n) are also unresolved. 
 
  Applicant has not convinced me that he has taken control of his finances. He still 
has a joint checking account with his wife. He admitted that his finances were “way 
overwhelming,” and that he did not “have it fully grasped as of yet.” 
 
  There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s financial 
problems will be resolved within a reasonable period. I am unable to find that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith effort to pay his 
debts. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Mitigation is only available for the 
paid debts, deleted debts, debts in payment plans, and the mortgage loan. None of the 
mitigating conditions are applicable to the remaining debts.  
 
 
9 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s honorable military service and his stable work history. 
However, Applicant’s finances have been in shambles for several years. He has taken 
some steps toward remedying his financial problems, but he still has far to go. He could 
not state with certainty who held his mortgage, when it was financed, and who did the 
refinancing. He also stated debts were paid, but despite being given time to do so, he 
failed to submit corroborating documents.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
the personal conduct security concerns, but he did not mitigate the financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.f:   For Applicant 
 
10 
 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.l:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.m-1.n:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.o-1.pp:   For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
