1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-01335
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised by multiple past-due debts. His
personal finances are improved, and he acted reasonably in response to the financial
problems caused by circumstances beyond his control. His past-due debts do not
indicate poor judgment or a lack of trustworthiness, and he is not likely to incur new
debts or other financial problems in the future. His request for a security clearance is
granted.
Statement of the Case
On January 31, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for a security clearance
required for his work as a defense contractor. Based on the results of the ensuing
background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not
  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.1
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These2
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
2
determine that it was clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to hold a
security clearance.1
On June 9, 2014, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts which raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guideline  for2
financial considerations (Guideline F). Applicant timely responded to the SOR (Answer)
and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on September 29, 2014 and I convened a hearing
on October 22, 2014. Department Counsel presented Government Exhibits (Gx.) 1 - 4.
Applicant testified and presented Applicant’s Exhibits (Ax.) A - C. I left the record open
after the hearing to afford Applicant time to submit additional relevant information. The
record closed on October 28, 2014, when I received information that has been included
in the record as Ax. D. All exhibits were admitted without objection. DOHA received the
hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 7, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $643 for unpaid
state income taxes, and that the debt was being enforced through a tax lien against
Applicant that was filed in November 2010 (SOR 1.a). SOR 1.a is resolved for the
Applicant. The Government further alleged that Applicant owed $35,815 for two past-
due mortgage debts (SOR 1.b and 1.c). Applicant denied SOR 1.a and provided
documentation showing that the state tax lien has been released. He admitted the other
SOR allegations, with explanations. In addition to the facts established by his
admissions, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 55 years old and works for a defense contractor as a voice-over-
internet-protocol (VOIP) technician. He has an excellent reputation in the workplace for
reliability and adherence to his security responsibilities. (Gx. 1; Ax. C)
Applicant served in the U.S. Army from November 1982 until being honorably
discharged in October 1989. In the Army, he was trained and assigned as a
telecommunications specialist in the Signal Corps. After leaving the military, he worked
for an electrical company until 1999. Thereafter, he worked as a senior technician with a
national telecommunications company. He was laid off due to declining business in
March 2009. (Gx. 1; Tr. 55)
Applicant was hired for his current position in November 2012. After being laid off
in 2009, he was unemployed for 18 months before working in a series of short-term
temporary positions. Most of his jobs between 2009 and 2012 lasted for about three or
 See Directive. 6.3.3
3
four months. He was also unemployed between February and April 2011, and between
September and November 2011. Applicant relied on savings and unemployment
benefits between April 2009 and October 2010. His salary between then and November
2012 averaged between $12 and $16 per hour. He had no employer-sponsored medical
or other benefits during that period. In his current job, he earns about $65,000 annually
and has medical benefits for his family.
Applicant and his wife have been married since November 1997. They still live in
a house they bought in 2001, and they have two children, ages seven and eight. Both
children were under three years of age when Applicant was laid off in 2009. He is the
sole income earner and his wife is a stay-at-home mother. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 58)
Applicant did not timely pay his 2009 state income taxes (SOR 1.a) because he
had been laid off and did not have enough money to meet that obligation. However, he
has always filed his income tax returns on time and he has otherwise been able to pay
all of his taxes as required. After Applicant exhausted his savings in 2010, he also was
unable to stay current on a second mortgage (SOR 1.b) and a home equity loan (SOR
1.c). 
In 2010, Applicant contacted all of his creditors to negotiate settlements or
repayment agreements. The terms they demanded at the time were beyond his ability to
pay. However, after he was hired for his current job in 2012, he was able to repay his
tax lien and to establish a repayment agreement with the law firm that was collecting the
SOR 1.b debt. In 2014, Applicant was able to withdraw about $11,000 from a pension
account he had with the electrical company where he worked until 1999. He used most
of that money to settle the SOR 1.b debt, which he paid off in October 2014. Applicant
also has established a repayment plan with the creditor that now holds the SOR 1.c
debt. He anticipates he will also be able to settle that debt as well. (Answer; Ax. B; Ax.
D; Tr. 59 - 60)
Applicant’s current finances are sound. Although he has a modest monthly cash
flow of less than $200, he has accrued no new delinquent debt; he is current on two
used car loans; and he is meeting all of his regular obligations. Applicant is still the sole
income earner for his family.
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,3
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a)
of the guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors
are:
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.5
 See Egan; AG ¶ 2(b).6
4
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to4
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  5
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
Government.6
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information is sufficient to support all of the SOR allegations. The facts
established raise a security concern about Applicant’s finances that is addressed at AG
¶ 18, as follows:
5
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive
gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of
income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations). As to AG ¶ 19(a), the record shows
Applicant has been unable, not unwilling, to repay his past-due debts.
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s financial problems arose when he was laid off in 2009 and was
unemployed for 18 months thereafter. During that time, he acted reasonably by making
sure he could keep the home he and wis wife had purchased in 2001. He was the sole
income earner because his wife had to stay home and care for their two young children.
Applicant sporadically found work between 2010 and 2012, but his wages were too low
to enable him to keep up with all of his obligations and resolve his past-due debts. Once
he started consistently earning a better wage in 2012, he was able to resolve his state
tax debt. In 2013, he became eligible to receive pension money from a past employer.
He used that to resolve one of his mortgage debts. He has since established a
repayment plan for the other mortgage debt. Applicant’s current finances are sound and
he is meeting all of his current monthly obligations. 
6
All of the foregoing supports application of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶¶
20(a) - (d). I conclude that available information is sufficient to mitigate the security
concerns raised by Applicant’s financial problems.
Whole-Person Concept
I have evaluated the facts and have applied the appropriate adjudicative factors
under Guideline F. I also have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 55 years old and presumed to be a
mature, responsible adult. Despite unexpected financial difficulties that arose through
no fault of his own, Applicant has been able to resolve the debts alleged in the SOR. His
financial problems did not arise through any misconduct or from poor financial
management. When he was once again employed full time, he corrected most of his
past-due financial obligations. His finances are sound because he exhibited good
judgment and reliability in fulfilling his responsibilities. A fair and commonsense
assessment of all available information shows that Applicant’s finances no longer
present an unacceptable security risk.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security
clearance is granted.
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
