1  
 
   
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
) ISCR Case No. 14-00998 
) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Robin L. Munson, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was fired from his previous defense contractor employment for violating 
security procedures involving an information system and for not being upfront about his 
conduct during his employer’s investigation of the incident. Applicant has an otherwise 
unblemished record of handling classified information, but his claim of an accidental 
breach is not persuasive in light of his inconsistent accounts of the incident and other 
contradictory evidence. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On  June  13,  2014,  the  Department  of  Defense  Consolidated  Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the 
security concerns under Guideline K (Handling Protected Information), Guideline M 
(Use of Information Technology Systems), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and 
explaining why it was unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for him. The DOD CAF took the action under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
2  
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on June 28, 2014. He requested a 
hearing before a Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge. 
The case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him. On 
August 25, 2014, I scheduled a hearing for September 18, 2014. On September 5, 
2014, counsel for Applicant entered her appearance. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Four Government exhibits (GEs 1-4) and 
eight Applicant exhibits (AEs A-H) were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant also testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on September 30, 
2014. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
The SOR alleges under Guideline K (SOR 1.a and 1.b), and cross-alleges under 
Guideline M (SOR 2.a) and Guideline E (SOR 3.a), that Applicant knowingly and 
intentionally: 
 
• Plugged a USB drive, which was classified Secret, into an unclassified 
laptop on January 24, 2011 (SOR 1.a); and 
 
• Used a classified computer, logged in by a co-worker, to transfer classified 
files from the Secret USB drive (SOR 1.b). 
 
Additionally, under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly refused to cooperate during his then 
employer’s investigation into the security violations (SOR 3.b); was terminated by that 
employer on March  4, 2011 for the deliberate misconduct set forth in SOR 1.a and 1.b 
(SOR 3.c); and falsified material facts on his February 2013 Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (QNSP) in that while he reported his employment termination for the 
incident involving the use of the classified USB drive in the unclassified laptop, he did 
not disclose the use of a then co-worker’s classified computer to transfer classified files 
from the Secret USB drive (SOR 3.d). 
 
When he answered the SOR allegations, Applicant indicated that due to fatigue, 
acute sinus pain, and the usual workplace distractions, he accidentally plugged the 
Secret USB drive into an unclassified computer. He denied any inference that his 
conduct was knowing or willful. Applicant denied that he used a co-worker’s computer to 
transfer the classified information from the USB drive. A team member, who was 
appropriately logged in and held the requisite security clearance, made the physical 
transfer, which Applicant reviewed to ensure it had been done correctly, as was his 
responsibility. Applicant also strongly denied that he was uncooperative during his then 
3  
employer’s investigation into the incident. He attended every meeting requested by 
security personnel or management and “[he] answered all questions honestly and 
thoroughly, to the best of [his] ability.” Applicant also indicated that he had not acted to 
conceal his error in that he reported the incident immediately to the employee 
responsible for the security of the secure information technology system. Furthermore, 
Applicant opined that his termination was not justified, as evidenced by his receipt of 
unemployment compensation and the company’s noncompliance with its published 
discipline procedures, which specified no more than a written reprimand for a first 
security  incident.  About  his  alleged  failure  to  disclose  on  his  QNSP  the  incident 
involving the transfer of classified material from the Secret USB drive, Applicant stated 
in part: 
 
I  deny  the  accusation  that  I  deliberately  failed  to  disclose  a  second 
violation but may have unintentionally omitted it because of its relatively 
low importance. I always considered it to be part of the same incident, as it 
happened at the same time and location in an effort to complete the same 
task. What is being referred to as the second security incident was also 
addressed in a letter of 08.08.11 that my attorney sent to [name omitted], 
of the Defense Security Service, in a voluntary attempt to keep the 
Department of Defense informed. 
 
I also did not interpret the instructions to this particular question to mean 
that the entire event needed to be reiterated in detail as part of the reply, 
since it was clearly marked as an “optional” comment section. 
 
Furthermore, I chose to focus on the incident with the USB drive, because 
Raytheon security people told me that they considered the use of a 
classified computer logged on to by another employee to be minor in 
comparison. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 64 years old and is currently employed as a senior principal design 
engineer  with  a  defense  contractor.  He  holds  a  master’s  degree  in  electrical 
engineering, which was awarded to him in June 1984. (GE 1.) 
 
Applicant had ten or more years of employment in the defense industry with a 
DOD security clearance before June 1, 1999, when he was hired as a principal engineer 
by  defense  contractor  X.  (GE  2;  AE  G.)  On  June  3,  1999,  Applicant  executed  a 
classified information nondisclosure agreement, agreeing not to divulge classified 
information to unauthorized persons with termination of any security clearance or 
employment as possible penalties for any breach. (GE 2; AE G.) Applicant’s Secret 
security clearance eligibility was renewed on November 15, 2003. (GE 4.) 
4  
 
Around June 2005, Applicant was promoted to the position of senior principal 
electrical engineer. By late 2010, Applicant was earning a bi-weekly salary of $5,528. 
Applicant held security clearance eligibility to the Secret level throughout his tenure at 
company X, and he had been periodically briefed about his security responsibilities by 
his employer, which included briefings on the company’s Classification Information 
Systems Security policy. (GE 2; AE G.) 
 
On  November  18,  2010,  company  X  issued  a  security  violation  alert  to 
employees after an engineer with 19 years of experience conducted an unauthorized 
and improper trusted download using a personal thumb drive, which resulted in a 
potential contamination of the company’s unclassified network.1  Employees were 
specifically advised to never use personal media on any company X system, classified 
or unclassified; to not rush in fulfilling their duties, and to be clear on the classification 
level of the systems in their laboratory. Furthermore, they were reminded that trusted 
downloads may be accomplished only by trained personnel with written authorization, 
and that those employees with clearances are responsible to understand and follow 
security procedures and to ask questions if unclear about proper security. The 
notification also stated: 
 
Classification markings on documents, media, and hardware serve to 
provide notice to all that the item is classified and requires approved 
safeguarding procedures. Regardless of the reason, failure to take notice 
of these markings and follow proper procedures puts National Security 
Information at risk. 
 
If you work in a hardware lab within a closed area, you need to be 
knowledgeable  about  the  equipment  in  use,  its  classification,  and 
permitted operations outlined in the System Security Plan (SSP). The SSP 
also identifies specific procedures related to the information system 
including the authority to perform a trusted download and the use of 
encrypted or unencrypted thumb drive. (GE 2.) 
 
On January 24, 2011, Applicant was the lead engineer directing the activities of 
two engineers involved in testing components and then verifying specifications of a 
classified system.  (AE G.) The work required coordination with an integration group 
during third shift in a closed, secure area at a facility separate from Applicant’s primary 
duty location. Applicant arrived at the testing site around 2:30 a.m. after working long 
hours the previous day. (AE B; Tr. 38-43, 51.) Applicant and his co-workers were in the 
final stage of a project and under time pressure. (Tr. 138.) A few hours later, Applicant 
needed to transfer classified information from a classified information systems network 
(source IS network) at the testing site to a classified IS network (destination IS network) 
at another company facility. The source IS network was accessed through a classified 
 
 
1 The engineer was re-briefed by company X security, but there is no evidence of other disciplinary action 
taken, even though the engineer initially denied that he had connected his personal thumb drive to an 
unclassified system. (GE 2.) 
5  
desktop computer (PC #1). Classified data had to pass through a classified gateway 
network (gateway IS network), which was accessed through a classified desktop 
computer (PC #2) at the test site. Applicant was authorized to access the source IS and 
destination IS networks but not the gateway IS network, although he had requested 
authorization, which he expected to be routine. (Tr. 54-56.) An engineer (engineer A) on 
his team at the test site was authorized to access the gateway IS network and PC #2. 
(Tr. 56.) Whereas the source and gateway networks were not linked, the data from the 
source IS network had to be transferred by copying the data onto a classified USB drive 
using PC #1 and then copying the data from the classified thumb drive to the gateway 
IS network using PC #2. (AE C.) 
 
Audit logs of the source IS network and PC #1 show that PC #1 was logged in 
under the credentials of engineer A when, on January 24, 2011, classified files were 
transferred from the source IS network to a Secret USB thumb drive2 via PC #1 (SOR 
1.b). (GE 4.) Applicant claims he directed engineer A to transfer the data using PC #1. 
(Tr. 57.) Engineer A discrepantly told company X that he may have neglected to lock PC 
#1 while repeatedly entering and exiting the closed area to run tests, but he denied that 
he transferred any files for Applicant or that he worked side-by-side with Applicant on 
January 24, 2011. (GE 4.) 
 
While awaiting authorization to access PC #2 and the gateway IS network, 
Applicant inserted the Secret thumb drive into his unclassified laptop computer, which 
was connected to the company’s unclassified network (SOR 1.a). (GEs 1-4.) Company 
X engineers were authorized to bring employer-issued, unclassified laptops into the 
closed area to access email messages and work on documents. (Tr. 41.) However, the 
National Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM) and company X’s 
security  procedures  prohibit  the  introduction  of  a  classified  thumb  drive  into  an 
unclassified laptop computer.3 
 
 
 
 
2  The  thumb  drive  was  classified  Secret  with  the  additional  caveat  of  No  Foreign  Dissemination 
(NOFORN). (GE 3.) 
 
3 Under ¶ 8-105 of the NISPOM, all users of a classified information security system are required to 
comply with the IS security program requirements; be aware of and knowledgeable about their 
responsibilities in regard to IS security; be accountable for their actions on an IS; ensure that any 
authentication mechanisms, including passwords, issued for the control of their access to an IS are not 
shared and are protected at the highest classification level and most restrictive classification category of 
information to which they permit access; and acknowledge, in writing, their responsibilities for the 
protection of the IS and classified information. Company X implemented the requirements of the NISPOM 
through published security standards. (See GE 2; AEs G, H.) Company security policy effective June 2, 
2003, stated in part: 
 
Only an IS specifically approved by the local Information Systems Security Manager 
(ISSM) and, as required, the government Cognizant Security Authority (CSA), will be 
used to process classified information. It is a violation of [company X] policy and 
government security regulations to process classified information on an IS that has not 
been specifically approved for processing classified information. (GE 2.) 
6 
The classified USB drive was conspicuously marked as Secret by means of an  
 
attached 3” x 7” red tag.4 An engineer with the integrations group (engineer B) noticed 
the Secret USB thumb drive in Applicant’s unclassified laptop. Engineer B observed 
Applicant to be working on a document on his unclassified laptop while the Secret 
thumb drive was plugged in. Engineer B removed the classified thumb drive from 
Applicant’s unclassified laptop and confronted Applicant about his reason for improperly 
inserting a classified drive in his unclassified laptop. Applicant stated to engineer B that 
he planned on copying a file from his computer onto the Secret USB thumb drive to 
transfer the file to a Secret PC on the classified source IS network. Engineer B took 
possession of the classified thumb drive and advised Applicant that he would be 
reporting the security incident to security. Engineer B notified the onsite Information 
Systems Security Officer (ISSO) of the incident as soon as he could find the ISSO. At 
the ISSO’s direction, engineer B then unplugged Applicant’s laptop from the unclassified 
network and secured the Secret USB thumb drive in a safe. (GE 4; AE D.) Applicant 
asserts that he notified the ISSO first (“I talked to him very briefly in the aisle, as I found 
him.”), and that he and the ISSO then discussed the incident for 35 or 45 minutes in the 
ISSO’s office. (Tr. 128.) The ISSO advised Applicant to stay off the IS network. (GE 4.) 
 
Company X’s Information Security Manager (ISSM) learned of the incident on 
January 24, 2011, from the ISSO. The ISSM asked Applicant to explain his conduct, 
and in a written statement given to the ISSM, he stated in part: 
 
• With authorized assistance, I was using the [Secret USB] thumb 
drive to make a file transfer between the [source IS network] and 
the [gateway IS network] when I accidentally plugged the thumb 
drive into my laptop USB port. 
 
• This was noticed simultaneously by myself and co-worker [engineer 
B]. 
 
• The USB thumb drive remained in the port for about 20 to 25 
seconds before it was noticed and removed. 
 
• No files on the thumb drive were accessed or opened, and no files 
were transferred in either direction. 
 
(GE 4; AEs E, F.) Applicant also met with a company X Industrial Security Specialist 
(ISS) at the ISS’ request on January 24, 2011, to discuss the incident. Applicant claims 
that the ISS thought there was no cause for alarm and that she was ready to close the 
investigation. (AE B; Tr. 81-82.) 
 
On January 26, 2011, a company engineer with a Top Secret clearance cleared 
files from all classified USB drives used by the program to transfer data between IS 
networks. (GE 4.) On January 27, 2011, engineer B provided a written statement to 
 
 
4 Applicant testified at his security clearance hearing that the tag was on a long string. (Tr. 70.) 
7 
company X, reporting that Applicant “was working on a document on his work laptop”  
 
while  the  classified  USB  drive  was  plugged  into  Applicant’s  unclassified  laptop 
computer. (GE 2; AE D.) Company X security investigators understood engineer B to 
mean that Applicant had been typing on his laptop at the time. (GE 4.) On January 28, 
2011, Applicant met with the facility security officer (FSO) to discuss engineer B’s 
statement. (AE B.) When asked about the discrepancy between his and engineer B’s 
versions, Applicant stated that engineer B was lying if his account differed. Due to the 
conflicting versions provided by Applicant and engineer B about the incident, company 
X’s facility security officer (FSO) confiscated Applicant’s unclassified laptop. A forensic 
search of the laptop did not reveal any suspicious activity. The ISSM took the USB 
thumb drive involved in the incident and stored it in the ISSO’s container. Recovery 
software was used on a classified laptop to recover the files that had been deleted on 
January 26 in accord with standard practice, but analysis of the data was inconclusive 
about the files on the USB drive when it was plugged into Applicant’s unclassified 
laptop. (GE 4.) 
 
During a February 9, 2011 meeting with company X’s ISS, Applicant explained 
that he was “very groggy” and in an “extreme fog” on January 24, 2011, and that he had 
taken a double dose of over-the-counter allergy medication before reporting to the 
testing site that day. He denied that he had entered any keystrokes on his laptop while 
the classified thumb drive was inserted. Applicant indicated that he was not thinking 
when he inserted the classified thumb drive in his laptop, and he did not know why he 
did it. (GE 4.) 
 
Applicant met with the ISS and the ISSM on February 10, 2011, to explain the 
factors (fatigue, a “severe and painful sinus attack”) that he believed contributed to the 
incident. Additionally, he indicated that while waiting for assistance to access the 
gateway IS network, he wanted to check unclassified work on his laptop. He again 
denied  that  any  computer  keys  were  struck  while  the  classified  USB  drive  was 
connected to his laptop. Applicant stated in part, “Although [engineer B] and I realized 
the situation virtually simultaneously, [engineer B] removed the USB drive as I was 
simultaneously reaching to remove it as well.” (GE 4; AE F.) 
 
On February 14, 2011, Applicant accompanied company X security personnel to 
the closed area and demonstrated that he accessed the source IS network via PC #1 on 
January 24, 2011 before going to his unclassified laptop. Applicant was asked directly if 
he intentionally inserted the classified USB drive in his unclassified laptop,  and he 
stated that he had not. The ISSM then checked the audit logs for PC #1 on January 24, 
2011, which indicated that the computer had been logged in under the credentials of 
engineer A during the time the incident occurred. (GE 4.) 
 
Applicant  met  with  company  X  security  personnel  on  February  21,  2011. 
Applicant indicated that he had inserted the classified USB drive into his laptop after he 
had moved files from the classified source IS network via PC #1. On being told that 
audit logs showed that he had not logged onto   PC #1, Applicant responded that he 
thought he had accessed PC #1,  but it was possible that he used engineer A’s account 
8 
 
 
on the source IS network to move the classified files to the USB drive for transfer to the 
gateway IS network.5 (GE 4.) 
 
On February 22, 2011, engineer A indicated to company X security personnel 
that he did not transfer files for Applicant on January 24, 2011, although he may have 
neglected to lock PC #1 on that date while running tests. (GE 4.) On February 24, 2011, 
the company removed Applicant’s access to the source IS network. (GE 4; AE B.) 
 
On March 2, 2011, company X reported its findings about the incident to the 
Defense Security Service (DSS). The company concluded that Applicant knowingly 
plugged the classified USB drive into his unclassified laptop to transfer files to a 
classified network and that his action placed the classified files contained on the USB 
drive  at  risk  for  compromise.  Applicant’s  laptop  was  connected  to  the  company’s 
network when the classified USB drive was inserted, so classified information was not 
adequately protected from approximately 4:00 a.m. on January 24, 2011, until clean-up 
actions were completed by the ISSM on January 25, 2011. A loss of classified 
information was presumed as files were stored and handled improperly when the Secret 
USB drive was plugged into Applicant’s unclassified computer system, which was 
connected to an unclassified network. The company also expressed its belief that 
Applicant committed a second security violation by using PC #1 while it was logged onto 
by engineer A. Furthermore, the company concluded that misleading statements by 
Applicant at the beginning of the investigation into the incident caused the deletion of 
evidence during the cleanup process. Company X informed the DSS it was 
contemplating terminating Applicant from his employment “for knowingly committing a 
security violation and repeatedly covering up his actions.”6 (GE 4.) 
 
On March 16, 2011, Applicant was terminated for cause from company X. (GE 3; 
AE G; Tr. 37.) The company’s decision to terminate Applicant cited his experience as an 
engineer with many years in the industry; that “he knew full well what he was doing 
when he violated the security rules, and when caught, repeatedly lied about his actions.” 
 
Applicant filed for unemployment compensation on March 21, 2011. To support 
his claim, he provided a statement on May 9, 2011, claiming that his security infraction 
 
 
 
5 Applicant testified at his hearing that there were times that “in the generic sense,” he said he transferred 
the information from source IS network to the classified USB drive when he meant that he directed or 
caused the information to be transferred by engineer A. (Tr. 57.) 
 
6 In accord with ¶ 1-304 of the NISPOM, which requires government contractors to establish and apply a 
graduated scale of disciplinary actions in the event of employee violations or negligence of NISPOM 
requirements, company X established an enterprise-wide Security Standard on August 7, 2006. Under 
the Security Standard, “processing classified information on computer systems not authorized and 
approved for classified processing,” is expressly cited as a deliberate breach of security. For a first non- 
deliberate breach of security, the recommended minimum disciplinary action is a written reprimand. For 
cases of deliberate breaches of security, the Security Standard specifies at a minimum a five-day 
suspension without pay but also indicates, “circumstances may warrant recommendation of termination.” 
(GE 2; AE H.) 
9 
 
 
was minor; that the incident was blown out of proportion by the company; and that the 
company did not investigate anything. He explained his conduct, as follows: 
 
BEFORE  ANY  DATA  FOR  INFORMATION  WAS  TRANSFERRED,  I 
TOOK IT OUT WHEN I REALIZED IT. THEY CHECKED MY LAPTOP 
TWICE AND DID NOT FIND ANY DATA. THE FIRST COUPLE OF 
MEETINGS THEY WANTED TO DROP IT. THEN SOMEONE WANTED 
TO PRESS THE POINT. IN THE MEANTIME, THEY SAID I LOGGED 
INTO SOMEONE ELSE’S COMPUTER BUT I NEVER DID AND THERE 
IS NO PROOF. (GE 2.) 
 
In response, company X indicated that Applicant “violated security rules and when 
caught, repeatedly lied about his actions [emphasis in original].” Applicant’s claim for 
unemployment benefits was denied. Applicant appealed the denial on May 12, 2011. 
 
Testimony was taken on Applicant’s appeal of the unemployment benefit denial 
over two sessions in June 2011. On June 22, 2011, a company X human resources 
(HR)  generalist  testified  that  Applicant  deliberately  took  classified  information  and 
placed it on an unclassified computer, and that his deliberate action led to a possible 
breach. The HR representative was unaware of any actual compromise of classified 
information and testified that Applicant had no previous security infractions at the 
company. The defining factor for the company in deciding to terminate Applicant’s 
employment was that he lied and failed to cooperate with the company’s investigation 
into the security infraction. Company X’s FSO testified that the ISSM did an “overwrite” 
of the hard drive based on Applicant’s initial account that it was an accident he had not 
used the keyboard while the classified thumb drive was plugged into his laptop. About 
the company’s findings that Applicant had not been fully candid, the FSO testified that 
Applicant claimed his conduct was inadvertent until February 24, 2011, when Applicant 
admitted that he put the classified USB drive into his unclassified laptop after he had 
moved files from a classified system to the classified thumb drive. The FSO admitted 
that Applicant refused to sign a statement of admission that he had deliberately inserted 
the classified thumb drive in his unclassified laptop. The FSO further testified that 
compromise of classified information could not be ruled out because of Applicant’s 
actions, although he also explained that data transfer from a USB drive requires 
manipulation of the computer. (AE G.) 
 
Applicant maintained at his unemployment compensation hearing that he “made 
an accidental mistake, nothing more.” He testified that engineer A was sitting at the PC 
to access the source IS network when Applicant went to take possession of the thumb 
drive from someone in the integration group.7 Applicant related that he did not have the 
proper log on information for the gateway IS network, so he had previously asked 
engineer A to transfer the information for him. About the incidents alleged in SOR 1.b, 
Applicant provided the following account: 
 
 
 
7 The name of the co-worker was not audible to the transcriber of the proceedings. (AE G.) Given the 
other evidence of record, it is reasonably presumed that Applicant named engineer A. 
10 
 
 
So, [engineer A] basically received the thumb drive and he was already 
logged in at that time.  And so, uh, and he actually said to me, “You know, 
why don’t I go ahead and do this anyway because I’m already logged on?” 
And I did say to him, “Well, you know, if you would like, you, maybe you 
should log off so that I could log on.” 
 
He said, “No, I’m already logged on so I’ll just do this. Just tell me what 
you wanted; what files do you want to transfer.” So basically, I–then I 
actually went up to the, uh, to the workstation there and I pointed to him. I 
said, “Well, just take this folder because this, this has, uh, I think, the files 
that I said that I would want.” So, he copied those files out to the thumb 
drive and then we both watched [sic] over to the [gateway IS network] 
workstation where he could then access the thumb–He could then access 
the [gateway IS network] and he logged on to that. And then he took that 
thumb drive and he took that file from the thumb drive and used the 
[gateway IS network] to place [a downloaded file] on a location in [the 
destination IS network]. And I basically watched them as he did this. 
 
So, after he was done with that task, he basically gave the thumb drive to 
me and I said, “Well, okay, I’ll hold onto this and I’ll, I’ll, I will find someone 
who is responsible for this.” And, uh, uh, and, and, and talk to someone 
how to get this back to the file cabinet where it was stored. So, I walked 
back to my, uh, my desk and then I started to–I just basically kind of put 
some drive on my desk, uh, immediate and after about ten minutes or so, 
uh, after I was looking at some files and, and looking at my agenda. I was 
actually taking [sic] on my laptop at that time looking at my agenda. Uhm, 
then it just kind of occurred to me and basically that I think, uh, the effects 
of the tiredness and the medication was really starting to hit me at that 
time and it just kind of popped in my head that I was wanted [sic] to check 
what was in that file because, in that folder, because I really didn’t know 
the individual files in the folder, and I wanted to be sure that the team had 
the individual files that were actually needed to be worked on. 
 
So, what I was thinking about the security implications and my clouded 
state, I basically plugged the thumb drive in there so I could see what files 
were, were in the folder. Uhm, and after, uh, like that was–that was the 
motivation basically for plugging in the, uh, thumb drive into the laptop. I 
completely forgot about the security, you, know, implications because of 
my state. Uh, there were a couple of other things that went through my 
mind as they, uh, and during this time, as a senior principal engineer, I’d 
like to think that one of my, uh, one of my activities is to think about how to 
do things more efficiently. And one of the things and just the split second, 
it took less than five seconds, where this thumb drive, probably five 
seconds or so, where this thumb drive was plugged in, in that split second, 
one of the things that I was, running through my mind was would it be nice 
11 
 
 
if we could use a thumb drive to, to move information between, uh, 
networks like this? 
 
Uhm, and, and then I realized that–that’s when I started to realize when I 
went through the series of logic that but, you know, you can’t use a, uhm, 
a secured thumb drive on an unsecured laptop. And that realization just hit 
me. I started to reach for the, uh, for the thumb drive but [engineer B] was 
sitting right next to me and he pulled it out basically about the same that I 
was reaching for it. And then, uh, then [engineer B], uh–Then I–I was–I 
was now– At that point, I was not only tired and I was not only medicated 
but I was also pretty rattled by what just happened and then I started to try 
to explain to [engineer B], “Well, you know, we, we, I was using this to 
move information from one network to the other network.” 
 
Applicant denied that he had typed on the laptop while the thumb drive was inserted. 
About him telling the FSO on January 28, 2011, that engineer B had to be lying about 
the incident, Applicant stated: 
 
As far as when, uh, [the FSO] asked me the question, uh, that it was 
[engineer B] lying that I gave, the way he asked me that question, it kind of 
implied to me that maybe he was saying that [engineer B] claimed that I 
robbed the bank or something, something totally unrelated. And that’s why 
I said, “Well, if he said something like that, he’d be lying.” 
 
About his failure to tell the ISSM during their first meeting on January 24, 2011, about 
his sinus medication, Applicant claimed it did not occur to him until the following day, 
when he noticed the wrapper while taking out the garbage. Applicant maintained that he 
had been as “completely cooperative and, and, and forthcoming [with the company’s 
investigation] as [he] possibly could.” He also asserted that training was “very poor” 
about secured thumb drives in that he was unaware of the functional parameters for 
their use or who was the proper custodian of the Secret/NOFORN USB thumb drive. 
(AE G.) 
 
The  decision  denying  unemployment  to  Applicant  was  overturned.  While 
evidence was presented showing that Applicant’s insertion of a classified thumb drive 
into his unclassified laptop was a breach of security, fatigue was a mitigating factor that 
led the judge to conclude his action was an accident and not willful. Company X 
established that it had a reasonable expectation, although not a policy, that its 
employees cooperate with investigations into security breaches. However, company X 
did not establish that Applicant had engaged in deliberate misconduct, or that he had 
admitted his guilt. Applicant’s explanations were accepted as credible in the absence of 
testimony from other witnesses with firsthand knowledge or other substantial evidence 
to corroborate his alleged admission. (GE 2.) 
12 
Applicant  was  unemployed  until  June  2011,  when  he  began  working  as  an  
 
engineering product manager for another defense contractor.8  (GE 1.)   On August 8, 
2011, Applicant provided a written account of his conduct on January 24, 2011, to the 
Defense Security Service (DSS). He indicated in part that he was not only authorized to 
view the classified information on the thumb drive, but also had “personally created a 
substantial portion of it.” During routine security and team meetings, he was told, “an 
approved method of transferring data such as the Classified Information was through 
the use of a classified thumb drive.” He also indicated to his knowledge the information 
on the secured thumb drive was encrypted, so plugging it into an unclassified laptop 
would have caused an authentication screen to appear. Yet, no dialog box appeared 
when he plugged the thumb drive into his machine, presumably because the drive was 
inserted “for a very short time, somewhere in the range of five to twenty-five (5-25) 
seconds.” He asserted that he had not typed a single character on the unclassified 
laptop while the thumb drive was plugged in. Applicant also claimed that just before he 
plugged the classified thumb drive into his laptop, he observed engineer B (who had 
contradicted Applicant’s claim of no keystroking) to be checking his vacation plans 
online. In addition, he testified that engineer B had expressed concern to him earlier that 
evening about a possible poor performance appraisal. Applicant asserted that he had 
done his best to cooperate during what he characterized as “a series of interrogations of 
increasing  strenuousness,”  during  which  questions  were  asked  with  the  intent  of 
trapping him into giving an incorrect answer. He expressed his belief that a marginal 
security rating received by company X caused the security team to make an example of 
him, and that the actions of management were influenced by recent layoffs. (GE 2.) 
 
On February 5, 2013, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of an 
Electronic  Questionnaire  for  Investigations  Processing  (e-QIP).  He  disclosed  in 
response to inquiry concerning whether he had left any employment under negative 
circumstances in the last seven years that he had been fired by company X in March 
2010 [sic]. He gave the following reason for his termination: 
 
[Company X] claims lack of cooperation during the investigation of a minor 
security incident. This was subsequently proven to be false. The decision 
to terminate was driven largely by poor company security lapses including 
a  marginal  security  audit  rating  at  the  time.  These  combined 
circumstances caused the travesty of a grossly overly punitive reaction 
without proper management oversight or deliberation. 
 
Applicant also responded “Yes” to the question concerning whether he had ever had a 
security clearance eligibility/access authorization denied, suspended, or revoked. He 
explained in part that in January 2011 he was using a classified USB drive to transfer 
files from one classified network to another classified network and that after completing 
the task, he “accidentally connected the classified USB drive to [his] unclassified laptop 
while turning attention to other work.” (GE 1.)  Applicant did not know whether his 
 
 
8 On his February 2013 Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (GE 1), Applicant 
mistakenly listed the end date for his employment with company X as March 2010 and the start date for 
his next job as June 2010 instead of March 2011 and June 2011 respectively. 
13 
clearance was officially suspended or revoked. He was advised by his then employer’s  
 
FSO to answer “Yes” to the clearance question because the company was unable to 
verify his situation. (Tr. 106.) Applicant explained that he did not mention separately that 
he had allegedly accessed PC #1 when the computer was logged under engineer A’s 
credentials because it happened at the same time as the USB thumb drive incident and 
involved the same people for the same task. To him, it was a single event. (Tr. 109.) 
 
On March 14, 2013, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for 
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant claimed that he erred on his e- 
QIP because the incident involving the classified USB thumb drive occurred in January 
2010 [sic], when he “accidentally” connected the classified thumb drive to his 
unclassified laptop. He asserted that he immediately realized his mistake and removed 
the classified USB drive. Applicant confirmed he had received the proper security 
training but he was tired, on a new schedule, and on a new sinus medication at the 
time. He added that he self-reported the incident to the ISSO on duty, whose name he 
did not recall. (GE 2.) 
 
In response to DOD CAF interrogatories, Applicant confirmed that the information 
previously provided during his March 2013 interview was accurate. About any additional 
information that he believed might assist the DOD CAF to determine whether it is clearly 
consistent to grant him security clearance eligibility, Applicant indicated that he had over 
20 years of unblemished compliance with security clearance responsibilities and that 
company X had provided no advance training in the use, features, or functions of the 
USB drive at issue. (GE 2.) 
 
By late June 2014, Applicant had a new job with another defense contractor.9 His 
work has been of an unclassified nature, although the company is sponsoring him for 
security clearance eligibility. (Tr. 115.) 
 
At his security clearance hearing in September 2014, Applicant testified that he 
had received no security training specific to the testing site. When he asked about 
training, he was advised to rely on the integration group for direction and assistance in 
security matters. (Tr. 59.) About engineer A’s involvement in the security incident, 
Applicant testified that engineer A took the classified USB drive from the integration 
employee, and offered to Applicant that he would load the files onto the USB from the 
classified source IS network. Engineer A then moved over to PC #2 and loaded the data 
from the USB to the gateway IS network. (Tr. 123-124.) Applicant denied that he ever 
used engineer A’s login session to move files from one network to another. (Tr. 150.) 
Applicant testified that he possessed the classified thumb drive from engineer A for 
“probably under five minutes” when he inserted it into his unclassified laptop. (Tr. 128.) 
“I just absentmindedly just [sic] did it by accident, because I was kind of tired at the time, 
and some of–and my other conditions, I just really didn’t think of the security at that split 
second.” (Tr. 61.) He testified on direct examination that he was reading specifications 
on his computer and not typing into it. (Tr. 69.) He later testified on cross examination 
that the combination of his impaired cognition and “being used to using this laptop to 
 
9 Applicant was working for his current employer as of his June 28, 2014 answer to the SOR. 
14 
 
 
plug in [his] own personal thumb drive” led to him plugging in the classified USB drive 
“without thinking.” (Tr. 121.) He noticed that nothing was happening on his computer, so 
he looked down and saw that the classified USB thumb drive was plugged into his 
laptop. (Tr. 127.) Applicant explained that his intent was to hold onto the thumb drive 
until he could identify someone who had access to a classified storage container. 
Engineer B was busy at the time. (Tr. 120.) When asked by me why he failed to notice 
the classified marking on the USB thumb drive, Applicant testified as follows: 
 
Well, part of it was that when the thumb drive was on the table, all I could 
really see was the thumb drive, the tag was hanging down on the bottom. 
So, it was very easy for me to absentmindedly think, well, here is a thumb 
drive. It’s not like the tag is right on top of the thumb drive and you have to 
move it to get to it. So, it was very easy just to take that thumb drive, move 
it half an inch and plug it into the laptop. (Tr. 154.) 
 
Concerning whether Applicant had any other removable media on his desk at the time, 
he claimed he could not recall exactly “because the table was very cluttered.” (Tr. 156.) 
 
Applicant described engineer B’s reaction as “very agitated” to see the classified 
USB thumb drive in Applicant’s unclassified laptop. (Tr. 62, 130.) He denies telling 
engineer B that he planned on copying files from his computer onto the Secret USB 
drive  and  then  transferring  it  to  a  Secret  PC  on  the  source  IS  network.  (Tr.  74.) 
Applicant went on that he was so unfamiliar with the details of the networks that he did 
not know what to call them at that time. (Tr. 75, 140.) He tried to explain to engineer B 
that he planned to use the thumb drive to transfer information between classified 
networks, but engineer B did not understand what he was trying to tell him. (Tr. 63.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative 
goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole- 
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
15 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires  that  “[a]ny  doubt  concerning  personnel  being  considered  for  access  to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government 
must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven 
by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship   with   the   Government   predicated   upon   trust   and   confidence.   This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
The security concern for Handling Protected Information is articulated in AG ¶ 33: 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
Applicant acknowledges that on January 24, 2011, he plugged a USB thumb 
drive classified Secret/NOFORN into an unclassified laptop issued to him by his then 
employer (company X). As an authorized user of a classified information system, 
Applicant was required to comply with all security requirements under the NISPOM (see 
¶ 8-105) and his then employer’s security standards implementing the NISPOM 
requirements. The NISPOM and his employer’s security procedures prohibited the 
processing   of   classified   information   on   non-classified   systems.   Applicant   has 
consistently denied that he intended to insert the classified USB thumb drive into his 
laptop. He also denies that any classified information on the thumb drive could have 
been compromised because he did not process any information or type any keystrokes 
16 
 
 
during the short time that the classified thumb drive was plugged into his unclassified 
laptop. 
 
As a threshold matter, the burden is on the Government of establishing disputed 
facts. A reasonable inference of deliberate conduct arises because of the nature of the 
conduct involved. Applicant physically inserted a conspicuously marked Secret thumb 
drive into his unclassified work laptop, which he knew was not approved for the 
processing of classified information. Even assuming some level of fatigue and impaired 
cognition from him taking a double dose of generic sinus medication before reporting to 
work, these factors apparently did not cloud his judgment only minutes before he 
inserted the thumb drive in his laptop, when according to him, he oversaw engineer A’s 
authorized downloading of a file from the classified source IS network to the classified 
USB drive. When asked to explain how he could have inserted the classified thumb 
drive by accident, Applicant testified on direct examination at his September 18, 2014 
security clearance hearing that he was not thinking about the security implications of his 
conduct. On cross-examination, he testified in part that he inserted the classified thumb 
drive without thinking because he was used to plugging in his personal thumb drive into 
his employer-issued laptop.10 In response to my inquiry into how he could have failed to 
note the conspicuous tag marking the USB thumb drive as Secret, he indicated that the 
tag had a long string that somehow hung off his desk. The inference to be drawn is that 
he picked up the drive without noticing that it was classified. 
 
Yet, there is no evidence showing that he had an unclassified thumb drive at his 
workstation that he intended to insert into his unclassified laptop instead. Furthermore, 
engineer B’s contemporaneous account of the incident supports a finding of a deliberate 
violation on Applicant’s part. When engineer B asked Applicant to explain why he had 
the Secret thumb drive plugged into his unclassified laptop, Applicant stated that he 
“planned on copying a file from his computer onto the Secret USB” and then transferring 
it to a Secret PC on the source IS network. When confronted with engineer B’s account 
in January 2011, Applicant claimed engineer B had to be lying. Applicant now asserts 
that engineer B misunderstood him; that he meant to convey that he was transferring 
information between classified networks; and that when he referred to his “computer” in 
his verbal exchange with engineer B, he meant classified PC #1. However, if Applicant 
intended to transfer information between classified networks, there would have been no 
reason to insert the classified thumb drive in his unclassified laptop. Employees were 
reminded in a security violation alert on November 18, 2010, of their responsibilities to 
note the markings on classified documents, media, and hardware. Under the 
circumstances, it is difficult to conclude that Applicant inserted the classified thumb drive 
by mistake. Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 34(g), “any failure to comply with rules for the 
protection of classified or other sensitive information,” applies. 
 
The Government also alleges that Applicant knowingly violated the security 
regulations covering the authorized use and protection of classified IS systems by using 
a classified computer logged in under the credentials of another company X employee 
 
10 Employees were reminded in a security violation alert in November 2010 that personal drives were not 
to be used on any company IS system. (GE 2.) 
17 
 
 
to transfer classified files using the Secret USB drive (SOR 1.b). The evidence shows 
that on January 24, 2011, Applicant sought to transfer classified information from a 
source IS network at the testing site to a destination IS network at another location. The 
source IS network was not linked to the gateway IS network, so transfer was via a PC # 
1 trusted download onto a classified thumb drive that would then be plugged into 
classified PC #2 for upload onto the gateway IS network. Applicant now maintains that 
the download was accomplished by engineer A, who took possession of the thumb drive 
from an integration engineer and volunteered to transfer the files because he was 
already logged onto PC #1. However, other evidence raises doubts about whether 
engineer A performed the trusted download and transferred the information through the 
use of the Secret thumb drive. On January 24, 2011, Applicant provided a written 
statement to the ISSM in which he stated in part:  “With authorized assistance, I was 
using the thumb drive to make a file transfer between the [source IS network] and the 
[gateway IS network] when I accidentally plugged the thumb drive into my laptop USB 
port. On February 14, 2014, Applicant demonstrated to security personnel that he had 
accessed the source IS network via PC #1, before going to his unclassified laptop. The 
ISSM then checked the January 24, 2011 audit logs for PC #1, which showed that PC 
#1 was logged in under the credentials of engineer A when the Secret USB thumb drive 
was used. Engineer A told company X security personnel that he had not worked 
alongside Applicant on January 24, 2011, nor had he transferred any files for him on 
that date.11 It is possible that engineer A did not recall the events of January 24, 2011, 
when he was interviewed by company X security personnel on February 22, 2011. On 
the other hand, one has to question why Applicant did not clearly detail engineer A’s 
involvement from the outset, if engineer A performed the download and transfer. 
Additionally, Applicant apparently demonstrated to security personnel on February 14, 
2011 that he accessed the source IS network on PC #1 before going to his laptop and 
plugging in the Secret USB thumb drive. Again, it is inexplicable that Applicant would fail 
to mention that engineer A accessed PC #1 instead of him. Furthermore, Applicant’s 
version has changed over time, from he was using the classified thumb drive with 
authorized  assistance,  to  engineer  B  performed  the  download  and  transfer  at  his 
request, to engineer B volunteered to transfer the information for him. 
 
Engineer A and Applicant were authorized users of PC #1 and the source IS 
network at issue, although access by Applicant to the classified source IS network when 
the computer was logged in under engineer A’s identifiers would violate identification 
and  authorization  controls  established  to  ensure  that  users  have  the  appropriate 
security clearances and need-to-know for the information on the classified system. See 
NISPOM ¶ 8-303.12 The weight of the evidence implicates Applicant in a violation of IS 
authentication requirements. AG ¶ 34(g) applies. 
 
11 The only evidence of engineer A’s denial of any involvement is in company X’s report of its investigation 
into the incident involving the Secret thumb drive. Hearsay evidence is entitled to less weight than a 
signed affidavit or statement. At the same time, company X had no apparent motive to misrepresent the 
interview of engineer A or its findings during the investigation. Applicant’s assertion that company X was 
looking for a way to terminate his employment to reduce personnel costs is speculative. 
 
12 ¶ 8-303 of the NISPOM provides as follows: 
18 
 
 
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 35(a), “so much time has passed since the behavior, or 
it has happened so infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely 
to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment,” applies in part. The security violations were committed almost five 
years ago, and Applicant had no previous security violations or infractions. Nonetheless, 
it is difficult to conclude that the conduct is not likely to recur in light of Applicant’s failure 
to accept any responsibility and his failure to be fully forthcoming about his actions, as 
detailed in the findings of fact. For example, Applicant indicated that he had moved files 
from the classified source IS network until he was advised about the audit logs. His first 
response was that it was possible that he used engineer A’s account to download the 
classified files. When informed that engineer A denied any involvement in the 
downloading and transfer, Applicant claimed the transfer was accomplished by engineer 
A at his direction.  Applicant has also imputed base motives to engineer B and company 
X in an effort to minimize his own culpability. On August 8, 2011, Applicant provided a 
statement to the Defense Security Service in which he claimed that engineer B was 
checking his vacation plans online and had related concerns about possibly receiving a 
poor performance appraisal just before engineer B observed the classified thumb drive 
in Applicant’s laptop. On his e-QIP, Applicant asserted that the decision of company X 
to terminate his employment was driven “largely by poor company security lapses 
including a marginal security audit rating at the time.” During Applicant’s unemployment 
hearing, company X admitted the marginal rating and job layoffs in the fall of 2010. 
However, the evidence before me does not establish that his employment termination 
was related to those events. 
 
AG  ¶  35(b),  “the  individual  responded  favorably  to  counseling  or  remedial 
security training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities,” is not implicated. Company X terminated Applicant’s 
employment in March 2011 for his security violations, but also because of his failure to 
acknowledge responsibility. There is no evidence that Applicant has accessed classified 
information since then, so he has no subsequent record of compliance with security 
procedures. 
 
 
 
 
As the complexity of a specific IS and the associated residual risk for this system 
increase, the need for identification and authentication of users and process becomes 
more significant. Identification and authentication controls are required to ensure that 
users have the appropriate clearances and need-to-know for the information on a 
particular system and shall be managed in accordance with procedures identified in the 
SSP. 
 
a. Unique identification. Each user shall be uniquely identified and that identity shall be 
associated with all auditable actions taken by that individual. 
 
b. Authentication at Logon. Users shall be required to authenticate their identities at 
“logon” time by supplying their authenticator, such as a password, smart card, or 
biometrics, in conjunction with their user identification (ID) prior to the execution of any 
application or utility on the system. 
19 
 
 
Applicant claims he was not adequately trained about security procedures at the 
testing site, but the evidence is to the contrary. He was told to ask the onsite integration 
engineers if he had any security questions or concerns. Furthermore, the security 
violations committed did not involve a security procedure specific to the testing facility or 
the particular classified project. Furthermore, Applicant had received refresher security 
briefings by his employer. All employees with clearances were reminded in the security 
violation alert of November 2010 of their responsibilities concerning taking proper notice 
of classification markings and to comply with security procedures when using classified 
hardware. Applicant’s violations of the security procedures involving classified 
information systems whether deliberate or due to gross negligence, are not mitigated 
under AG ¶ 35(c), “the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training.” 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 
 
¶ 39: 
The security concern for Use of Information Technology Systems is set out in AG 
 
Noncompliance  with  rules,  procedures,  guidelines  or  regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data use for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
Applicant’s insertion of the Secret USB thumb drive into his unclassified laptop 
computer on January 24, 2011, establishes Guideline M concerns under AG ¶ 40(f): 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system without authorization, 
when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations. 
 
Based largely on engineer B’s statement that he observed Applicant working on 
his computer while the Secret thumb drive was plugged in, company X concluded that 
the possibility of compromise could not be ruled out. Applicant has consistently denied 
that he engaged in any keystroking or otherwise manipulated the computer while the 
Secret thumb drive was in his laptop.  While any processing of classified information on 
an unclassified computer or IS network would implicate AG ¶ 40(e), “unauthorized use 
of a government or other information technology system,” and perhaps also AG ¶ 40(h), 
“any misuse of information technology, whether deliberate or negligent, that results in 
damage to the national security,” the evidence falls short of establishing that Applicant 
manipulated the computer. However, AG ¶ 40(e) applies in that Applicant’s use of the IS 
source network through PC #1 when the computer was logged onto under engineer A’s 
identifier would be an unauthorized use of an IS system, notwithstanding Applicant 
could have properly accessed the system under his own logon identifier.  Even so, the 
20 
 
 
primary  concern  is  with  his  knowing  entry  of  a  classified  thumb  drive  into  his 
unclassified computer when it was connected to an unclassified IS network. 
 
As  with  Guideline  K,  the  failure  to  comply  with  the  rules  and  regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may be mitigated if so much time has 
elapsed since the misuse to where it no longer casts doubt on judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. For the reasons addressed above, Applicant has not demonstrated the 
reform necessary to apply AG ¶ 41(a), “so much time has elapsed since the behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and  does  not  cast  doubt  on  the  individual’s  reliability,  trustworthiness,  or  good 
judgment.” 
 
AG ¶ 41(b), “the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one’s password or 
computer when no other timely alternative was readily available,” could reasonably 
apply to Applicant’s access to the IS network via PC #1 under engineer A’s logon 
identifier. Applicant was apparently not only an authorized user of PC #1 and the 
classified IS source network. He created some of the information on the system. 
Applicant testified during his unemployment hearing that he watched as engineer A 
downloaded the files onto the Secret thumb drive and then loaded the files onto the 
gateway IS network. Applicant demonstrated during the February 14, 2011 walkthrough 
with security personnel that he accessed the IS source network before going to his 
laptop. Applicant did not indicate that he personally uploaded files to the classified 
gateway IS network for which he was waiting access authorization. AG ¶ 41(b) would 
not mitigate his intentional insertion of classified removable media on an unclassified 
laptop connected to an unclassified IS network. AG ¶ 41(b) also would not apply to any 
unauthorized access by Applicant to the classified IS gateway network, but the evidence 
does not prove culpability in that regard. 
 
Applicant’s evidence to establish AG ¶ 41(c), “the conduct was unintentional or 
inadvertent and was followed by a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and 
by notification of supervisor,” is not persuasive. The denial of unemployment benefits to 
Applicant was overturned because a review examiner on appeal concluded that 
company X failed to present a statement from Applicant or the testimony of a witness to 
substantiate its report that Applicant admitted moving files from the source IS network to 
the Secret thumb drive. That decision is not binding on the security clearance 
adjudication process. Due to the need to protect classified information, any doubts 
about an individual’s security clearance eligibility are to be resolved in favor of national 
security. As discussed under Guideline K, it is difficult to believe that Applicant would 
have failed to notice the large marking tag on the Secret thumb drive. While Applicant 
explained that he had impaired cognition, no co-worker interviewed during the 
investigation mentioned concern about Applicant’s ability to perform on January 24, 
2011. Engineer B reported, with no apparent motive to misrepresent, that Applicant told 
him he planned to copy a file from his laptop onto the Secret USB thumb drive and then 
transfer it to the classified source IS network.  Engineer B’s swift removal of the Secret 
thumb drive from Applicant’s unclassified laptop prevented Applicant from acting on his 
21 
 
 
stated intent. Whether it was Applicant or engineer B who first notified the ISSO of 
Applicant’s misuse of the IS system, AG ¶ 41(c) does not mitigate deliberate conduct. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The security concerns about Personal Conduct are set forth in AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for security clearance 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with  security  processing,  including  but  not  limited  to  meeting  with  a 
security investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or 
releases, and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation; or 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
By using PC #1 without properly logging on with his own credentials, and then 
inserting the Secret thumb drive in his unclassified computer (SOR 3.a), Applicant 
raised significant doubts about his judgment and willingness to comply with the rules 
and regulations for the proper use and protection of a classified information system. 
During  company  X’s  security  investigation,  Applicant  provided  discrepant  accounts 
about whether he accessed PC #1 and downloaded information onto the Secret thumb 
drive before inserting it in his unclassified computer. Applicant’s then employer viewed 
these conflicting accounts as a failure to cooperate and terminated Applicant’s 
employment as a result. The Government alleged Applicant’s employment termination 
as a separate concern under Guideline E (SOR 3.c). Applicant had an obligation to 
provide full, frank and truthful answers to company X security officials from the outset, 
and he failed to do so. His initial account led the ISSM to perform an overwrite of the 
system on January 24, 2011. At the same time, his employment termination is a 
consequence of his security violations and lack of candor. It does establish a separate 
issue of poor judgment, unreliability, or untrustworthiness. A favorable finding is 
warranted as to SOR 3.c. Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(b) applies to the personal 
conduct concerns covered under SOR 3.a and 3.b: 
22 
 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
Applicant’s violations of security procedures through misuse of an information system 
are explicitly covered under Guidelines K and M, so his misconduct does not trigger AG 
¶ 16(d): 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with  rules  and  regulations,  or  other  characteristics  indicating  that  the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace; 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer’s time 
or resources. 
 
Nevertheless, Applicant engaged in unreliable behavior and demonstrated a pattern of 
dishonesty that would implicate AG ¶ 16(d) were his actions not otherwise covered 
under other guidelines. 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant was also not candid when he completed 
his e-QIP and did not mention that he had violated computer logon authentication 
procedures  when  he  accessed  PC  #1  when  it  was  logged  on  under  engineer  A. 
Applicant could reasonably consider his access to PC #1 as part of the same incident 
involving the insertion of the Secret thumb drive in his unclassified laptop. The 
Government did not establish that Applicant deliberately falsified by not mentioning the 
violation  committed  by  accessing  PC  #1  under  engineer  A’s  logon  information. 
However, Applicant displayed minimization and denial of responsibility when describing 
the insertion of the Secret thumb drive on his unclassified laptop. Applicant cooperated 
with company X’s investigation in that he attended all meetings about the incident. 
However, Applicant’s documented record of inconsistent statements about his role in 
the  events  of  January  24,  2011,  and  his  unacceptable  tendency  to  discredit  the 
23 
 
 
motivations of his then employer as well as engineer B, are inconsistent with reform. 
Not one of the personal conduct mitigating conditions is fully satisfied.13 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct 
and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at 
AG ¶ 2(a).14 
 
Applicant and his team were under some time pressures on January 24, 2011, 
which may well have been the primary motivator in him circumventing security 
regulations involving the download of classified information from an IS network and then 
inserting a Secret USB drive in his unclassified laptop. Applicant maintains that security 
 
13 Conditions that could mitigate security concerns under AG ¶ 17 include: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment as caused or significantly 
contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of authorized personnel or legal counsel 
advising or instructing the individual specifically concerning the security clearance 
process. Upon being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, 
or it happened under  such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors 
that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior 
is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable reliability; 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or occurs under 
circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, 
judgment, or willingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
 
14 The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
24 
 
 
training was inadequate. He had held a security clearance for approximately 20 years, 
so he is reasonably expected to have known and complied with the security procedures 
established for the security of a classified IS system, especially the source IS network 
for which he had access authorization. It is well settled that once a concern arises 
regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption 
against the grant or renewal of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 
1399, 1401 (9th  Cir. 1990). Based on the facts and circumstances before me, for the 
reasons noted above, I do not find it clearly consistent with the national interest to 
reinstate Applicant’s security clearance eligibility at this time. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
Paragraph 1, Guideline K: AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline M: AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.b: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.c: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.d: For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
