 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02345 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 30, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 25, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 30, 2014. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
31, 2014. I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 20, 2014. The 
 
2 
 
 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through C, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on December 3, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted both SOR allegations with explanations. His admissions were 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 40 years old. He served in the military from 1994 to 2010 and was 
honorably discharged in the paygrade E-6. While serving on active duty he was 
awarded four Navy-Marine Corps Achievement Medals and five Good Conduct Medals. 
He anticipates completing his bachelor’s degree in 2015. He married in 1999 and 
divorced in November 2012. He has two children, ages 14 and 9. He has held a security 
clearance since 1994. He has worked for a federal contractor since 2010.1  
 
 In 2008, Applicant accepted a $22,000 incentive bonus from the military to 
complete 20 years of service. He was having personal problems and was no longer 
content serving on active duty so he left the military. He understood he was required to 
repay the bonus he had received at $1,000 a month. He could not afford the payment. 
He applied his 2011 tax refund of $11,000 toward the debt (SOR ¶ 1.a), and started 
making small payments toward the balance.2  
 
Applicant and his wife decided to divorce and his finances became strained. He 
was working overseas and sending money to his wife to support his children. Based on 
his overseas salary the child support amount was increased to $2,000 a month. This 
occurred two months before Applicant returned to the United States. When he returned 
he was still required to pay the increased amount, even though he was no longer 
earning the higher salary. It took approximately six to seven months to get the child 
support payments reduced to $1,600 a month. Applicant and his wife had a long 
protracted divorce. Applicant’s wife and children were living in another state. He 
explained that the expenses for lawyer’s fees, court fees, and the travel associated with 
visiting his children, hearings, and meetings associated with the divorce affected his 
financial stability. He estimated his initial lawyer’s fee was $9,000 and after his wife 
moved he had to pay another $6,000 to $7,000 for a lawyer in the new state, along with 
other expenses. He was unable to repay the military bonus during this time. He stated 
he was not being irresponsible, but rather had to prioritize his expenses. It was 
important to him to resolve his custody issues first, which was costly. After the divorce 
was finalized, Applicant paid all  marital debts and slowly started paying his other bills.3  
                                                          
1 Tr. 18-21, 48-53. 
 
2 Tr. 21-25. 
 
3 Tr. 21-30, 67-68. 
 
3 
 
 
In August 2014, Applicant contacted the government creditor for the debt in SOR 
¶ 1.a (current balance $9,557) to arrange a payment plan. He agreed to make monthly 
payments of $220. He stated he made payments in October and November 2014 and 
intended to make consistent monthly payments. He provided a document showing the 
balance owed and his monthly payment. His 2012 and 2013 tax refunds were applied to 
the debt. He understands he owes the balance and will repay it through the monthly 
payment plan and with his tax refunds.4 
 
The debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($5,010) is a car loan for a repossessed vehicle. 
According to Applicant’s divorce decree his wife retained possession of the vehicle and 
was required to make the monthly payments. She was unable to make the payments 
and returned the vehicle to the creditor. Applicant was unaware she had the vehicle 
voluntarily repossessed. Because the vehicle loan was in both of their names, he is still 
responsible for the debt. When Applicant learned of the debt, he contacted the creditor 
and arranged a payment plan to settle the debt for $1,800 with monthly payments of 
$200 until it was satisfied. Applicant made monthly payments in March, April, and May 
of 2014. His ex-wife has not contributed to the monthly payments and refuses to help 
with the payments. Applicant intends to continue monthly payments in January 2015. It 
is unclear whether the settlement amount is still valid. He understands the importance of 
paying this loan because of its impact on his credit, even though the divorce order 
assigned this obligation to his ex-wife.5 
 
Applicant credibly testified that prior to his divorce he did not have financial 
problems. The divorce and custody dispute had a serious financial effect on him. He 
has paid all other debts and the two on the SOR are the only two remaining. His child 
support payments are now approximately $1,060 a month and are current. He 
participated in financial counseling offered by his employer. He maintains a written 
budget. He understands his financial obligations and intends to resolve these two 
remaining debts. He lives within his means.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
4 Tr. 30-35, 64-66; Answer to SOR; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. 35-46, 66; Answer to SOR; AE B, C. 
 
6 Tr. 47, 53-54, 63-64. 
 
4 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following two are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has two delinquent debts that he was unable to pay until recently. I find 
there is sufficient evidence to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant is still resolving both of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. 
Therefore, the debts are recent, ongoing, and AG ¶ 20(a) cannot apply. Applicant’s 
financial problems are attributed to his divorce. He was unable to meet his financial 
obligations when he returned from overseas, in particular his child support payments, 
which had been based on his higher salary. The costs associated with his divorce and 
travel also affected his finances. These conditions were beyond Applicant’s control. In 
order to fully apply AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must demonstrate that he acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant has not ignored his debts, but for a period of time he 
was unable to pay them. He has paid all of his other debts, and the SOR debts are the 
only two that remain. His ex-wife was required to pay the vehicle loan, but refuses to 
pay it. Applicant contacted the creditor and made some payments toward this debt and 
 
6 
 
 
intends to continue resolving it in 2015. Applicant has a monthly payment plan to 
resolve the debt in SOR ¶1.a. AG ¶ 20(b) applies.  
 
 Applicant made some payments toward the resolution of the two remaining 
debts. He contacted both creditors and has a monthly plan to resolve the remaining 
balances. He has made a good-faith effort to resolve his debts, and has shown that 
there are clear indications his financial problems are being resolved. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 
20(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 40 years old and honorably served in the military for 16 years. He 
understands the importance of repaying two delinquent debts and has made payments 
toward their resolution He is paying what he is financially able to do at this time. He 
does not have other outstanding debts. These debts were not incurred because he was 
living beyond his means, but rather as a consequence of expenses associated with a 
divorce, and his ex-wife’s refusal to pay a vehicle loan that was assigned to her in the 
divorce order. I found Applicant’s testimony credible. Although all these debts are not 
completely resolved, I do not believe they rise to the level of a security concern. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
