 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
-------------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-01523 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On January 18, 2013, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (e-QIP). On June 5, 2014, the Department of Defense issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing. Applicant responded on July 18, 2014. 
Applicant requested his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
On October 8, 2014, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant on October 16, 2014. He was given the opportunity to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on 
October 24, 2014. Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time 
allowed that would have expired on November 23, 2014. I received the case 
assignment on December 15, 2014. Based upon a review of the complete case file, 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all 26 allegations pertaining to financial delinquencies and 
unpaid personal income taxes. (Items 2-6)  
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He is married. Applicant has one child. He served in 
the U.S. Navy from August 2009 to September 2012. He works for a defense contractor. 
He was unemployed from September 2012 to November 2012 after leaving active 
military duty. His wife has been unemployed since February 2014. (Items 5, 8) 
 
 Applicant has 25 delinquent financial obligations totaling $53,751. He 
accumulated these delinquencies between 2002 and 2012. He paid his 2009 federal 
income taxes of $2,784 (Subparagraph 1.c). The other debts remain unpaid. Applicant 
failed to file his 2008 federal income tax form for 2008 (Subparagraph 1.a). He owes 
$3,000 on his 2008 income tax account (Subparagraph 1.b). (Items 5, 6, 7) 
 
 Applicant submitted documents showing he contacted several of his creditors on 
July 18, 2014, by mail offering to pay $5 to $10 on each debt (Subparagraphs 1.d to 1.e, 
1.g to 1.k, 1.o to 1.y). He submitted letters pertaining to all debts listed in the SOR 
except Subparagraphs 1.f, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.n. There are no documents from the creditors 
accepting or rejecting the offers of payment. These debts are owed to credit unions, 
banks, a jeweler, two cell telephone companies, and a cable television company, 
among other creditors. One debt is the subject of a garnishment action for $1,910 owed 
on a military credit card account (Subparagraph 1.z). Garnishment is not a voluntary 
effort to repay this debt. (Items 5-8) 
   
 Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
  
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;   
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 From 2002 to the present, Applicant accumulated 25 delinquent debts and 
income tax obligations, totaling $53,751. Of his debts, 24 remain unpaid or unresolved, 
with the sole exception being the $2,784 paid on his 2009 federal income taxes.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. None of the mitigating conditions apply. 
 
The unpaid debts are recent, frequent, and cast doubt on Applicant’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He incurred a large number of credit 
card and other debts during the past 10 years and has not repaid them. AG ¶ 20 (a) 
does not apply. 
 
The conditions that resulted in the financial delinquencies were not beyond 
Applicant’s control. He and his wife were employed at the same time until her 2014 loss 
of work. He had two incomes he could have used to pay off some of this debt. Also, he 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
could have not spent the money he did and could have filed his 2008 and 2009 federal 
income taxes. Eventually he did pay the 2009 income taxes according to the letter from 
the Internal Revenue Service he submitted as an exhibit. Applicant did not act 
responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20 (b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has not received any counseling regarding his finances. If he did, he 
did not submit any exhibits to show he had any such advice. AG ¶ 20 (c) does not 
apply. 
 
Applicant has not demonstrated a good-faith effort to repay his debts. He offered 
his creditors $5 to $10 on each debt, but evidently never received a reply because he 
did not submit any documents to that effect as exhibits. AG ¶ 20 (d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant did not submit any evidence that he had a reasonable basis to dispute 
the legitimacy of any of the debts. AG ¶ 20 (e) does not apply. 
 
There is no evidence of any affluence resulted from a legal source of income. AG 
¶ 20 (f) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts. Next, he exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of his delinquent debts 
during the past ten years. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or substantial doubts as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the whole-person concept against Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
           Subparagraph 1.a to 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d to 1.z:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                         
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
