 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 14-02564 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) alleges five delinquent, collection, or 
charged-off accounts, bankruptcy discharge of his debts in 1997, and foreclosure of his 
condominium in 2009. Applicant said that three of the non-foreclosure delinquent debts 
were the result of identity theft; however, he did not provide any information about 
attempting to resolve one significant debt. He intentionally omitted financial information 
from his February 28, 2013 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) version of security clearance application (SF 86). Financial considerations and 
personal conduct concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 28, 2013, Applicant submitted an SF 86. (Item 4) On July 11, 2014, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an 
SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) as revised by 
the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence on August 30, 2006, which became 
effective on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) 
and E (personal conduct). (Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOD could not make 
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On July 31, 2014, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and waived his 
right to a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
dated September 26, 2014, was provided to him on October 9, 2014.1 Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on December 4, 2014. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted responsibility for one bank debt, the 
second mortgage, foreclosure, and bankruptcy in SOR ¶¶ 1.d to 1.g.3 He denied 
knowledge of the three delinquent, charged off, or collection debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.c. 
He admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant also provided extenuating and 
mitigating information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.   
 
Applicant is 60 years old, and he has been a software administrator since August 
2004.4 From August 2004 to April 2007, he worked as a drug and alcohol counselor. He 
honorably retired after serving on active duty in the Navy from September 1972 to April 
1997. In the Navy, he was an Operations Special Chief (E-7) and held a top secret 
security clearance. (Item 3) In 1971, he married, and in 1989, he was divorced. In 2003, 
he married. His children were born in 1974, 1976, and 1978, and his stepchild was born 
in 1974. He did not list his education on his SF 86. Applicant is active in his church.  
(SOR response) He volunteers for a variety of programs, and he donates funds to 
several charities. (SOR response) There is no evidence of security violations. 
 
                                            
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated September 29, 
2014, and Applicant’s receipt is dated October 9, 2014. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant 
that he had 30 days after his receipt to submit information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3The sources for the information in this paragraph are Applicant’s SOR and SOR response. 
(Items 1, 3)   
 
4Unless stated otherwise, Applicant’s February 28, 2013 SF 86 is the source for the facts in this 
paragraph. (Item 4) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Financial Considerations5 
 
Applicant’s credit reports and SOR allege five delinquent, collection, or charged-
off accounts, foreclosure of his condominium in 2009 (¶ 1.f), and discharge of his 
nonpriority unsecured debts through bankruptcy in 1997 (¶ 1.g).  The SOR described 
his five delinquent debts as follows: ¶ 1.a ($10,842) for a bank debt; ¶ 1.b ($6,402) for a 
credit account; ¶ 1.c ($13,782) for a collection account; ¶ 1.d ($21,430) for a bank debt; 
and ¶ 1.e ($59,980) for a second mortgage account.  
  
Applicant said he had no knowledge of the debts described in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.c. 
He contacted each of the creditors and informed them that he had no knowledge of the 
account, and he believed the three debts were the result of identity theft. Applicant 
admitted responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d, and said he “defaulted on the loan due 
to rising interest rates and subsequent rising payments” as well as his spouse’s 
unemployment.  
 
As to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f, Applicant utilized a first and second 
mortgage to purchase a condominium.6 His interest rates increased. In 2008 there was 
a precipitous decline in the value of his condominium. Applicant unsuccessfully 
attempted to use a quit claim, short sale, or renegotiated mortgage; however, “the 
lender demanded full payment. So we had no choice but to walk away.” In 2009, the 
bank foreclosed on his condominium.  Applicant’s residence is in a non-recourse state. 
See note 8, infra.  
 
On an unspecified date, Applicant’s spouse became permanently disabled, and 
his family income was reduced by 25 percent. After two and a half years, she was 
awarded Social Security disability.  
 
Applicant’s bankruptcy in 1997 is not recent. Applicant did not explain why 
bankruptcy was necessary, the source of the debts, or how much debt was involved.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant’s February 28, 2013 SF 86 in Section 26 under the label “Delinquency 
Involving Routine Accounts” asked four relevant questions: (1) “In the past seven (7) 
years, [have] you had any possessions or property voluntarily or involuntarily 
repossessed or foreclosed?”; (2) “In the past seven (7) years, [have] you defaulted on 
any type of loan?”; (3) “In the past seven (7) years, [have you] been over 120 days 
delinquent on any debt not previously listed?”; and (4) “[Are you] currently over 120 
days delinquent on any debt?” (emphasis in original; Item 4) Applicant answered, “No,” 
even though his condominium was returned to his mortgage lender using foreclosure, 
and he had defaulted on his bank debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($21,430). In his SOR response, 
                                            
5 The sources for the information in this section are Applicant’s SOR and SOR response. (Items 
1, 3) 
 
6 The source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s SOR response. (Item 3) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Applicant said, “The reason I did not disclose the items listed was I was scared that I 
would lose my job.  And with the economy as it was and still is, I like many others walk 
in fear of losing employment and being able to provide security for my family.” (Item 3)     
            
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his [or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
   
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit report and SOR response. Applicant’s SOR alleges five delinquent, collection, or 
charged-off accounts, a foreclosure in 2009, and a bankruptcy in 1997. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c), requiring 
additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;7 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
 
                                            
7The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the good-faith mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the good-faith mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013). 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions to all of his SOR debts. He did not provide 
sufficient information about his finances to establish his inability to make greater 
progress paying his creditors. His spouse’s medical problems and unemployment 
damaged his family finances and are circumstances largely beyond his control; 
however, he did not act responsibly under the circumstances in regard to all of his SOR 
debts. Applicant provided sufficient information to mitigate the foreclosure and failure to 
pay his second mortgage (SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.f). Applicant unsuccessfully attempted to 
use a quit claim, short sale, or renegotiated mortgage. In 2009, the bank foreclosed on 
his condominium. Applicant’s residence is in a non-recourse state.8 The foreclosure and 
second mortgage debt were resolved through foreclosure.   
 
Applicant denied knowledge of the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.c, and he informed 
the creditors that he was not responsible for those debts. There is no evidence that the 
creditors have sought to enforce these three debts by obtaining a judgment or 
garnishing Applicant’s pay. These three alleged debts are mitigated under AG ¶ 20(e).     
    
 Applicant did not provide any of the following documentation relating to the debt 
in SOR ¶ 1.d for $21,430: (1) proof of payments such as checking account statements, 
photocopies of checks, or a letter from the creditor proving that he paid or made any 
payments to the creditor; (2) correspondence to or from the creditor to establish 
maintenance of contact with the creditor;9 (3) a credible debt dispute; (4) attempts to 
negotiate payment plans, such as settlement offers or agreements to show that he was 
                                            
8 See California Code of Civil Procedure sections 580b and 580d. The Anti-Deficiency Statute, 
Cal. Code Civ. Proc. § 580(b), states in relevant part: 
 
No deficiency judgment shall lie in any event after a sale of real property or an estate for years 
therein for failure of the purchaser to complete his or her contract of sale, or under a deed of trust 
or mortgage given to the vendor to secure payment of the balance of the purchase price of that 
real property or estate for years therein, or under a deed of trust or mortgage on a dwelling for not 
more than four families given to a lender to secure repayment of a loan which was in fact used to 
pay all or part of the purchase price of that dwelling occupied, entirely or in part, by the purchaser. 
 
Under this section, generally if there is a foreclosure on a dwelling and there is a deficiency, the lender 
has no recourse regarding “purchase money loans,” also called “non-recourse loans,” the amounts set 
forth in both the 1st and the 2nd mortgages used to finance the dwelling purchase. The collateral or 
dwelling is considered full satisfaction. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-09662 at 9 (A.J. Feb. 26, 2009) 
(quoting same provision to mitigate substantial mortgage debts—it is noted hearing-level decisions are 
persuasive but non-precedential); ISCR Case No. 08-03024 at 10-12 (AJ Apr. 28, 2009) (same result—
different state). 
 
9 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
attempting to resolve these SOR debts; (5) evidence of financial counseling; or (6) other 
evidence of progress or resolution of his SOR debts. In his SOR response, he admitted 
responsibility for the debt and made no comments about how he was endeavoring to 
resolve it.  
 
 Applicant’s bankruptcy in 1997, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, is too remote in time to 
raise a security concern. Moreover, the file does not contain evidence about the 
number, amount, or source of the debts discharged during this bankruptcy.   
  
 Applicant’s failure to prove that he has made any steps to resolve the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.d shows a lack of judgment and responsibility that weighs against approval of 
his security clearance. There is insufficient evidence that he was unable to make 
greater progress resolving this delinquent debt, or that his financial problems are being 
resolved, are under control, and will not recur in the future. Under all the circumstances, 
he failed to establish that financial consideration concerns are mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) applies. The Government produced substantial evidence that 
Applicant deliberately omitted relevant facts from his February 28, 2013 SF 86 about his 
finances. He failed to disclose the foreclosure of his condominium in 2009 and his 
$21,430 charged-off delinquent debt owed to a bank, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f.     
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s intentional false statement 
about his finances on his February 28, 2013 SF 86. His false statement is recent, 
serious, and deliberate. He failed to meet his burden of mitigating this conduct.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is 60 years old, and he has been a software administrator since August 2004. From 
August 2004 to April 2007, he worked as a drug and alcohol counselor. He honorably 
retired after serving on active duty in the Navy from September 1972 to April 1997. In 
the Navy, he was an Operations Special Chief (E-7) and held a top secret security 
clearance. He is active in his church, volunteers for a variety of programs, and donates 
to several charities. There is no evidence of security violations.  
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant has acknowledged that he has a $21,430 charged-off delinquent 
debt owed to a bank, as alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d. He has not provided any evidence of 
what he has done to resolve this debt. His failure to provide more information on 
resolution of this debt shows lack of financial responsibility and judgment and raises 
unmitigated questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. See AG ¶ 18. More importantly, Applicant deliberately omitted 
derogatory financial information from his February 28, 2013 SF 86. Applicant’s “failure 
to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process” weighs 
heavily against approval or reinstatement of his access to classified information 
because candid disclosure of negative information provides some assurance that a 
security clearance holder will disclose any potential compromise of classified 
information. Such disclosure, even when it reflects negatively on a security clearance 
holder, is crucial to the protection of classified information.  
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated personal conduct and 
financial considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance 
to Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary to 
justify the award of a security clearance in the future. At some future time, he may well 
be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security clearance worthiness. 
Based on the facts before me and the adjudicative guidelines that I am required to 
apply, I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
reinstate Applicant security clearance eligibility at this time. 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Financial considerations and personal 
conduct concerns are not mitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e to 1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
