 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ADP Case No. 14-02159 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on November 26, 2013. On June 11, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR), citing trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F. DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended 
(Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on August 11, 2014; answered it on August 28, 
2014; and requested a decision on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s written case on September 30, 2014. On October 6, 2014, 
a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was 
 2
given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on October 20, 2014, and 
did not respond. The case was assigned to me on December 5, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations except SOR ¶ 
1.bb, which he denied. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since July 2013. He has never held a security clearance or a public 
trust position. 
 
 Applicant has attended an online university since March 2010 but has not 
received a degree. During the past ten years, he has held various jobs in the private 
sector. He was unemployed from February to May 2010, July 2010 to April 2011, and 
March to April 2012.  
 
 Applicant married in May 2003 and divorced in April 2010. Two children were 
born during the marriage, ages 11 and 9, for whom Applicant is obligated to pay child 
support.  
 
 The SOR alleges 29 delinquent debts totaling more than $30,000. Applicant’s 
credit bureau report (CBR), dated December 11, 2013, (Item 5) reflects the debts in the 
SOR. The CBR reflects that 15 of the 29 delinquent debts are medical debts. Of the 15 
medical debts, five are for less than $100. In his security clearance application, 
Applicant stated that he did not have medical insurance when the debts were incurred. 
The other debts alleged in the SOR include a judgment for early termination of a lease 
(SOR ¶ 1.b), an automobile repossession (SOR ¶ 1.e), and unpaid cable and cell phone 
bills (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.n, 1.p, and 1.r). 
 
 Applicant has not sought or received financial counseling. He has not negotiated 
payment agreements, paid, or otherwise resolved any of the debts alleged in the SOR. 
In his answer to the SOR, he stated that he intended to start catching up with his most 
recent debts and to pursue a debt management plan to resolve his older debts.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. The standard that must be met for 
assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness 
are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is “clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor 
personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
 3
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security. The Government 
must present substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by 
substantial evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate 
burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or 
continue eligibility for a public trust position.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
 4
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and his CBR establish two disqualifying conditions under 
this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) 
(“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. Applicant encountered a marital breakup, three 
periods of unemployment, and numerous medical bills that were not covered by 
insurance. However, he has not acted reasonably. He has been employed since April 
2012 and has worked for his current employer since July 2013. He produced no 
evidence that he had contacted any of his creditors or taken any significant action to 
resolve his debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant has not sought or received financial 
counseling, and his financial problems are not under control. 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) is not established. Good faith means acting in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case 
 5
No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Although Applicant has 
promised to start resolving his debts, his promise to pay his delinquent debts in the 
future is not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner. ISCR 
Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 19, 2008). A person is not required to establish 
resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. The 
adjudicative guidelines do not require that an individual make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts alleged in the SOR 
be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant’s 
vague aspirations to resolve his debts do not constitute a plan, and he has taken no 
significant steps to pay or otherwise resolve any of the debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Although Applicant claims that he disputed the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.bb, he has not produced any documentary evidence of the basis for the 
dispute or its resolution. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Because Applicant requested a determination on the record without a hearing, 
I had no opportunity to evaluate his credibility and sincerity based on demeanor. See 
ISCR Case No. 01-12350 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jul. 23, 2003). 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with 
national security to grant him eligibility for a public trust position. 
 
 6
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.cc:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
