 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-02825 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations’ trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 31, 2014, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense Regulation 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
On August 28, 2014, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR, and he elected 
to have his case decided on the written record. On September 26, 2014, Department 
Counsel submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was 
provided to Applicant on October 2, 2014, and he received it on October 13, 2014. 
 
2 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant submitted additional information. The case was 
assigned to me on November 21, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations except ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g. His 
admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He is not married and has no children. He served in the 
military from 1994 to 1999 and was honorably discharged. He has an associate’s 
degree awarded in 1996, and continued to attend college from August 2006 to August 
2007, and from May 2008 to January 2009. He has not earned an advanced degree.  
 
 Applicant had periods of unemployment from March 2003 to July 2003; 
December 2008 to June 2009; December 2009 to January 2010; August 2011 to April 
2012; and from December 2013 to the present.1  
 
 Applicant failed to file his 2012 federal income tax returns. On his security 
clearance application (SCA), he stated the reason was because “the government has 
been for three years garnishing my wages for educational expenses accrued by student 
loans.”2 In his answer to the SOR he stated: “No excuse for this.”3 During his 
background investigation interview on January 29, 2014, he indicated that he was upset 
and frustrated because the federal government was withholding his tax refunds to apply 
to delinquent student loans He planned on filing his 2012 federal tax return with his 
2013 federal tax return. He did not provide proof that he filed the delinquent tax return. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.e alleged approximately $153,152 in delinquent student 
loans. At some point, Applicant was making $100 monthly payments on his student 
loans, but defaulted in 2000 because he did not have the financial means to pay them. 
He admitted he owes the loans, but disputed the total amount because when he was 
working his wages were being garnished to pay the debts. In his answer to the SOR, he 
stated the garnishment has been in place for six years. He does not know the current 
balance of the debts. He indicated that his tax refunds are also involuntarily withheld to 
apply to the delinquent debts. He defaulted on the loans because he did not have 
money to pay them.4 In his answer to the FORM, Applicant provided documents 
showing his wages were garnished in 2009 for $103 a month. It is unknown how long 
the garnishment was imposed, but presumably it stopped when he was unemployed. 
Applicant provided documents to show his federal income tax refunds for 2010 of 
                                                          
1 Item 4, 7. 
 
2 Item 4. 
 
3 Item 2.  
 
4 Item 7. 
 
3 
$1,767 and $1,683 for 2006, were withheld. He provided documents to show that other 
amounts were withheld by the federal government, presumably the amounts garnished. 
They were: $718 in 2011, $300 in 2008, $976 in 2008, $345 in 2002, and $48 in 2007.  
He also provided a “notice of withholding” document dated May 31, 2013 for 
garnishment in the amount of $99,003 to the U.S. Department of Education.  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applied admitted he broke a lease on an apartment he 
was renting. He stated that there were three months remaining on the lease. He denied 
that the amount reflected in SOR ¶ 1.f ($9,628) is the correct amount. During his 
background interview he explained that when he vacated the apartment he did not leave 
a forwarding address, so he did not receive the correspondence regarding the collection 
of the debt. He made no arrangements with the landlord prior to moving. He learned of 
the amount when he completed a new rental application for a home and was advised of 
the outstanding debt. He stated during his background interview that he had worked out 
an agreement to begin paying this debt. He stated in his answer to the SOR that he 
worked out an agreement with the creditor to begin paying the debt. He failed to provide 
proof he has taken action to resolve the debt.5 
 
 Applicant stated in his SOR answer that he does not recognize the debt in ¶ 1.g 
($1,410). During his background interview he indicated that he was familiar with the 
debt and that he would contact the creditor to make payment arrangements to resolve 
the debt, but he did not agree with the credit report. He has not resolved the debt. He 
admitted he owes the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h ($351) but has not paid it.6 Applicant is a 
leader in his church and community. He teaches Sunday school.7  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . 
. . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
                                                          
5 Item 2, 7. 
 
6 Item 2, 7. 
 
7 Item 2. 
 
4 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 
5 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant failed to file his 2012 Federal income tax returns. He has delinquent 
student loans and other debts totaling approximately $153,152, which he is unwilling or 
unable pay. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  Applicant’s delinquent debts are recent and he has not provided evidence of 
voluntary efforts to resolve them. The government has garnished his wages and 
withheld his tax refunds. It appears he was frustrated by the government’s actions and 
decided not to file his 2012 federal income tax return. He has not provided proof that he 
filed his 2010 tax return. I am not convinced his behavior is unlikely to recur. His 
conduct casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant had periods of unemployment. His unemployment was beyond his 
control. However, in order to fully apply AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must present evidence 
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. He did not. When he was employed 
he did not voluntarily pay his delinquent debts. Instead, the government garnished his 
wages and withheld his tax refunds. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 
6 
 Applicant has not initiated good-faith efforts to pay or resolve his delinquent 
debts. Garnishment actions and involuntary withholding his tax refunds does not 
constitute a good-faith effort to repay or otherwise resolve his delinquent debts. There is 
no evidence he has received financial counseling or that his financial problems are 
under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. 
 
 Applicant disputed the amounts owed for his delinquent student loans, on a 
defaulted lease, and on the legitimacy of one of the debts. He provided documents 
showing the amounts the federal government has withheld from his tax refunds and 
garnishment of his wages. Considering his loans are still in default status, he is likely 
still accruing interest and penalties, so the delinquent balance is unknown. He did not 
provide documents to support the other debts he disputed or any action he has taken to 
resolve them. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to these debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He served honorably in the military. He failed to file his 
2012 income tax returns, and has not voluntarily paid any of his delinquent debts. His 
financial problems are not under control and he has demonstrated poor judgment in 
managing them. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns.  
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances it is not clearly consistent with national security 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
