KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: A judge may weigh the same evidence differently under different guidelines. The
Appeal Board has no authority to rule on the sufficiency of a clearance investigation.  Adverse
decision affirmed..
CASENO: 14-00715.a1
DATE: 12/10/2014
DATE: December 10, 2014
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-00715
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 3, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On September 8, 2014, after considering the
record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ 
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 60-year-old employee of a Government contractor.  Married since 1978, he
and his wife have three adult children.
Applicant worked for another Government agency form 1977 to 1985.  He began working
for his current employer in mid-1985.  He has held a security clearance for 36 years.  His most
recent eligibility was granted in 2004.
Applicant illegally used marijuana from mid-2006 until mid-2013, all the while holding a
security clearance.1  He characterized his use as once or twice a year “‘in very small amounts.’” 
Decision at 2.  In his security clearance application (SCA), Applicant stated that he intended to use
marijuana in the future.  He stated that he considered it to be harmless when used only occasionally
and that he would never engage in such activity under circumstances that might harm others or
himself.  Applicant reaffirmed his admissions of marijuana use in his answer to the SOR, stating,
however, that he would not use illegal drugs in the future.  He made similar statements in his
response to the File of Relevant Material (FORM).
Applicant cited to his service to the community, such as his participation in the Parent
Teacher Association, church, veterans groups, boy scouts, etc.  He highlighted his excellent work
ethic and his reputation within the community.
He avers that his last drug use was not recent and that he no longer associates with persons
who use marijuana.  He claims that his lifestyle changes indicate that his drug use is unlikely to
recur.
The Judge’s Analysis
1Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR, and the Judge incorporated these admissions into his findings
of fact.  Allegation 1(a) stated that, in addition to his more recent use, Applicant used marijuana “from about 1971 to
approximately 1974.”  
2
The SOR alleged Applicant’s drug use under Guidelines H and E, and the Judge concluded
that Applicant’s misconduct raised concerns under both.  He further concluded that Applicant had
not mitigated the Guideline H concerns, citing to evidence of his many years experience with
holding a clearance.  The Judge stated that, as a consequence of this experience, Applicant knew or
should have known the adverse effect of illegal drug use on his clearance.  He stated that Applicant’s
use of marijuana violated the trust placed in him by the Government and indicates a lack of
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  The Judge concluded that Applicant’s promises to refrain
from future drug use are entitled to “little weight,” insofar as he has used marijuana over several
years duration despite his knowledge of the drug’s illegality.  Under Guideline E, the Judge
concluded that Applicant’s admission of his drug use precludes the likelihood that he could be
subjected to blackmail.  He resolved that Guideline in Applicant’s favor.
In the whole-person analysis the Judge noted evidence of Applicant’s professional
competence, his reputation in the community, and his having held a clearance for 36 years.  He went
on to say, however, that notwithstanding his favorable qualities, Applicant’s use of marijuana
violated the trust that the Government had placed in him and raised questions about his judgment,
trustworthiness, and ability to comply with the law and to protect classified information.
Discussion
Applicant contends that the Judge’s conclusions are inconsistent, in that the Judge found in
Applicant’s favor under Guideline E regarding the same allegations that he found against Applicant
under Guideline H.  He argues that if his conduct were mitigated under one it should have been
mitigated under the other.  However, a Judge may weigh the same evidence differently under
different Guidelines.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 13-00142 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 15, 2014).  In the case
before us, we find no reason to disturb the manner in which the Judge weighed the evidence.  His
differing conclusions under the two Guidelines alleged in the SOR are sustainable.        
Applicant contends that the Government should have delved deeper into his background in
order to obtain favorable evidence that would counterbalance his drug use.  He believes that the
investigation in his case was not thorough enough, thereby presenting a distorted view of his
trustworthiness.  We have no authority or duty to rule on the sufficiency of a clearance investigation. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 00-0430 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 3, 2001).  In a DOHA case, once security
concerns are raised, either through an applicant’s admissions or through evidence provided by the
Government, it is the applicant’s responsibility to present evidence in mitigation.  An applicant “has
the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  Directive ¶
E3.1.15.  The Directive imposes no such burden on the Government.  
As the Judge concluded, Applicant’s admissions to the SOR and his answers in the SCA that
he had used marijuana on multiple occasions while holding a clearance were sufficient to raise
security concerns under both Guidelines.2  Therefore, the burden fell upon Applicant to present any
2The Directive presumes a nexus between proved or admitted conduct under any of the Guidelines and an
applicant’s security worthiness.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00114 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 30, 2014).  
3
and all evidence in mitigation.  Although pro se applicants are not expected to present their cases
as would an attorney, they are expected to take reasonable steps to protect their rights.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 12-02371 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 30, 2014).  In addition to his SOR answer, Applicant
submitted a written response to the FORM.  If he believed that further evidence was needed, it was
his responsibility to submit it to the Judge.  
Applicant’s brief cites to evidence of his good character and other positive traits.  He notes
that the Judge himself commented on this evidence in his whole-person analysis.  He believes that
this comment is not consistent with other parts of the Judge’s analysis in which he states that
Applicant’s drug use impugns his judgment, trustworthiness, and willingness to comply with the
law.  However, it is not inconsistent for a Judge to acknowledge an applicant’s favorable evidence
but, nevertheless, conclude that this evidence is not sufficient to undermine the security concerns
raised by his conduct or circumstances.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06591 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 16,
2009). Given the record that was before the Judge, a reasonable person could conclude that the
admittedly laudatory aspects of Applicant’s record were not sufficient to mitigate the Guideline H
concerns in his case. 
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The Judge’s findings about Applicant’s multiple uses of marijuana while holding a
clearance and his inconsistent statements about his intent for future use support the Judge’s
mitigation analysis.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-18270 at 3, n. 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  The
decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only
when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the
national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed; Michael Y. Ra’anan                
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett                   
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
Signed; james E. Moody                    
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
