                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ------------------------------------                   )      ISCR  Case No.  14-02712           
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding his financial considerations. Eligibility
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On July 18, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DoD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on August 21, 2014, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on October 2, 2014, and was scheduled for hearing on
November 12, 2014. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of four exhibits (GEs
1-4). Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and seven exhibits (AEs A-G). The
transcript (Tr.) was received on November 24, 2014. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with a documented inquiry of the
status of his state tax filings for tax years 2010-2013. For good cause shown, Applicant
was granted seven days to supplement the record. The Government was afforded six
days to respond. Within the time permitted, Applicant provided a letter from his state’s
treasury department confirming his filing of all state income tax returns for the tax periods
of 2010-2013. Applicant’s submission was admitted as AE H.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly failed to file federal tax returns for tax years
2010-2012, as required by law. In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied failing to file
his federal tax returns for the years in question. He claimed he filed his federal tax returns
for the years 2010-2013. He claimed an understanding that he had additional time to file
his tax returns because he would be receiving a refund. He claimed he did not then, or
now, believe he violated any law and further claimed he has since filed his tax returns for
the 2010-2012 tax years as well as for the 2013 tax period.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 44-year-old principal project specialist of a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Background
Applicant was employed by his current employer in 1991 and has been with the
same employer for almost 23 years. (GE 1; Tr. 44) He married in August 2010 and has no
children from this marriage. (GE 1 and AE C) Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in
May 1991 and earned additional post-graduate credits from a local technical institute in
2007. (GE 1) Applicant claims no military service.
Applicant’s finances
Applicant failed to file timely federal and state income tax returns in 2010, 2011,
and 2012, as required by law.  (GE 4 and AE A; Tr. 54-56) Claiming refunds for all three
years and an understanding that he had three years to file his tax returns when he was
entitled to tax refunds, he never sought any filing extensions from the IRS or state taxing
3
authority for the years in question. (AE C; Tr. 63-64) When completing his security
clearance applications (e-QIPs) in March 2013 he furnished a much different explanation
for his failure to file tax returns for 2010-2012: difficulty with his software. (GEs 1-2).  He
cited the same software problems when he was interviewed by an agent from the Office
of Personnel Management (OPM) in April 2013. (GE 4 and AE C) 
Not until Applicant received the SOR in July 2014 did he realize the seriousness of
his failure to file timely federal tax returns. (Tr. 65) Even at this time, he still believed he
had legal protections to complete his tax returns within the three-year window he relied on
for filing taxpayers like himself who were entitled to refunds. (AE C; Tr. 65) 
After citing complexities associated with his wife’s 401(k), his pending home sale,
and his reliance on information in an IRS website that seemingly afforded taxpayers
entitled to refunds up to three years to file their federal tax returns, he acknowledged his
erroneous understanding of IRS filing requirements. (Tr. 63-65) Mistakenly, he failed to
properly interpret the letter he received from the IRS in 2011 (corrected to be 2012) that
applied two timelines: one for seeking owed refunds from the IRS and the other for setting
income tax filing requirements for all taxpayers. (AEs A and C; Tr. 66-70) Applicant
recognized he made a judgment mistake in not filing his returns in a timely way or
obtaining filing extensions from the IRS.  (Tr. 50) 
Applicant filed his federal and state tax returns for the tax years of 2010-2012 in
January 2014. (AE A; Tr. 55-56)  Without a prior filing extension from the IRS, he waited
until August 2014 to file his 2013 return. (AE B). For each of these tax years, he received
tax refunds from the IRS. (AEs A and B; Tr.  53-56) His most recent credit report reflects
an excellent credit history with no listed adverse accounts that could potentially explain
his late filing of his federal tax returns. (AE D) Inferences warrant that Applicant’s tax filing
delays were attributable to mistaken understandings of his filing duties for taxpayers
expecting refunds.
In a post-hearing submission, Applicant furnished a letter from his state’s taxation
division confirming his filing of state tax returns for tax years 2010-2013 and his having no
outstanding tax balances associated with the 2010-2013 tax periods, or any other tax
year. (AE H)  
Endorsements and awards
Colleagues who have worked with Applicant for many years laud his engineering
skills and performance and characterize him as reliable and trustworthy. (AE E; Tr. 58-59)
Applicant produced performance evaluations for the inclusive years of 2010-2013 when
he worked as a team leader who executed his team’s goals while leading other engineers
on the team’s assigned missions. (AE F) His evaluator assigned leader ratings that
ranged from 5.0 (significantly exceeds) to 3.0 (proficient) in rating categories and
assigned an overall performance rating of 3.6/5.0 (exceeded commitments). (AE F) 
4
In recognition of his outstanding contributions to his engineering team over the
course of his 20 years with the company, Applicant received a prestigious award from his
employer in October 2013. (AE G) Previously, he was a recipient of numerous special
recognition awards between 2005 and 2013.
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  They must be considered before
deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The
guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
5
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
AG, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances
be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan,
484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s failure to timely file federal tax
returns for tax years 2010 through 2012. Difficulties with his software and mistaken
understandings about IRS deadlines for tax filings for taxpayers who expect refunds are
6
his assigned reasons for not timely filing his federal tax returns for the years in question,
or obtaining filing extensions.
Applicant’s filing delays raise potential security concerns about his judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness in managing his personal finances. Applicant’s actions
warrant the application of one of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC
¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual [f]ederal, state, or local income tax returns as required or
the fraudulent filing of the same.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.
Financial stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required
precisely to inspire trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the
principal concern of a clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is
vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in
financial cases.
Applicant’s failure to file timely federal tax returns cannot be considered to be the
result of extenuating circumstances. He was manifestly aware of the importance of filing
timely federal and state tax returns and paying his debts as they come due. His recent
correspondence from his state’s taxing authority confirmed Applicant’s timely filing of his
state tax returns is an important indicia of his security clearance worthiness. See ISCR
Case No. 12-05053 at 4-5 (App. Bd. October 30, 2014). Applicant has since filed his
federal returns covering his back tax years before the issuance of the SOR in 2014, and
documented his receipt of refunds for these years.
Cited confusion over IRS criteria for tax filing for taxpayers anticipating refunds is
the major reason for Applicant’s extended delays in filing his tax returns. Still, he waited
several months to file his back returns even after he told the OPM agent who
interviewed him in April 2013 that he “intends to file these tax returns in the near future.”
(GE 4)  None of his cited reasons for failing to address his federal tax returns are
sufficient to warrant any application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the
financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation),
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”  Failure to make more
concerted efforts to address his 2010-2012 tax returns precludes him from taking full
advantage of MC ¶ 20(b).
By filing his 2010-2012 federal tax returns (albeit out of time), Applicant has
shown progress in stabilizing his finances. Certainly, mitigation could be stronger were
Applicant to have filed his 2013 federal tax return with an extension or before he
received the SOR. Still, his documented tax filings and refunds reflect satisfactory
progress in accordance with the criteria established by the Appeal Board for assessing
an applicant’s efforts to rectify his poor financial condition with responsible efforts
considering his circumstances. See  ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan.,
12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No.
7
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Oct.
29, 2009). Applicant’s efforts to date are enough to meet the tax filing criteria
established by the Appeal Board for assessing an applicant’s efforts to rectify his
failures to satisfy his legal tax filing obligations.  See ISCR Case No. 12-05053, supra,
at 4-5.
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence reflects some Applicant judgment
lapses in his failing to timely file his federal tax returns for tax years 2010-2012 or seek
tax-filing extensions for the years in question. Still, misunderstandings of his tax filing
duties, and not wilful failure to file, best explain his late federal tax filings for the years in
issue. Applicant’s most recent filing initiatives and refunds resulting from his late tax
filings reflect good-faith measures to address his tax returns. 
Applicant’s many contributions to his defense contractor employer also weigh
considerably in his favor in making an overall clearance eligibility assessment. He has
received solid performance evaluations and is highly regarded by the colleagues who
work with him and place their trust in him. His awards recognizing his outstanding
contributions to his engineering team over the course of his 20 years with the company
are numerous and include a prestigious employer award. Overall, Applicant’s
demonstrated trust and reliability with his employer of over 20 years duration and
demonstrated corrective tax filing actions to date are sufficient to meet mitigation
requirements imposed by the guideline governing his finances.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):   FOR APPLICANT
Subpara. 1.a:            For Applicant             
  
                        Co n  c  l u  sions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
8
                                        
  
9
