 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01226 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald C. Sykstus, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the handling protected information and use of information 
technology systems security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 9, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines K (handling 
protected information) and M (use of information technology systems). The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 29, 2014, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 23, 2014. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
 
2 
 
September 29, 2014, scheduling the hearing for October 21, 2014. The hearing was 
convened on October 21, 2014, and reconvened on October 23, 2014. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 30, 2014.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Procedure 
 
A joint hearing was conducted for Applicant and his son. I have one set of 
exhibits and one transcript, but I am issuing separate decisions.  
 
Evidence 
 
Department Counsel called three witnesses and submitted Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 33, which were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant and his 
son testified. They called 12 additional witnesses and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through W and AA through QQ, which were admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel sent an informational letter to Applicant’s attorney on August 29, 
2014. The letter is included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 61-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2009. He is on unpaid furlough pending the outcome of this 
case. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which he has held since about 2009. He 
has a bachelor’s degree. He is married with three adult children.1  
 
 On a Friday in January 2012, Applicant inserted unclassified read-only compact 
discs (CDs) in a classified computer. Any media placed in a classified system takes on 
the classification of the system. He was authorized to place them in the classified 
computer, but the CDs became classified. Applicant inadvertently brought the now-
classified CDs home, where they remained in his backpack until he returned to work the 
following Monday.2 
 
 During the weekend, the discs could not be located by the security manager. On 
Monday, the security manager asked Applicant about the missing discs. He produced 
them from his backpack. It was determined that there was no compromise or spillage. 
The security manager testified that Applicant was “quite contrite . . . forthright and 
honest about what he did.” Applicant was directed to reread the security briefing and the 
system security plan.3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 46-48, 53-54, 84, 136-137; GE 14. 
 
2 Tr. at 66-74, 99-101, 398-399; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 13, 14, 16-18. 
 
3 Tr. at 73-75, 109-110, 398-399, 409-410; Applicant’s response to SOR;GE 13, 14, 16-18. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant and his son work for the same company. They were required to 
periodically spend time at an isolated location in the United States. The closest hotel to 
the location was more than 60 miles away. Conditions at the location were austere with 
few amenities. The location had a bank of classified computers that were connected to 
a classified network.4  
 
 During a trip to the isolated location in 2011, it was noted that the computers 
would occasionally be locked. The locked computers were being used by remote logins 
from other locations. Authorization was required to do remote logins. In early 2012, a 
secure network was created between Applicant’s home location and the isolated 
location. Classified information could be transmitted over the secure network, and it was 
possible to conduct a remote login between the two locations. However, no 
authorization was granted to anyone at Applicant’s home location to perform a remote 
login to the computers at the isolated location.5 
 
 Applicant’s son traveled to the isolated location in April 2012. Applicant was 
unable to make the trip because of a medical condition. Applicant’s son created a text 
file with the Internet Protocol (IP) address of the computer at the isolated location and 
placed the text file on the secure network. The son called Applicant and asked him to 
attempt a remote login from the classified computer at the home location to a classified 
computer at the isolated location. Applicant was authorized to log into the computers at 
both locations, but he never received authorization to conduct remote logins. Applicant 
took his son’s request without question, and he did not investigate whether he was 
authorized to conduct a remote login to the computer at the isolated location. Applicant 
used the IP address that was on the text file, and he attempted a remote login to the 
computer at the isolated location. He was able to get to the login prompt on the screen, 
but he was unable to log in.6 
 
 The Defense Security Service (DSS) suspended Applicant’s security clearance in 
December 2012 pending the outcome of this case. Applicant has been on unpaid 
furlough from his company for almost two years. He is appropriately remorseful for his 
actions.7  
 
 Numerous witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf. He also submitted a large 
amount of documents and letters. Applicant is praised for his excellent job performance, 
as well as his honesty, dedication, reliability, trustworthiness, and integrity.8 
 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 57-63, 146-148; GE 4, 5, 23. 
 
5 Tr. at 63-64, 77-78, 105, 134, 150, 208-211; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 4, 5, 10, 23. 
 
6 Tr. at 59-60, 77-84, 102, 106, 110, 119-120, 163-164, 207, 222-223, 273; Applicant’s response to SOR; 
GE 4, 5, 10, 17, 19, 20, 23. 
 
7 Tr. at 136-137; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 33. 
 
8 AE A-V. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 The security concern for handling protected information is set out in AG ¶ 33: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
 AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) collecting or storing classified or other protected information at home or 
in any other unauthorized location;  
 
(d) inappropriate efforts to obtain or view classified or other protected 
information outside one’s need to know; and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information.  
 
 Applicant took classified discs home. He attempted a remote login to a classified 
computer when he was not authorized to do so. The evidence raises the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate handling protected information security concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 35. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training 
and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of security 
responsibilities. 
 
 The first incident was an honest mistake that could have happened to almost 
anyone. However, it put Applicant on notice, and he should have exercised more care 
during the second incident. He was authorized to log into the classified computers at 
both locations, but he had no authorization to log in remotely. Applicant relied on his son 
to his own detriment. Nonetheless, I am convinced that Applicant is remorseful for his 
actions, he possesses a positive attitude toward the discharge of his security 
responsibilities, and he will not repeat the behavior. Both mitigating conditions are 
applicable.  
 
6 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
The security concern for use of information technology systems is set out in AG ¶ 
39: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information. 
 
 AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or 
component thereof;  
 
(c) use of any information technology system to gain unauthorized access 
to another system or to a compartmented area within the same system; 
and 
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system. 
 
Applicant attempted an unauthorized remote login to a classified computer. The 
above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate the use of information technology systems security 
concerns are provided under AG ¶ 41. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.  
 
 AG ¶ 41(a) is applicable under the same rationale discussed in the analysis for 
handling protected information.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines K and M in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 I considered Applicant’s excellent character evidence. He was involved in two 
security violations. One was inadvertent, and the inappropriate actions of his son 
significantly contributed to the second. Security violations are one of the strongest 
possible reasons for denying or revoking access to classified information, as they raise 
serious questions about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. 
Once it is established that an applicant has committed a security violation, he has a very 
heavy burden of demonstrating that he should be entrusted with classified information. 
Because security violations strike at the very heart of the industrial security program, an 
administrative judge must give any claims of reform and rehabilitation strict scrutiny. In 
many security clearance cases, applicants are denied a clearance for having an 
indicator of a risk that they might commit a security violation (e.g., alcohol abuse, 
delinquent debts, or drug use). Security violation cases reveal more than simply an 
indicator of risk.9 The frequency and duration of the security violations are also 
aggravating factors.10  
 
Applicant is remorseful for his conduct. I further believe the experience of going 
through the adjudicative process had an additional value, in that Applicant is cognizant 
that he must be more diligent in his responsibilities for safeguarding classified 
information. He has met his heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to continue his security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the handling protected information and use of information technology systems 
security concerns. 
 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 03-26888 (App. Bd. Oct. 5, 2006). 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 97-0435 at 5 (App. Bd. July 14, 1998). 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline K:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline M:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
