1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
----------------------------------- ) ADP Case No. 14-02132
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a
public trust position. The evidence shows Applicant has a history of financial problems
or difficulties, which is ongoing and unresolved. Applicant did not present sufficient
evidence to explain and mitigate the concern stemming from her unfavorable financial
history. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.
Statement of the Case
On August 21, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a
statement of reasons (SOR) detailing a trustworthiness concern under Guideline F for
financial considerations. The action was taken under Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Review Program (Jan. 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security
 The AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The1
AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 Tr. 33–34. 2
 Tr. 69–70. 3
 Tr. 62–64. 4
 Exhibit 1. 5
2
Program (Jan. 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)1
implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. The SOR recommended submission
of Applicant’s case to an administrative judge to determine her eligibility to occupy an
automated data processing (ADP) position to support a contract with the DOD.  
In her September 10, 2014 answer to the SOR, she agreed with or admitted the
various delinquent debts alleged under Guideline F. She also requested a hearing and
provided an explanation for her financial situation.
The case was assigned to me November 12, 2014. The hearing was held
December 9, 2014. At the hearing, Department Counsel presented Exhibits 1–4, which
were admitted. Applicant did not present any documentary matters, but the record was
kept open to allow her to do so. Those matters were timely received and are admitted
without objections as Exhibit A. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received
December 17, 2014.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a health care contractor for the Defense
Department. She is seeking to obtain eligibility to occupy a position of public trust for her
job working in a customer service call center. Eligibility is necessary because her job
involves access to sensitive but unclassified information known as personally
identifiable information, which is commonly abbreviated as PII. She has had this job
since March 2013. She earns $14.72 per hour; she has no other sources of income;
and, aside from less than $1,000 in the bank, she has no significant financial assets. 
Applicant is married, but has lived separated from her husband for several
years.  She anticipates obtaining a divorce in 2015.  The marriage produced four2 3
children who are now 21, 18, 16, and 13 years old. Two of the children reside with each
parent who is responsible for their support. In addition, a one-year-old grandchild is
living with Applicant, but she anticipates that will be a temporary arrangement.4
Applicant’s employment history includes two periods of unemployment. She was
unemployed from October 2012 to February 2013 and from November 2004 to February
2005.  Otherwise, she has had gainful employment, usually working in customer-service5
jobs, since at least 2002. 
 Exhibits 2, 3, and 4.  6
 Tr. 38–39. 7
 Tr. 43–44. 8
 Tr. 50. 9
 Exhibit A. 10
 Tr. 50–51. 11
 Exhibit A. 12
 Tr. 54–55. 13
3
The available documentary evidence shows that Applicant has a history of
financial problems or difficulties.  As alleged in the SOR and admitted by Applicant, she6
has 22 delinquent accounts ranging in amounts from $22 to $14,013 for a total of about
$32,391. They consist of collection accounts, charged-off accounts, and medical
collection accounts. 
Applicant explained that she has struggled financially since the age of 18, when
she had her first child, and the delinquent accounts in the SOR were accumulated over
a period of years.  She did not provide any documentary information showing that the7
delinquent accounts were paid, settled, in a repayment agreement, forgiven, or
otherwise resolved in her favor. She explained that the largest delinquent debt, a
charged-off account for $14,013, was reduced to approximately $3,000 after sale of the
repossessed car.  She has telephoned and spoken with various creditors, but was8
unable to reach any repayment agreements as most creditors wanted a lump-sum
payment that she could not afford to pay. She considered resolving her delinquent debts
through bankruptcy and sought the advice of a bankruptcy attorney, but she could not
afford to pay the initial attorney’s fees.  Most recently in December 2014, she sought9
the advice of a credit-counseling organization.  They advised Applicant that she lacked10
sufficient cash flow to make payments on delinquent debt and meet her current
obligations, and that she should consider bankruptcy.  The paperwork from credit-11
counseling organization shows a monthly income and expense summary with a
negative net remainder of $173.25.  That is consistent with Applicant’s explanation that12
it is necessary for her to “juggle” to meet her recurring monthly expenses.13
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 14
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant15
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  16
 AG ¶ 19(a).  17
 AG ¶ 19(c). 18
4
Discussion
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant14
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern is: 15
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect [sensitive] information.  16
The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly compromise
sensitive information to obtain money or something else of value. It encompasses
concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important qualities. A
person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or
negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information.    
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties, which is ongoing and unresolved. The facts indicate inability (as
opposed to unwillingness) to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial17
obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish18
these two disqualifying conditions, and the facts also suggest a degree of financial
irresponsibility.
With that said, I attach minimal security significance to the seven accounts
identified as medical collection accounts for a total of about $3,286. Applicant incurred
those debts for necessary medical care and they do not indicate poor self-control,
questionable judgment, unreliability, or untrustworthiness. On that basis, the debts in
SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.g, 1.j, 1.l, 1.m, 1.n, and 1.o are decided for Applicant.   
 Based on the available evidence, none of the six mitigating conditions under
Guideline F are sufficient to fully mitigate the concern stemming from the remaining
 AG ¶¶ 20(a)–(f). 19
 ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). 20
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (citations and quotations omitted). 21
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).22
5
delinquent accounts.  Applicant has done little to resolve those delinquent accounts.19
She has been advised to pursue bankruptcy by a bankruptcy attorney and a credit-
counseling organization, and that appears to be a suitable course of action for her to
take from a financial perspective. Although perfectly legal, bankruptcy does not qualify
as a good-faith effort to resolve one’s financial problems in this type of proceeding.
Otherwise, she has no plan to resolve her indebtedness at any point in the near future. 
Of course, the purpose of this case is not aimed at collecting debts.  Rather, the20
purpose is to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness
consistent with the guidelines in the Directive. In evaluating Guideline F cases, the
Appeal Board has established the following standard:
The Board has previously noted that the concept of a meaningful track
record necessarily includes evidence of actual debt reduction through
payment of debts. However, an applicant is not required, as a matter of
law, to establish that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the
SOR. All that is required is that an applicant demonstrate that he has
established a plan to resolve his financial problems and taken significant
actions to implement that plan. The Judge can reasonably consider the
entirety of an applicant’s financial situation and his actions in evaluating
the extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his
outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. There is no requirement
that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously.
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the
payments of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan
be the ones listed in the SOR.21
Here, the evidence does not support a conclusion that Applicant has established a plan
and taken steps to implement that plan sufficient to mitigate the concern. 
To conclude, the evidence leaves me with doubt about Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a public trust position. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence
as a whole and considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable
evidence or vice versa. I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  For all22
these reasons, I conclude Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations
concern.
6
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.c, 1.g, 1.j, 1.l, 1.m, 
1.n, and 1.o: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, 1.i,
1.k, and 1.p–1.v: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for an ADP position. Eligibility for access to
sensitive information is denied.
        
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
