 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-01952 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Michael Jones, Esq. 
 
 
 December 11, 2014 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Drug Involvement security concerns that arose out of his 
infrequent recreational drug use from 1990 to May 2012. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 4, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigative Processing (e-QIP). On July 3, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer) on August 5, 2014 and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on September 25, 2014, and then reassigned to me on October 20, 
2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on October 20, 2014, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on November 3, 
2014. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibit (GE) 1, which was 
admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called one witness. 
The record was left open for the receipt of additional documentation. On November 18, 
2014, Applicant presented 17 pages of additional documentation. His post-hearing 
exhibits were marked AE C through K. Department Counsel had no objections to AE C 
though K and they were admitted. The record then closed. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on November 13, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a government contractor. He also owns 
an independent small business. He lives with his fiancée and her three minor children. 
(GE 1; Tr. 25-26, 54, 58.) 
 
 The SOR alleged that between September 1990 until approximately May 2012, 
Applicant used marijuana. Applicant admitted his marijuana use on his e-QIP, in his 
Answer, and during his testimony. (GE 1; Answer.) 
 
 Applicant’s marijuana use was recreational in nature and occurred infrequently 
between September 1990 and May 2012. The frequency of use ranged between a 
couple times per year to a couple times per month, at parties and social gatherings. He 
did not go to parties with the intent of using marijuana, but would partake if it was 
offered to him. He never purchased it. (GE 1; AE K; Tr. 27-32, 44-48.) 
 
 In May 2012 he recognized the poor judgment of his past illegal drug use. He 
testified that he was sincerely remorseful for breaking the law and understood the 
gravity of his past actions. He has worked diligently to change his life significantly in the 
past few years. In 2012 he consciously decided he no longer wanted to use marijuana. 
He decided he wanted to focus on building his career. He moved to another city and 
discontinued associating with drug users. He no longer attends social gatherings where 
marijuana is used. He met his fiancée and they became engaged in summer 2014. He 
now provides for her three children and feels a responsibility to be a good role model for 
them. He also applied for and received a job with his current employer. Although this is 
his first job that has required a security clearance, he stopped using marijuana even 
before he decided to apply for it. He is now a dedicated professional. (AE D; Tr. 28-29, 
32-48, 56-61.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he has put his marijuana use behind him. He submitted a 
signed statement of intent not to use marijuana in the future. He testified that he has 
successfully abstained from using marijuana for more than two years. He submitted 
 
3 
 
negative drug test results as further proof that he is no longer using marijuana. (AE C; 
AE D; Tr. 28-29, 32-48, 56-61.) 
 
 Applicant is well respected by those who know him, as verified by the letters he 
entered into evidence. He is known in his community as a successful small business 
owner who is actively involved in community outreach. His friends and colleagues 
consider him to be reliable and trustworthy. His 2014 performance review reflects he is 
a valued employee. (AE E; AE F; AE G; AE H; AE I; AE J; Tr. 67-71.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
4 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under Drug Involvement AG 
¶ 25, and the following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 The Government presented sufficient information to support all of the factual 
allegations under Guideline H (SOR ¶ 1.a). Applicant used marijuana, infrequently from 
1990 to May 2012. The facts established through the Government’s evidence and 
through Applicant’s admissions raise security concerns under both of the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, 
and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated sufficient intent not to use any illegal drugs in the 
future. While Department Counsel argued that two years of abstinence are not 
significant, given his long history of marijuana use over a 22-year period, Applicant has 
made a number of significant changes in his life during those two years that 
demonstrate his serious commitment to abstinence from marijuana. He recognized that 
 
5 
 
he was wrong to use marijuana. He ceased using it prior to applying for his current 
position. He has disassociated from drug-using friends. He moved to another city and 
no longer attends parties with drug users. He is engaged to be married and is now a 
role model for his fiancée’s three children. He is a successful business owner and 
professional, and surrounds himself with like-minded professional acquaintances that do 
not use illegal substances. Thus, he has changed his environment. Moreover, he has 
abstained from the use of illegal substances for more than two years. He signed a 
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. Applicant’s 
current reputation for honesty and trustworthy behavior, coupled with his candor 
concerning his past drug use, add weight to his commitment to abstain from illegal drug 
use. Applicant has presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the Government’s concerns 
under AG ¶ 26(b). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s infrequent but 
illegal drug use occurred over a long span. He was irresponsible at the time and did not 
recognize the seriousness of his actions. He has now matured. He has not used illegal 
substances for more than two years after coming to the revelation that there was no 
room for illegal substances in his future professional life. His changes are permanent 
and the likelihood of recurrence is extremely low. Applicant is highly respected by those 
who know him. He has a reputation for honestly and trustworthiness. He successfully 
passed a urinalysis test. The record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant should be granted a security clearance. 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
