 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-03975 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronnie Chaney, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline M, use 
of information technology systems, and Guideline K, handling protected information. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline M, use of 
information technology systems, and Guideline K, handling protected information. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 On September 25, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 28, 2014. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on October 
31, 2014. I convened the hearing as scheduled on November 18, 2014. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. Applicant and two witnesses testified. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A through D, which were admitted into evidence without objection.1 DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 26, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 49 years old. He served in the Army from 1985 until he honorably 
retired in paygrade E-8 in 2005. He has been married since 1989, and he has a 24-
year-old son and a 30-year-old stepdaughter. He holds two master’s degrees. He has 
held a top secret security clearance with access to sensitive compartmented information 
continuously since 1985. At different times during his career he has held higher access 
clearances. He has worked for his current employer since June 2014.2  
 
Applicant was employed with Employer A from 2008 to February 2013. As part of 
his employment he had access to the company’s email account. An employee’s email 
account is not monitored while they are employed. Once an employee leaves the 
company, a supervisor will review the employee’s email account to see if there are any 
questionable issues.3  
 
In late January 2013, Applicant submitted his resignation to Employer A, and his 
last day was in February 2013. Applicant’s supervisor, who was the chief executive 
officer (CEO) of the company, reviewed his email account and contacted the facility 
security manager because he noticed that Applicant had transferred data from his 
company account to his personal account. The data included user names and 
passwords from the company’s accounts, the company’s accounting practices, and the 
company’s business rating information.4  
 
The CEO testified that Applicant had a legitimate reason to have the company’s 
business rating information while he was employed with the company. He would obtain 
the information from the accounting department. The business rating information is 
important and sensitive because it evaluates the credit worthiness of the business. 
Applicant had no need to have this information after he left employment with the 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit (HE) I is a letter from Applicant’s personal representative advising of his intent to appear 
at the hearing. HE II is Department Counsel’s exhibit list. HE III is Department Counsel’s letter to 
Applicant regarding discovery matters. 
 
2 Tr. Tr. 11, 123, 126, 155-158. 
 
3 Tr. 31-36. 
 
4 Tr. 32-36, 50, 56-58. 
 
3 
 
 
company. There was also no reason Applicant should have had the user name and 
password associated with the business rating information while at the company or after 
he left employment with the company. The CEO confirmed that Ms. W was one of three 
people who had access to the user name and password on the business rating 
information account. She worked remotely.5  
 
Applicant kept a master list of user names and passwords for all his personal and 
business accounts. This business and personal list were not separated, but mixed 
together. The list included user names and passwords for hotels, airlines, and other 
consumer websites. It also included user names and passwords for the company that 
would allow access to proprietary information, including the user name and password 
for the business rating information. Applicant credibly testified that he received this 
information from Ms. W who had access to the account. Applicant explained that Ms. W 
sent him the user name and password so he could expedite a proposal that was to go to 
the CEO, and they wanted to ensure the potential client’s finances were sound before 
the company engaged the potential client. The user name and password were part of 
the master list. The CEO confirmed that Applicant did not need access to the business 
rating information for his consultant project. Applicant acknowledged it should not have 
been transferred. He stated he was not thinking when he transferred the entire list. At 
the time, he did not think what he was doing was wrong because he intended to come 
back to the company to work as a consultant.6 
 
Applicant had an agreement with Employer A to work as a consultant from 
February 2013 until June 2013. The agreement was to work on a proposed contract 
with the government, if the company was awarded the contract. The plan was for the 
CEO to rehire Applicant, and he would be the program manager. The company would 
be provided the required documents and aspects of the work after the contract was 
awarded. There were occasions in the past when contract proposals had been sent to 
personal email accounts, which was against the rules. Applicant forwarded the proposal 
for a government contract to his personal email account. The CEO did not believe this 
proposal pertained to work that was part of the consulting agreement. Applicant 
explained that it was part of the proposed contract, and he wanted to be ready to start 
the project once it was awarded. He acknowledged he should have asked the CEO for 
permission before transferring the document to his personal account.7  
 
The accounting information that Applicant forwarded to his personal account 
provided a blueprint of how the company conducts its business. The CEO testified the 
document contained proprietary business documents. It was not inappropriate for 
Applicant to have access to this information while he was employed at the company, but 
                                                          
5 Tr. 36-39, 70-82. 
 
6 Tr. 68-69, 96-97, 129-138, 154. 
 
7 Tr. 39-46, 49, 82-92, 97, 129, 133, 143-145. 
 
4 
 
 
it was not a necessary part of Applicant’s job. He should not have had access to the 
information after he left the company.8  
 
Applicant explained he had access to the company’s accounting information 
because he wanted to make sure he was in compliance when he worked for the 
company as a consultant. He explained that while working for the company he needed 
the information to approve invoices and timesheets. He was concerned that someone 
might question how he handled the financial matters, so he wanted to make sure he 
followed the approved practices. Applicant transferred the accounting information to his 
personal account because he was preparing for the consulting contract that he believed 
he would be working on. He wanted to be ready to start as soon as the contract was 
approved. As the program manager, he wanted to make sure the new staff understood 
what they were required to do. He explained that when the contract was awarded he 
wanted to be able to staff it right away, and in order to do what he needed to be ready 
before it was awarded. Applicant acknowledged he should have told the CEO before he 
sent the material to his personal email account. He admitted he should have asked 
permission. He credibly testified that he made a mistake and promised to comply with 
all the requirements in the future.9  
 
Applicant’s duties at the company included reviewing human resource and 
accounting policies and procedures. This also included approving timesheets, expense 
reports, and invoices. He was also responsible for participating in cost proposals, which 
included salaries, rate buildups and final rates for the contracts.10 
 
The CEO confirmed that Applicant was a good worker and there were never any 
issues regarding his employment. Applicant was never counseled or disciplined for 
infractions or security-related violations. The CEO thought highly of Applicant and 
believed he is patriotic. This is what influenced the CEO to give Applicant the consulting 
contract. The CEO confirmed that it was not authorized or customary for employees to 
use their home email accounts for work purposes, and it was considered a serious 
violation. When the CEO discovered the above discrepancies and filed a report, he and 
Applicant discussed the matter. Applicant agreed to delete all of the data he had 
transferred from the company account to his personal account. The CEO confirmed that 
Applicant apologized to him about transferring the data. The CEO is confident that 
Applicant deleted all of the transferred information. He confirmed that none of the 
information transferred was compromised or used for Applicant’s or another’s benefit. 
He did not believe Applicant intended to harm the company. Despite what transpired, 
the CEO would recommend Applicant for a position of trust. He believed Applicant’s 
conduct was a one-time transgression.11 
                                                          
8 Tr. 63-67. 
 
9 Tr. 46-49, 66-67, 138-143. 
 
10 AE C. 
 
11 Tr. 51-56, 60-63, 67, 70, 96. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant admitted he made a mistake when he transferred information from his 
employer’s account to his personal email account. He believed he was acting in good-
faith at the time. Applicant credibly testified that he purged every document he 
transferred from the company to his personal account. He never would have made the 
transfer if he thought he was doing something wrong. He explained that if he had 
wanted to use the material for an unauthorized purpose, he could have made a hard 
copy and no one would have known. He apologized for his actions and was remorseful 
regarding his errors. Applicant testified that he and the CEO were friends and had a 
good relationship. He never shared the information with a subsequent employer or any 
person.12  
 
It is unclear whether Applicant received any training on the appropriate handling 
of proprietary information while working for the company. In March and April 2014, he 
took it upon himself to complete training courses on Identifying and Safeguarding 
Personally Identifiable Information, Virtual Training for Security Professionals, and 
Facilities Security Officer Orientation for Non-Processing Facilities Curriculum. He 
testified he wanted to be part of the solution to ensure the proper handling of sensitive 
material.13 
 
Applicant provided character letters that describe him as a loyal, ethical person 
who can be trusted. He has an in-depth understanding of the complexities associated 
with handling sensitive material and is greatly respected as one who goes to significant 
lengths to ensure compliance with the storage, transmission, and usage of such 
information. He is a diligent and conscientious professional.14  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
                                                          
12 Tr. 128-129, 152-153. 
 
13 Tr. 129-131. 
 
14 AE C. 
 
6 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems:  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliably and trustworthiness, calling into question the 
willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information. 
 
AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
7 
 
 
(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or 
component thereof; and 
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system. 
 
Applicant transferred the user names and passwords that gave him access to the 
company’s business data from his company account to his personal account. He also 
transferred a business proposal, proprietary business data and the company’s 
accounting guidelines to his personal account. He did this without authorization. I find 
the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 and especially 
considered the following:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one’s 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and  
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor.  
 
I found Applicant’s testimony and explanations for his actions to be credible. 
Applicant admitted he transferred the user name and password list he kept on his 
company computer to his personal computer. He did not separate the list between 
personal and business. I conclude this was an oversight by Applicant. However, he also 
intentionally transferred a user name and password that was given to him by Ms. W. 
This was unauthorized. The other transfers were also unauthorized, but Applicant did 
not have any nefarious intention to misuse this information. He intended to use this 
information to prepare for executing a contract that he would be working on, if approved, 
as a consultant with the company. He wanted to be ready so he could start right away. 
There is no indication he was using any information he transferred for any other 
purposes than to fulfill the work requirements as the program manager and consultant 
on the contract. He believed he was authorized to make the transfers, even though the 
evidence was to the contrary. When he learned of his mistake, he deleted all of the 
transferred data, apologized to the CEO, and took steps to ensure it would never 
happen again. I find his behavior happened under unusual circumstances, it is unlikely 
to recur, and it does not cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. No harm was done to the company. Although misguided, Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
believed he was acting in the best interests of his employer by preparing for the new 
contract. As soon as he became aware there was an issue he acted appropriately. I find 
all of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
 AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered the following: 
 
 (b) collecting or storing classified or other protected information at home or 
in any other unauthorized locations; 
 
 (d) inappropriate efforts to obtain or view classified or other protected 
information outside of one’s need to know; and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information.  
 
 Applicant admitted he used his company email account to transfer user names 
and passwords pertaining to proprietary business data and accounting policies. He did 
not have authorization to make these transfers and violated the company’s rules and 
regulations. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 35, and I have 
specifically considered the following:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual currently reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities. 
 
The mitigating condition analysis under Guideline M, use of information 
technology systems, is the same for Guideline K, handling protected information. I will 
not repeat the analysis, but include the following additional comments under this 
 
9 
 
 
guideline. Applicant mistakenly believed he was authorized to transfer the data. When 
he learned he was not, he immediately admitted his mistake and took corrective action 
by deleting all of the transfers. He has taken several courses to ensure he is aware of 
the rules and is in compliance. Applicant has exhibited a positive attitude toward the 
discharge of his duties relating to the protection of sensitive information and security 
responsibilities. I find the above mitigating conditions apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines M and K in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 49 years old. He retired from the military after 20 years of honorable 
service. He made some mistakes after he resigned from working with Employer A. His 
actions were not intended to harm his former employer, but rather he was attempting to 
prepare for his new job as a consultant. Applicant believed he was authorized to make 
the transfers, but he did not have expressed approval from his supervisor. When he 
learned of his transgression, he immediately apologized and mitigated his conduct by 
deleting all of the transfers. His former CEO, who reported the conduct, believes 
Applicant is trustworthy and this was a one-time transgression. I believe it to be also. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the use of information 
technology systems guideline and the handling protected information guideline. 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline K:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
