 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-02460 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations.) Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on December 12, 2013. On 
July 22, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on August 6, 2014; responded by denying all the 
allegations on August 11, 2014; and requested a decision on the record without hearing. 
On September 5, 2014, he requested a hearing. (Hearing Exhibit (HX) I.) Department 
Counsel was ready to proceed on October 29, 2014, and the case was assigned to me 
on October 31, 2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
2 
 
notice of hearing on the same day, scheduling the hearing for November 18, 2014. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s letter transmitting copies 
of GX 1 through 3 to Applicant is attached to the record as HX II. Applicant testified and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through J, which were admitted without objection. 
I kept the record open until December 3, 2014, to enable him to submit additional 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX K through U, which were admitted 
without objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX K through U are 
attached to the record as HX II. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 2, 
2014. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old aircraft mechanic employed by a defense contractor 
since November 2013. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from September 1989 
to May 2010, when he retired as a petty officer first class. He has a 50% service-
connected disability. (AX B.) He worked for a defense contractor as a maintenance 
supervisor from June 2010 to November 2013, when he began working for his current 
employer. He received a security clearance in the Navy and retained it during his 
employment with defense contractors. (Tr. 46.) 
 
 Applicant married in August 1990. He and his wife had two children during their 
marriage, now ages 21 and 15. In 2009, Applicant’s then wife left him and the children 
without warning. (Tr. 37.) Applicant filed for and received a divorce in January 2013. 
The parties were given joint custody of the children, with Applicant having primary 
physical custody. (AX J.) His son lives independently and his daughter lives with him. 
He does not receive any child support from his ex-wife. His ex-wife was employed until 
she left him in 2009, but she is not currently employed. (Tr. 44-45, 52-53.) 
 
 While on active duty, Applicant deployed frequently and relied completely on his 
wife to handle the family finances. He gave her a power of attorney because he was 
rarely at home. (Tr. 37-38.) In March 2007, Applicant obtained a debt-consolidation loan 
for $11,446, at his wife’s suggestion, and he paid off his debts in preparation for 
retirement from the Navy. (Tr. 35-36, 47-49.) He paid off the debt-consolidation loan in 
January 2012. (AX D.) When Applicant received the SOR in August 2014, he learned 
that he had $17,000 in delinquent debts.  
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied the six debts alleged, and he 
attached documents reflecting that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.e, and 1.f had 
been resolved. He explained that the debts were incurred by his ex-wife without his 
knowledge and in his name, using a power of attorney. When he contacted his ex-wife 
about the debts, she told him, “Go to hell.” (Tr. 53.) He initially refused to pay them, 
claiming that they were her responsibility, but has since resolved all but one of them. 
 
 
3 
 
After Applicant’s stepfather passed away, his mother gave him about $20,000, 
and he used some of it to resolve the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. (Tr. 39.) The 
evidence concerning these debts is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a, judgment for $2,280, filed in September 2012. In Applicant’s 
response to the SOR and at the hearing, he denied any knowledge of this judgment. He 
searched the internet for the name of the party who obtained the judgment, obtained a 
copy of the case file from the court, and tried to contact the party at the telephone 
number and address listed in the case file; but he has been unable to locate or contact 
the person who obtained this judgment. (Tr. 83; AX S; AX T; AX U.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b, individual installment account charged off for $6,940 in January 
2011. This account was sold several times by a succession of collection agencies, and 
the current owner of the debt has been paid in full. (Answer to SOR; AX L through R.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c, credit card account charged off for $906 in June 2009. This 
account was settled for $634 in August 2014. (Answer to SOR; Tr. 56-57; AX K.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d, collection account for $6,429. A collection agency obtained a 
judgment for this debt in July 2012, and it was settled for $4,800. (Answer to SOR; GX 2 
at 3; Tr. 59-61.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e, collection account for $582. This debt, a delinquent department 
store account, has been resolved. (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f, collection account for $138. This debt, a delinquent cell phone 
account, has been resolved. (Answer to SOR.) 
 
 Applicant was suspended from work shortly after the SOR was issued. (Tr. 17.) 
Before he was suspended, he was earning about $23 per hour for 40 hours a week and 
working about 20 hours overtime. (Tr. 40.) He receives monthly military retired pay of 
$1,637 and monthly disability pay of $875. (AX B; AX C.) His budget provides for annual 
income of $58,800 and expenses of $48,592, which amounts to a net monthly 
remainder of about $848. (AX A; Tr. 40-41.) He is current with his bills. He is supporting 
himself with his retired pay, disability pay, about $5,000 remaining from his mother’s gift, 
and about $3,000 that he withdrew from his civilian retirement account. (Tr. 70.) He has 
not sought financial counseling because he has been able to resolve all his delinquent 
debts and is able to live within his means. (Tr. 75.) 
 
 Applicant’s current supervisor has known him for about nine years and was his 
supervisor in the Navy. He describes Applicant as kind, generous, trustworthy, and a 
person with a strong sense of duty and high integrity. (AX F.) Two former subordinates, 
who worked for Applicant for five years, have married each other, and have become 
Applicant’s close friends. They consider him level-headed, loyal, trustworthy, and a 
caring father. (AX H; AX I.) Applicant’s neighbor, who has known him for about a year, 
considers him trustworthy, dependable, and a role model for her teenage son. (AX G.) 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
 
5 
 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling about $17,275. The concern under 
this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Even though Applicant denied all the allegations in the SOR, his credit bureau 
reports are sufficient to establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 
19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not 
meeting financial obligations”). It is well settled that adverse information from a credit 
report will normally meet the requirement in Directive ¶ E3.1.14 that an allegation be 
supported by substantial evidence. ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 
2010.) 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is established. Although Applicant’s debts are numerous and recent, 
they were incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Applicant’s debts were incurred without his knowledge 
and through the financial irresponsibility of his ex-wife, which were circumstances 
largely beyond his control. He has acted responsibly and has resolved all the debts 
except the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a. He has made extensive efforts to contact the party 
who obtained the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.a, but he has been unsuccessful. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. Applicant has resolved the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.f 
and has made good-faith efforts to contact the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant served honorably for 20 years in the U.S. Navy, and he has established 
a reputation for trustworthiness, honesty, and integrity as a civilian contractor employee 
 
7 
 
since his retirement. He has held a security clearance since he first enlisted in the Navy. 
He was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns 
based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of 
showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
