                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                                                                      )                                                             
        ----------------------------------                  )      ISCR  Case No.  14-00072            
                                                           )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.  
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding his financial considerations and
personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of Case
On February 28, 2014, the Department of Defense (DoD) Consolidated
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons
why DoD adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a
security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine
whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DoD on
September 1, 2006.  
2
Applicant responded to the SOR (undated), and requested a hearing. The case
was assigned to me on August 28,  2014, and was scheduled for hearing on October 22,
2014. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of four exhibits (GEs 1-4). Applicant
relied on two witnesses (including himself) and 20 exhibits (AEs A-S). The transcript (Tr.)
was received on October 30, 2014. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
permit him the opportunity to supplement the record with documentation of his payment
efforts with creditors not documented in Applicant’s credit reports as paid. For good cause
shown, Applicant was granted 14 days to supplement the record. The Government was
afforded five days to respond. 
Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with documentation
of payments of debts covered by subparagraphs 1.b-1.h, 1.j, and 1.q. Applicant provided
statements covering his efforts to find listed creditors 1.i, 1.k, 1.p, and 1.r-1.t.  Applicant’s
post-hearing submissions were admitted as AEs T-GG.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated 23 delinquent debts. The
alleged debts exceed $26,000.
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly falsified his electronic questionnaires for
investigation processing (e-QIP) of April 2013 by omitting his delinquent debts alleged in
Guideline F. His alleged omissions covered delinquent debts that were either charged off,
turned over to a collection agency, or over 120 days delinquent at any time within the
previous seven years, or which are currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt.   
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debts alleged in the SOR with
explanations but denied falsifying his e-QIP. He claimed that he provided money to his
ex-wife to cover their bills during their lengthy separation and assumed she paid them as
agreed. Applicant further claimed his ex-wife managed his finances and did not tell him of
the debts listed in the SOR that she failed to pay. 
Applicant claimed he did not become cognizant of the listed debts in the SOR until
after his wife vacated their home and left five moving boxes full of mail.  Applicant claimed
that “it was only then that I became aware that these accounts (i.e. those accounts listed
in the SOR) were delinquent.” Applicant claimed, too, that he has since paid all of the
listed debts, which no longer appear on his updated credit reports. 
In his response to the SOR allegations that he falsified his e-QIP application by
omitting his delinquent debts, Applicant denied any attempt to falsify. He claimed he was
not aware of any delinquent debts when he completed the e-QIP in April 2013. He further
claimed that the debts at issue were beyond his control, and he made prompt and good-
3
faith efforts to correct the mistake. And he claimed the inadvertent mistake cannot be
used to exploit or manipulate him.
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 44-year-old vice president of a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
incorporated and adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in May 1999 and has four children from this marriage. (GE 1) He
separated from his wife in March 2009, remained separated from her during recurrent
months of residence sharing, and divorced her in December 2011. (GEs 1 and 2 and AE
O) Applicant has since remarried (GE 2; Tr. 35, 43-44)  He earned a bachelor of arts
degree in political science from a recognized university in January 1993 (GE 2) and
claims no military service.  
Applicant received his first security clearance in 2008 while employed by a
previous employer. (GE 2; Tr. 51) His 2013 e-Qip reveals several overlapping
employment relationships. He described his current employment with Company A as a
full-time consulting position that commenced in May 2007 and is ongoing. (GE 1; 25-29)
He listed contemporaneous employment as well in his e-QIP with Company B, a publicly
traded software company (September 2012 and ongoing) as a vice president of public
sector affairs, Company C (August 2009 through September 2012), and Company D
(April 2007 through January 2009).  (GE 1; Tr. 46)
Although Applicant’s relationship with Company A is characterized by his Company
A manager as “as an industry partner and employee consultant” (AE S; Tr. 26), the
developed understandings between Applicant and the principals of these two overlapping
firms regarding work and compensation is less than clear. Applicant’s checking statement
for September-October 2014 lists deposits from Company B and a deposit from an
unidentified source of $107,685 in September 2014. (AE I) Applicant described his
employment with Company A as an extension of his employment with Company B. (GE
2)  His explanations are reconcilable with the statements he provided in his e-QIP and are
accepted. (GEs 1 and 2) 
Applicant’s finances
Throughout a lengthy period of marital separation (i.e., between March 2009 and
December 2011), marked by recurrent months of residence-sharing, Applicant
accumulated 23 delinquent debts that were either charged off or placed for collection. In
the aggregate, they exceeded $26,000. (GEs 2-4 and AE O) During this separation
period, Applicant relied on his ex-wife to pay their bills and was unaware that his wife did
not pay them (inclusive of the debts listed in the SOR) as he assumed she would. (Tr. 49-
51) In their marital settlement agreement of May 26, 2011, Applicant and his wife
4
allocated the debts accrued during their marriage and accepted individual responsibility
for all credit card debts executed in their individual names during their marriage and for all
individual debts incurred after March 31, 2011. (AE P; Tr. 47-48) 
Applicant assured that his ex-wife accepted responsibility for the medical debts
included in the SOR as part of the alimony and support Applicant agreed to provide under
their marital settlement agreement. (AE P; Tr. 42) Applicant, in turn, made his agreed bi-
weekly monetary payments to his ex-wife to cover their marital debts during the period of
their marital separation while she continued to reside in the family residence (i.e.,
between 2008 and 2012). (Tr. 42-43) With the money Applicant provided his ex-wife
during their separation, he fully expected her to bear financial responsibility for his
children’s medical care. (Tr. 42) This she neglected to do. (Tr. 43) 
Following their 2009 separation, Applicant continued to reside with his wife and
their four children in their family residence before selling the home in December 2010 and
moving into their new residence in January 2011. (GEs 1-2) Two months later (in March
2011), Applicant moved out of the new family residence. His wife, in turn, continued to
reside in the residence with their four children until sometime in 2012 while the home was
listed for sale. (GEs 1 and 2)  In 2012, with the family residence still unsold, Applicant’s
ex-wife also vacated the premises and moved into a local residence with her children.
(GE 2 and AE’s response; Tr. 38) 
When Applicant’s ex-wife moved out of the family residence in 2012, she left five
mail-filled boxes (including the unpaid bills) with him. (Tr. 49-50) Because he was too
busy with his work at the time, he did not open the boxes right away to check for any
outstanding billings. (Tr. 50-51)  Only after he opened the boxes and checked the mail for
old billings did he become aware of the delinquent debts (some covered by the SOR, and
some not). See Applicant’s response and AEs O-P; Tr. 38-40.  Whether these delinquent
debts were charged off, in collection, or over 120 days delinquent was unknown to
Applicant at the time.  
Applicant’s ex-wife corroborated Applicant’s account of their payment
arrangements in her undated correspondence. She stressed that this period of separation
was a difficult transition period for Applicant and herself and that some of the bills “likely
slipped through the cracks.” (AE O) Her accounts are reconcilable with Applicant’s
understandings and are accepted. 
All of the SOR debts are listed in Applicant’s credit reports (inclusive of the
judgment debt covered in subparagraph 1.a) as accounts opened by him in his individual
capacity. (GEs 3-4; Tr. 49-50) ) To what extent any of these debts were generated by his
ex-wife was not fully developed at hearing and is unclear. Without identifying specific
debts, Applicant claimed that some of the listed debts covered children’s medical debts,
credit card usage, and parking tickets incurred by his ex-wife. (Tr. 47-48)
When Applicant’s ex-wife did not satisfy the debts allocated to her in their marital
settlement agreement, Applicant opened discussions with her about their individual
5
payment responsibilities. (Tr. 47-48) By late 2013, Applicant’s ex-wife had still not
addressed any of the delinquent debts covered in the SOR. (Tr. 48). Thereafter,
Applicant took it upon himself to pay the delinquent bills she was responsible for. (Tr. 48-
49)  By 2014, he had paid off most of them. (AEs H and P) These debts encompass most
of the debts listed in the SOR. Applicant’s credit reports, bank statements, and creditor
correspondence  document Applicant’s payment of the following debts: creditor 1.a (a
$1,143 judgment), creditor 1.b ($1,699), creditor 1.c ($401), creditor 1.d ($368), creditor
1.e ($330), creditor 1.g ($104), creditor 1.f ($544), creditor 1.h ($24), creditor 1.j ($199),
1.m ($218), creditor (1.n ($2,486), creditor 1.o ($199), creditor 1.q ($391), creditor 1.u
($15,725), and creditor 1.w ($425). (GE 4 and AEs K, M-N, P, T-V, and X; Tr. 40-42, 47-
48, 64-67) 
Still lacking in documented evidence of actual payment are several of the listed
debts in the SOR, i.e., creditors 1.i ($89), 1.k ($213), 1.l ($1,092), 1.p ($34), 1.r ($55), 1.s
($205), 1.t (455), and 1.v ($65).  See AEs D, H, K, M-N, T-V, and GG. Collectively, these
remaining debts (13 in all) do not exceed $2,000. Because they no longer appear on
Applicant’s most recent credit reports, he has encountered difficulty contacting some of
them to trace them and double-check their payment status. (Tr. 50-51) Most of these
debts are very small and quite possibly were already paid by his ex-wife.  
Following the hearing, Applicant did make concerted efforts to contact his
remaining creditors with previously listed open accounts charged, in collection status, or
over 120 days delinquent. Some he could not locate; one did not exist anymore; while
others declined to respond to his inquiries. (AEs W, Z, and BB) Under these
circumstances, these unaccounted for debts merit credit as either paid or otherwise
resolved debts. Applicant now understands the importance of maintaining regular access
of updated credit reports and checks them periodically each year for accuracy. (Tr. 45)
Applicant has completed credit counselling and received a certificate documenting
his completion of the course requirements in 2014. (AE L; Tr.  45) Lessons learned from
his credit counselling include “the importance of credit and how things come on and off.”
(Tr. 45, 62-63) 
Applicant reported annual gross income of $1.379 million in 2013, $589,432 in
2012, $363, 824 in 2011, and $391,994 in 2010. (AE A-C, J, and CC-FF; Tr. 36, 64)  For
2014, he reported net monthly income of $36,453, monthly expenses of $10,000, no
monthly debt payments, and a net monthly remainder of $26,453. (AEs F and G)
Applicant currently owns a home that he purchased for cash in October 2013 for
$400,000 and is now worth an estimated $500,000. (AE E; Tr. 38) In his checking
accounts, he maintains “in the neighbourhood of a couple hundred thousand dollars” (Tr.
37), and relies on his current wife to manage his checkbooks. (Tr. 44) 
Applicant’s e-QIP omissions
In April 2013, Applicant completed an e-QIP application. He answered “no” to the
questions asked of him in Section 26 about any debts charged off, in collection, or over
6
120 days delinquent in the previous seven years or currently over 120 days delinquent.
(GE 1; Tr. 55-56) Applicant denied any deliberate intention to provide false information
and attributed his denials to an inadvertent mistake on his part due to his lack of
information at the time about any delinquent debts charged off, in collection, or over 120
days delinquent in the previous seven years or currently over 120 days delinquent. (AE
response; Tr. 55-59) 
When Applicant first learned of the specific debt delinquencies covered in the SOR
and their payment status (i.e., whether charged off, in collection, and/or over 120 days
delinquent in the previous seven years or currently) is less than clear. In his unverified
response to the SOR, he claimed awareness of the listed delinquent debts (without
describing his understanding of their delinquent payment status) only after his ex-wife
moved out of the family residence and left boxes containing bills, some covered by the
SOR and some not. (Applicant’s response)  
Earlier in the security clearance application process (in May 2013), Applicant was
interviewed by an agent from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM).  Asked about
delinquent debts in the interview, Applicant reportedly told the inquiring agent of other
debts in collection or default status whose details he could not identify (mostly medical
bills and credit cards).  (GE 2) Reportedly, he volunteered that he did not list them all on
his “case papers” (e-QIP) “because he did not find a place to list multiple accounts when
filling them out” and did not pay them “because he did not earn enough money to pay all
of the bills as well as his required child support and alimony payments.” (GE 2) 
Asked about the accuracy of his response statements to the SOR, Applicant
verified their accuracy and incorporated his answers in his hearing testimony. (Tr. 40) In
his SOR response, he claimed that “it was only then [emphasis added] that I became
aware that these accounts (i.e. those listed in the SOR) were delinquent.” Applicant never
indicated what kind of delinquent status he found the accounts to be in before addressing
them (i.e., whether charged off, in collection, or over 120 days delinquent within the
previous 120 days or currently 120 days delinquent). 
Without more clarification of the state of his  understanding of the delinquent status
of the referred-to accounts, his use of the term “delinquent” to describe the debts in
question is ambiguous and insufficient to attribute any definitive understanding of the
status of the specific debts listed in the SOR.  More evidence of an intent to conceal his
delinquent debts is required before any inferences of falsification can be drawn. 
When questioned by Department Counsel at hearing about statements attributed
to him in his 2013 OPM interview, Applicant disputed any statements ascribed to him
about his prior knowledge of the specific debts and his poor financial status at the time
without disavowing any knowledge of delinquent debts generally. (Tr. 55-59)  He  cited
his 2013 wage statement as corroborative proof of his good financial health at the time.
(AS A J; Tr. 60-61) 
7
Because the OPM summary of the interview lacks any prior verification by
Applicant, it cannot be assigned any controlling weight when considering Applicant’s
disputed interview statements without more corroborating proof. Applicant’s explanations
on the whole are plausible and credible considering the state of his finances and
knowledge and all of the circumstances extant at the time.
Only after Applicant volunteered his unspecified delinquent account information in
his 2013 OPM interview did the OPM agent confront him on the specific delinquent
accounts listed in his credit report. (GE 2) Applicant responded to the agent with the best
information known to him about the specific debts covered by the SOR that were listed in
his April 2013 credit report as charged off, in collection, or over 120 days delinquent
within the previous seven years or currently over 120 days delinquent. (GEs 1-2 and AE
P; Tr. 39-40) 
Applicant’s volunteered general acknowledgments in his OPM interview of debts
he had that were either in collection or default are compatible with the time-line he
provided in his SOR response and hearing claims about the state of his knowledge of the
delinquent debts in issue. His acknowledgments reflect good-faith corrections before
being confronted with the details of the specific accounts and their collection status.  
While Applicant’s e-QIP omissions reflect judgment lapses, they do not reveal
omissions of debts known at the time to be debts charged off, in collection, or over 120
days delinquent within the past seven years or currently over 120 days delinquent.
Without this specific understanding of the status of his accounts when he completed his
e-QIP, no inferences of knowing and willful omission can be attributed to Applicant. 
Moreover, the voluntary corrective information Applicant provided in his May 2013
OPM interview about his awareness of other debts in collection or default before he was
confronted with the list of specific debts covered are entitled to acceptance as voluntary
and timely corrections of his e-QIP omissions. His corrections reflect an overall mistaken
understanding about the status of his debts, both when he completed his e-QIP and again
when he was asked about his debts in his OPM interview
Awards and endorsements
Applicant is well-regarded by his managers. (AE S; Tr. 25-29) The manager of the
Company A technology group that Applicant has consulted for since 2007 characterized
Applicant as honest and trustworthy. (Tr. 26-28) He credited Applicant with providing
support for the firm’s customers on technology matters. (Tr. 26) Company A is a
recognized Federal 100 award winner and has received numerous accolades in the
government industry. (Tr. 28)
Other colleagues with Company A who have worked with Applicant over the
course of his consulting relationship with the company describe Applicant as “a truthful
upstanding citizen” who can be trusted in the most sensitive of circumstances. (AE R)
8
Applicant is highly regarded as well by friends and his landlord as a person who is
trustworthy in his personal and business relationships. (AE R)
Policies
           The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account factors
that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of
the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.”  They must be considered before
deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied.
The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in
accordance with AG ¶ 2(c).
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to
include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
 Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
9
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts.  AG, ¶ 18.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG, ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain
a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). 
10
Analysis  
Security concerns are raised over Applicant’s history of delinquent debts,
attributable in part to historical reliance on his ex-wife’s management of their family
finances. Security concerns are also raised over Applicant’s omission of his delinquent
debts in the e-QIP he completed in April 2013 and the disparate explanations he
furnished about the time-lines for becoming aware of his delinquent debts.  
Financial issues
Following his marital  separation in 2009, Applicant continued to rely on his ex-wife
to maintain their bills in current status with the money he provided for child support and
alimony while she remained in each of their family residences with their four children.
Over the course of their separation and divorce, Applicant continued to provide his wife
money for child support and alimony to defray family bills and assumed she was doing so
in accordance with their mutual understandings reached in their marital agreement.  
Unbeknownst to Applicant, his ex-wife did not pay the bills she committed to
paying (including all of the debts listed in the SOR, except for the judgment debt covered
by subparagraph 1.a). By the time she turned the bills over to Applicant in 2012, they had
reached delinquent status. Applicant’s debts warrant the application of two of the
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts;” and DC ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, among which is the expectancy of consistent trust and candor.  Financial
stability in a person cleared to access classified information is required precisely to inspire
trust and confidence in the holder of the clearance. While the principal concern of a
clearance holder’s demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and
influence, judgment and trust concerns are also explicit in financial cases.
Once Applicant learned of the delinquent debts covered in the SOR from the OPM
agent who interviewed him in May 2013, he addressed his unclear payment
responsibilities with his ex-wife for several months before going ahead and paying them
himself. Payment records and credit reports document Applicant’s payment or
satisfactory resolution of all of the debts in question, inclusive of those debts  assigned to
his wife under the terms of their marital settlement agreement. Applicant’s payment
efforts merit application of MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”
Applicant documented his completion of a financial counseling course in 2014 and
is entitled to take full advantage of MC ¶ 20(c), “the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control,” is warranted in these circumstances. By addressing his
11
delinquent medical and consumer debts identified in the SOR, Applicant has established
a promising track record for resolving his debts. MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,”  fully applies to
Applicant’s situation. 
Applicant’s documented medical and consumer debt payment history reflects
satisfactory progress in accordance with the criteria established by the Appeal Board for
assessing an applicant’s efforts to rectify his poor financial condition with responsible
efforts considering his circumstances. See ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 2-3 (App. Bd.
Oct. 29, 2009).  Applicant has paid or satisfactorily resolved all of the listed debts in the
SOR.
That Applicant is currently unable to document the payment of several remaining
delinquent debts identified in his earlier credit reports and SOR following demonstrated
good-faith efforts to identify and reach settlements with these creditors is not enough to
deprive him of the mitigation benefits achieved from his recent payment efforts. Each of
these remaining debts has been removed from Applicant’s most recent credit reports and
entitles Applicant to either payment credit or satisfactory resolution. Applicant’s efforts to
date meet the Appeal’s Board requirements for stabilizing his finances. ISCR Case No.
07-06482 (App. Bd. May 21 2008). See ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan.,
12, 2007)(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000)); ISCR Case No.
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999).    
From a whole-person standpoint, Applicant’s meritorious record of civilian
employment as a high-performing officer and consultant with well-established defense
firms has earned him the praise and trust of his managers, colleagues, and close friends
who know him and have worked with him. While his history of debt accruals is
considerable, with the help of his current wife, he has developed a solid track record of
debt management and is committed to maintaining his finances to respectable levels
consistent with holding a security clearance. 
Overall, Applicant’s corrective actions to date are sufficient to meet mitigation
requirements imposed by the guideline governing his finances. Favorable conclusions are
warranted with respect to the allegations covered by Guideline F.
Personal conduct issues
In the process of completing an e-QIP in April 2013, Applicant omitted his
delinquent debts that had either been charged off, assigned for collection, or which were
over 120 days delinquent. Applicant’s “no” answer was intentional, but it was based on his
uncertainty at the time as to the identities of the debts and whether they had reached
charge-off, collection, or 120-day delinquent status.
Security concerns over Applicant’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness are
raised under Guideline E as the result of his omission of his delinquent debts in the e-QIP
he completed in April 2013. By his statements and actions, Applicant placed in issue his
12
judgment and fiducial commitment to safeguarding classified and other sensitive
materials. 
One of the disqualifying conditions covered by Guideline E are applicable.  DC ¶
16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts to any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities.”  DC ¶ 16(a) may be considered in evaluating Applicant’s April 2013 e-
QIP, his May 2013 OPM statements, and his hearing testimony.
Applicant’s “no” answer regarding his debt delinquencies in his 2013 e-QIP, while
intentional, was made without specific knowledge at the time of the creditor identities and
payment status of the listed debts in the SOR at issue (i.e., whether charged off, in
collection, or over 120 delinquent within the past seven years or currently 120 days
delinquent). Due diligence on his part should have prompted him to investigate the
condition of his debts to ensure accurate reporting. 
Certainly, Applicant’s negative response, lacked any due diligence research or
investigation on his part. Even with his business commitments and limited understanding
of the payment status of the debts, he could have been reasonably expected to make
more concerted efforts to check the status of his debts before completing his e-QIP. Still,
his “no” answer lacks any probative proof of motive required to establish specific intent to
conceal. To the contrary, Applicant’s testimony and checking records established that he
had ample assets to satisfy any delinquent debts rightly attributable to him. His negative
response to the financial question inquiring about his debt delinquencies was not
accompanied by any signs or indicia of a desire to conceal debts from evaluators
assessing the information provided in his e-QIP.
Traditional assessments of falsification in ISCR proceedings include considerations
of motive in determining whether particular applicants engaged in knowing and willful
concealment. Both Guideline E and relevant case authorities underscore the importance
of motive and subjective intent considerations in gauging knowing and willful behavior.
See ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006)(citing ISCR Case No. 02-
23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 2004)). See,  generally, United States v. Chapin, 515 F.2d 1274,
1283-84 (D.C. Cir. 1975); United States v. Steinhilber, 484 F.2d 386, 389-90 (8  Cir.th
1973); United States v. Diogo, 320 F.2d 898, 905 (2d Cir. 1963). Put differently, the
Government must be able to negate any reasonable interpretation that will make
Applicant’s explanations about his debt omissions in his e-QIP factually justifiable. Use of
a subjective intent test is not intended to straightjacket either party with particular words
and phrases, but rather to avert definitional traps.
Under the facts and circumstances of this case, Applicant’s omissions were neither
knowing nor willful, but were based on misjudgments of how he needed to respond to e-
QIP questions that inquire about debts that have reached a certain level of delinquent
status. While a yes answer with explanations of his uncertainty about the status of some
13
potentially delinquent accounts meeting the question’s criteria would have better served
himself and the Government, Applicant’s no answers do not reflect any knowing and
willful intent to conceal.
To the extent mitigating considerations are necessary to correct any judgment
lapses associated with Applicant responses to the financial questions covered in Section
26 of his e-QIP, Applicant is entitled credit for his disclosing general information about
other debts that were either referred for collection or in default when first questioned by
the OPM agent who interviewed him in May 2013. 
Applicant’s volunteered corrections meet the prompt, good-faith requirements of
MC ¶ 17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts,” as well as the
infrequent, unique circumstances requirements of MC ¶ 17(c), “the offense is so minor, or
so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such
unique circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Both MC ¶ 17(a) and  MC ¶ 17(c) of
Guideline E apply to Applicant’s situation. 
In evaluating all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s withholding of
material information about his financial status in the e-QIP he completed and his
corrections and clarifications in his ensuing OPM interview and hearing testimony, his
explanations and timing of his corrections are sufficient to convincingly refute and
mitigate the deliberate falsification allegations. Questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, are each core policy
concerns of the personal conduct guideline (AG ¶ 15). 
Considering all of the circumstances surrounding his May 2013 e-QIP omissions
and ensuing accounts, Applicant’s  omissions of delinquent debts attributed to him are
refuted as to any knowing and willful omissions. Imputed judgment lapses associated with
his omissions are mitigated
From a whole-person standpoint, the evidence is sufficient to demonstrate that
Applicant has mounted responsible, good-faith efforts to provide accurate background
information to the Government in the 2013 e-QIP he completed. Any judgment lapses
demonstrated in his completion of his 2013 e-QIP are more than off-set by the positive
judgment impressions he has forged with his manager, friends, and landlord. The
employment relationships he has developed with his Company A and Company B
employers have been very productive and rewarding for Applicant and were instrumental
in demonstrating his overall reliability and trustworthiness necessary to meet security
eligibility requirements.  
In making a whole-person assessment, careful consideration was given to the
respective burdens of proof established in Egan (supra), the AGs, and the facts and
circumstances of this case in the context of the whole person. Favorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraph 2.a. 
14
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):   FOR APPLICANT
Subparas. 1.a through 1.w:                  For Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):                FOR APPLICANT
Subpara. 2.a:       For Applicant
                        Conclusi o  n  s   
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
15
  
