 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02203 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, drug involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 16, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 28, 2014. He requested a decision based 
on the written record. On September 4, 2014, Department Counsel requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 19, 2014. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
 
2 
 
 
September 26, 2014, scheduling the hearing for October 16, 2014. On the date of the 
hearing, Applicant emailed DOHA’s administrative assistant advising him he was unable 
to attend the hearing due to a medical condition. He later provided a doctor’s note.1 His 
hearing was postponed and an amended notice of appearance was issued on October 
24, 2014, scheduling the hearing on November 12, 2014, by video teleconference. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, and 
they were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own 
behalf. He offered Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted into evidence without 
objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 24, 2014.  
 
Procedural Issues  
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing SOR ¶ 2.a. The 
motion was granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR. His admissions are incorporated 
into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old. He graduated from college in 2000. He married in 2011 
and has two children ages four and one. He has worked for a government contractor 
since 2006. He has held a security clearance since 2006.2 
 
 Applicant used marijuana in 2005 while living overseas and teaching English. 
Friends were visiting, and they traveled to Amsterdam where marijuana use is legal. He 
stated it was the first time he used marijuana. He was 28 years old at the time.3 
 
 Applicant returned to the United States and began working for a government 
contractor in August 2005. He obtained his first security clearance in February 2006. He 
worked with both classified and unclassified matters while at this job. In July 2007, he 
met friends in a park and used marijuana. He used marijuana again with friends in the 
park in September 2007. He stated he was young. He did not appreciate the gravity of 
his actions, and it seemed like a minor event in his life. He understands that he made 
poor decisions at the time and does not believe he was thinking about its impact on his 
security clearance. He stated he was experimenting at the time. He was 30 years old. 
He believed it was an innocent situation, and he was having “a good time.” He stated he 
now has a broader exposure to and understanding of the seriousness of his action.4  
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is the email and doctor’s note. 
 
2 Tr. 21-22, 49. 
 
3 Tr. 22, 28. 
 
4 Tr. 26, 33-36, 45-49, 51. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 In 2009, Applicant moved to a new city with his prospective wife. While attending 
a party where he was meeting new people, he wanted to “fit in” and succumbed to peer 
pressure to use marijuana. He was unaware before going to the party that marijuana 
would be present. He admitted he should have refused the marijuana. He stated that 
since that occurrence he has told his friends he will not use marijuana again. He stated 
his friends do not use marijuana in his presence. Applicant was 32 years old at the time 
and had a security clearance. His current job requires him to have access to facilities 
that hold classified material.5  
 
 Applicant stated that he has become more aware in the past couple of years 
about the importance of his security clearance. This has occurred primarily because as 
he travels to sites that are more secure, he now understands the weight of holding a 
security clearance. He felt that in 2007, the place where he was working, did not take 
holding a security clearance as seriously as where he works now.6  
 
 Applicant noted it has been five years since his last marijuana use. He has 
performed exemplary work for his employer.7 He does not intend to use marijuana in the 
future. He is a family man and has a different focus. Applicant’s wife does not use illegal 
drugs.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
                                                          
5 Tr. 27, 36-39, 41-43, 45-46. 
 
6 Tr. 39, 47-49, 51-52. 
 
7 AE A. 
 
8 Tr. 51. 
 
4 
 
 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered the following disqualifying conditions for drug involvement 
under AG ¶ 25 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
 (g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana twice in 2007 and once in 2009. He held a 
security clearance when he used marijuana. I find the above disqualifying conditions 
apply.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant used marijuana in 2005, twice in 2007, and once in 2009. The last 
three times he used marijuana, he held a security clearance. His marijuana use in 2005 
in Amsterdam was not illegal there. He used illegal drugs when he was aware of the 
special trust he was given when he was granted a security clearance, a trust he 
violated. Applicant’s conduct casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant credibly testified that he does not intend to use illegal drugs in the 
future. It has been five years since his last marijuana use. He testified that he has told 
his friends not to use marijuana in his presence. He is now a family man. AG ¶ 26 (b) 
partially applies. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
 
6 
 
 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information.  
 
Applicant associated with people who used illegal drugs and on three occasions 
while holding a security clearance used marijuana. The above disqualifying condition 
applies.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant credibly testified he told his friends he no longer uses marijuana and 
not to use it in his presence. He has acknowledged his behavior and taken positive 
steps to eliminate marijuana use in his presence. I find both mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 38 years old. His explanation for his illegal marijuana use in 2007 
was that he was young, he did not appreciate the gravity of his actions, and it seemed 
like a minor event. He was 30 years old. Applicant then moved to a new city and used 
marijuana again. His excuse for using it in 2009 was peer pressure. He used it because 
he wanted to fit in with new people he was meeting. He was 32 years old. It does not 
appear he understood the gravity and importance of holding a security clearance. He 
had gained the trust of the government when he was granted a security clearance in 
2006. He abused that trust by breaking the law and using illegal drugs three times while 
holding a clearance. The Government requires people it entrusts with security 
clearances to abide by laws and regulations, regardless of the repercussions. Applicant 
was beyond the age of youthful indiscretion when he used marijuana as an adult and a 
trusted employee. It has been five years since his last marijuana use, but that passage 
of time does not negate the fact he did not have sufficient self-discipline to refuse illegal 
drugs while holding a security clearance. Applicant’s actions reflect poor judgment. 
Succumbing to peer pressure at 32 years old raises security concerns. This is not a 
case where Applicant was using marijuana before he had a security clearance and was 
unaware of its negative impact on his employment. Rather, he had a security clearance, 
but did not recognize or ignored the importance of his responsibilities and obligations. 
Applicant violated the trust the Government placed in him.  
 
Applicant has told his friends he does not use marijuana and they should not use 
it in his presence. He has mitigated the security concern regarding his contact with 
people who use drugs. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised under the personal conduct 
guideline, but failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the drug involvement 
guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 
8 
 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Withdrawn 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
