KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline J; Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge concluded that Applicant showed a steady pattern of criminal activity since
2001, and he concluded that there has not been a sufficient amount of time to determine whether
his rehabilitative efforts will be successful.  The Board finds no reason to believe that the Judge
did not properly weigh the evidence or that he failed to consider all the evidence of record. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-00667.a1
DATE: 12/16/2014
DATE: December 16, 2014
In Re:
---------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-00667
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 7, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct), Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested that the case be decided on the written record.  On September 11, 2014, after the close of
the record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Robert E.
Coacher denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant  appealed, pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable
security clearance decision. 
The Judge made the following findings:  Applicant is 34 years old, unmarried, and has two
children.  Applicant has twelve delinquent debts in the amount of $46,000.  Applicant sold crack
cocaine for profit from about June 2005 to December 2005 and used cocaine from June 2005 to
November 2010.  He was convicted of selling controlled substances and sentenced to three years
probation in 2005 or 2006.  He used crystal methamphetamine until about February 2006.  He was
convicted of battery and sentenced to three years probation in 2006.  He was convicted of driving
on a suspended license in 2008 and placed on probation.  The probation was later revoked and then
extended three years.  He was arrested for trespass and refusing to leave private property in 2008. 
He was arrested for driving on a suspended license in May 2009 and January 2010.  He was arrested
and convicted for DUI in 2011.  He was arrested for public intoxication in 2011 or 2012.  In 2001
he was discharged from the military under other than honorable conditions because of a positive
urinalysis test for marijuana.  He used marijuana while holding a security clearance.  
In June, 2013, Applicant completed a security clearance questionnaire.  He answered “no”
to a question concerning drug use within the last seven years.  He answered “yes” to the question
concerning whether he had been charged, convicted, or sentenced regarding a crime within the last
seven years.  He gave the details for his 2005 conviction for selling drugs, but failed to list any
additional crimes.  He was also asked whether he had ever been or was currently on probation.  He
answered “yes” to this question in one place in the application and “no” when he was asked about
any other offenses that may have resulted in probation.  He was also asked if he was ever charged
with an offense involving alcohol or drugs to which he answered “no.”  These answers were not true.
Applicant indicated that he is working with his sister to get his finances in order.  Concerning
his past criminal conduct, he acknowledged his past actions, but has now surrounded himself with
“positive people” and lives for his kids.  He no longer uses drugs or alcohol and he voluntarily
attends AA meetings.  He did not present any documents supporting these assertions.
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Applicant’s debts are recent and remain
unresolved.  He did not provide sufficient evidence to show that the debts are unlikely to recur. 
There is no evidence that he has made a good-faith effort to pay the remaining debts.  Applicant
illegally used marijuana, cocaine, methamphetamine, and sold cocaine for profit on a number of
occasions.  His period of abstinence is insufficient to demonstrate his intent not to use illegal drugs
in the future.  He did not present sufficient evidence to establish that he completed a drug treatment
program, nor did he present evidence of a favorable diagnosis.  Applicant has shown a steady pattern
of criminal activity since 2001.  There has not been a sufficient amount of time to determine whether
his rehabilitative efforts will be successful.  His last criminal act is not sufficiently attenuated after
considering his behavior in its totality.  Falsifying information on a security clearance application
casts doubt on Applicant’s trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment.  Applicant failed to
mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, Guideline J, Guideline H and Guideline
E.  
Applicant asserts that he is a changed individual and is moving forward regardless of his
past.  He states that he is implementing ways to improve his credit standing.  He argues that his past
efforts to mitigate his prior drug use were not considered by the Judge.  He states that his most
recent convictions were alcohol related and were dismissed and were removed from his record. 
Applicant’s arguments do not establish error on the part of the Judge.
Applicant makes numerous references on appeal to his circumstances since the close of the
record.  Applicant’s representations constitute new evidence, which the Board cannot consider. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
There is a rebuttable presumption that the Judge has considered all the record evidence.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-18303 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2008).  Applicant’s assertion that the Judge
did not consider mitigating evidence regarding his history with drugs does not overcome this
presumption.  The Board finds no reason to believe that the Judge did not properly weigh the
evidence or that he failed to consider all the evidence of record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-06622
at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 2, 2012).  We have considered the totality of Applicant’s arguments on appeal
and find no error in the Judge’s ultimate conclusions regarding mitigation
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007). 
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan      
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett       
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody       
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
