 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-01582 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations or personal conduct 
trustworthiness concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 13, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The DOD acted under 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, 
Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 8, 2014, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge on August 
28, 2014, but because of workload reasons it was re-assigned to me on September 17, 
2014. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on September 26, 2014, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on October 7, 
 
2 
 
2014. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index was marked as hearing 
exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered two exhibits (AE), which were marked as 
AE A and B. Both were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held 
open for Applicant to submit additional information, but she chose not to submit any 
additional evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 17, 2014.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the Guideline F allegations, 
except for SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c and 1.bb. She denied both Guideline E allegations (SOR ¶¶ 
2.a and 2.b). The admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a review of the 
pleadings and evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a government contractor. She works as 
an enrollment specialist and has held that position for one year. She has a high school 
diploma and has taken some trade school and college courses. She has never married, 
but has one son and is expecting another child. She has no military background.1  
 
 The SOR alleges 33 delinquent debts for a total of about $82,163. The debts 
were listed in a credit report from December 2013. She also discussed the listed 
delinquent debts in her trustworthiness determination interview with an investigator in 
December 2013.2  
 
 Applicant testified that the two largest debts in the SOR (¶¶ 1.b ($30,074) and 1.c 
($21,771)) were for student loans associated with her brother. She stated that their 
Social Security numbers were one digit apart and she believed that they appeared on 
her credit report by mistake. She claimed that her student loans only amounted to about 
$6,000. She failed to produce documentary evidence to support her dispute of these 
student loans. A credit report from December 2013 lists both student loans under her 
name and with her correct Social Security number. She failed to admit or deny a 
medical debt in the amount of $130 (SOR ¶ 1.bb), but again she failed to present 
documentation disputing this debt, which is also listed on the December 2013 credit 
report.3   
 
 Applicant claims her financial difficulties arose because of her medical issues 
when she was uninsured. She also stated she was unemployed for some time and that 
she had to care for her sick mother. Her trustworthiness application, however, indicated 
that she has been steadily employed since 2003 with gaps of employment no more than 
one month apart between jobs. In August 2014, after the issuance of the SOR, 
Applicant hired a credit repair company to review her credit reports and assist in 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 25; GE 1, 3.  
 
2 GE 2-3. 
 
3 Tr. at 27, 29, 43; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
identifying and removing any inaccurate and erroneous accounts. She provided a letter 
from the company stating what services it provides, however, no documentation was 
included showing what results have been obtained through this company’s efforts.4  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is a judgment entered in 2012 in the amount of 
$465. This judgment is for unpaid rent on an apartment. Applicant stated that this 
judgment is for the same debt that is listed in SOR ¶ 1.l. She failed to produce 
documentary evidence to support her assertion. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.w is also 
for an apartment-related debt in the amount of $345. Other than turning both debts over 
to the credit repair company, she has not taken any action to resolve these debts. 
These debts are unresolved.5  
 
 The allegations at SOR ¶ 1.d and 1.i are vehicle repossession debts in the 
amounts of $12,789 and $332. Both were voluntary repossessions. Applicant has not 
made contact with the creditor and no payments have been made. These debts are 
unresolved.6 
 
 The allegation at SOR ¶ 1.e is an overdue loan for Applicant’s current automobile 
in the amount of $2,507. She stated this amount is now current, however, she provided 
no supporting documentation. This debt is unresolved.7 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, 1.q, 1.y and 1.z are delinquent 
consumer and credit card accounts in the amounts of $601, $601, $299, $690, $196 
and $194. Applicant admitted that she incurred credit card debt by living beyond her 
means. The debts are being reviewed by her credit repair company, but no payment 
plans have been established. These accounts are unresolved.8 
  
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.n, 1.o, 1.r, 1.v, and 1.y are delinquent 
telecommunication and utility accounts in the amounts of $1,175, $1,032, $640, $370, 
and $196. The debts are being reviewed by her credit repair company, but no payment 
plans have been established. Although she asserted that SOR ¶ 1.r was paid, she did 
not present any supporting evidence. These accounts are unresolved.9 
 
 The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 1.m, 1.p, 1.s through 1.u, 1.x and 1.aa through 
1.gg are delinquent medical accounts in various amounts. The debts are being reviewed 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 27-29; AE A. 
 
5 Tr. at 30; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 32, 35-36. 
 
7 Tr. at 33. 
 
8 Tr. at 34-36; GE 2; AE I. 
 
9 Tr. at 41-42. 
 
 
4 
 
by her credit repair company, but no payment plans have been established. These 
accounts are unresolved.10 
 
 Other than hiring a credit repair company, Applicant has not received financial 
counseling. She did not offer any budget information.11 
 
 Applicant answered “no” to two questions on her trustworthiness application 
concerning whether in the last seven years a judgment had been entered against her 
and whether she had any voluntary repossessed property or delinquent debts in the last 
seven years. The answer to both questions should have been “yes.” She admitted that 
she voluntarily returned two vehicles to the creditors and that she had received debt 
collection letters from creditors in 2009 through 2012. She also claimed that she was 
unaware of what was on her credit report and that she was confused by the application 
questions. I do not find Applicant’s testimony credible.12 
 
 Applicant offered a character letter from her current supervisor. He attested to 
her competence, character and dedication.13 
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 37, 40-44. 
 
11 Tr. at 51; AE G. 
 
12 Tr. at 47-48, 50. 
 
13 AE B. 
 
 
5 
 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect sensitive information. An individual who is financially overextended 
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
  
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that remain unpaid. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, multiple, and cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Although Applicant’s short periods of unemployment, her uninsured medical 
expenses, and her support for her mother could be considered beyond her control, she 
has done little to resolve the debts besides hiring a credit repair company. She has not 
put forth responsible efforts to resolve the issues associated with the remaining debts. 
AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 There is no evidence of financial counseling. Additionally, Applicant has not 
established payment plans for the unresolved debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not 
apply. 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant failed to provide any documentation supporting disputes of any debts. 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern despite 
the presence of some mitigation.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the trustworthiness process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the trustworthiness process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire. . . . 
Applicant admitted that she voluntarily returned two vehicles and thus knew that 
there were two repossessions. I find her explanation for not providing the required 
information on her application implausible. After evaluating all the evidence, I find 
Applicant deliberately provided false information concerning her judgment, delinquent 
debts, and repossessions. AG ¶ 16(a) applies.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 and considered the following as potentially applicable: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 Falsification of material information on a trustworthiness application is a serious 
offense and calls into question Applicant’s trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 
17(c) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information by considering the 
totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative 
judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
8 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of 
the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
I considered the circumstances by which Applicant’s financial situation was 
affected by her unemployment, her uninsured medical expenses, and the assistance 
she provided to her mother. However, I also considered that despite these factors, the 
debts remain unaddressed. Her troublesome financial history causes me to question her 
ability to resolve her debts.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for access to sensitive information. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations and 
personal conduct trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs: 1.a – 1.gg: Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs: 2.a – 2.b:  Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
