KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST: The Judge concluded that Applicant’s favorable evidence was not sufficient to
overcome security concens arising out of Applicant’s use of marijuana while in his late 30's and
at the time he held a security clearance.  The Judge’s conclusions are supported by the record. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-01551.a1
DATE: 12/15/2014
DATE: December 15, 2014
In Re:
---------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-01551
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
5, 2014, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On
September 8, 2014, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
A high school graduate, Applicant has worked for a Government contractor since 2006 and
has held a security clearance since 2007.
In 2013, Applicant attended a party at the apartment of a friend, who occasionally used
marijuana.  Applicant drank eight to ten beers at the party.  Someone passed a marijuana cigarette
to Applicant, and he took a puff, because “it was there.”  Decision at 2.  Applicant was immediately
remorseful for his actions.  When he told his wife what he had done, she became angry.
When he returned to work, his supervisor told him that he had been selected to take a random
urinalysis.  He submitted the required sample, and a few days later his supervisor told him that it had
tested positive for marijuana.  Applicant’s employer directed him to attend a substance-abuse class
and suspended his authorization to operate a Government vehicle.  Applicant completed the class,
which included both group sessions and one-on-one counseling.  After this, his Government vehicle
driving privileges were restored.
Applicant acknowledged that the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance was
prohibited.  At the hearing, he testified that he informed his supervisor of his use before submitting
his urine sample.  This was not consistent with his statement to the clearance investigator that he had
so informed his supervisor after having been apprised of the results of the urinalysis.  Applicant
acknowledged that he did not inform his supervisor immediately upon returning to work, because
he was concerned about what his employer would do.
Applicant claims that this is the only time he has used marijuana in his entire life.  He
continues to associate with the friend who held the party.  Applicant does not intend to use drugs
in the future.  He has submitted to other drug tests and the results were negative.
Applicant is considered to be both dependable and qualified at his job, excelling at problem
solving.  He is willing to work extra hours to ensure mission accomplishment.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge stated that Applicant’s use of marijuana on the day in question was in violation
of the trust placed in him by virtue of his clearance.  She noted evidence that he did not immediately
report his conduct upon returning to work following the drug use and that he continues to associate
with the friend who held the party and who uses marijuana.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge
again cited to evidence of Applicant’s dilatory reporting of his misconduct.  She also noted his
promise not to use drugs in the future.  The Judge stated that Applicant was “beyond the age of
youthful indiscretion” when he used marijuana as “an adult, a father, and a trusted employee.”  Id.
at 6.  She concluded that Applicant had failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his use
of marijuana.  
Discussion
Applicant cites to his favorable evidence, such as his good work record, his successful
completion of substance abuse counseling, and his advice to his son and to others about the dangers
of drug use.  Applicant’s argument is not sufficient to rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence.  Neither is it sufficient to show that the Judge weighed the evidence
in a manner that was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00251
at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 10, 2014).  
 
In arguing his appeal Applicant asserts matters from outside the record, which we cannot
consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory
explanation for the decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is
that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national
security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
