 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-00108   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant owes approximately $68,000 in unresolved 
delinquent debt. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 7, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. The 
Government submitted its written case on August 22, 2014. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In addition, Applicant was also 
provided a copy of the Directive.2 Applicant received the FORM on September 4, 2014. 
Applicant did not submit a response to the FORM, nor did she object to the 
attachments, which are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. The case 
was assigned to me on November 3, 2014. I opened the record to allow the parties to 
submit additional information. Applicant submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B.3 
AE B purports to be three money orders showing payments to the creditor alleged in 
SOR ¶1.a; however, the payment information is illegible. On November 24, 2014, I 
contacted Applicant, informing her of the state of the exhibit and giving her the 
opportunity to submit another copy. She did not respond. As a result, AE A and B are 
admitted, as is, without objection.4 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 51, has worked for a federal contractor since August 2012. This is her 
first application for access to classified information. On her security clearance 
application, dated August 15, 2013, Applicant disclosed that she has had financial 
problems within the past seven years. Applicant cites several reasons for her financial 
problems: a 10-month period of unemployment between October 2011 and August 
2012; an unspecified reduction in her husband’s work hours; a $50,000 decrease in 
income upon accepting her current employment; and an increase in expenses caused 
by providing financial support to her brother and his family for eight months. The 
ensuing investigation revealed that Applicant is indebted to 11 creditors for 
approximately $68,000, which includes a delinquent home mortgage ($38,861). All 11 
debts were alleged in the SOR.5 
 
 Applicant admits that she owes two of the delinquent accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 
1.h), but claims that she is making payments on each account. She denies the 
remaining nine accounts. She claims that the she is making payments toward the 
judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($1,996) and that the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b 
($6,070) has been satisfied. She also attests that her mortgage, SOR ¶ 1.c, is current. 
Applicant claims to have no knowledge of the remaining six accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.e, 
1.g, and 1.i-1.k). Applicant does not provide any documentation to corroborate her 
claims. Nor has she provided any current documentation about her current finances.6 
 
 
                                                          
2 FORM cover letter, dated April 9, 2014. 
 
3 AE A: Applicant’s Letter, undated; and AE B: Copy of Money Orders.  
 
4 All correspondence regarding Applicant’s post-hearing submissions is appended to the record as 
Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
5 GE 3 – 8; AE A. 
 
6 GE 3; AE A – B. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a security concern because “an individual who is 
financially over extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.”7 Financial difficulties have proven to be a significant motivating factor for 
espionage or attempted espionage.8 The Government does not have to prove that an 
applicant poses a clear and present danger to national security,9 or that an applicant 
poses an imminent threat of engaging in criminal acts. Instead, it is sufficient to show 
                                                          
7 AG ¶ 18. 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 96-0454 (App. Bd. Feb. 7, 1997). 
  
9 See Smith v. Schlesinger, 513 F.2d 463, 476 n. 48 (D.C. Cir. 1975). 
 
 
4 
 
that an applicant has a history of unresolved financial difficulties that may make her 
more vulnerable to financial pressures.10  
 
  The SOR alleges that Applicant owes approximately $68,000 in delinquent debt. 
The allegations are supported by the record, establishing the Government’s prima facie 
case.11 Applicant has demonstrated an inability to pay her debts as well as a history of 
not doing so.12 Applicant did not present sufficient information to mitigate the financial 
concerns in the SOR. The record does not support a finding that Applicant’s financial 
problems were beyond her control, that she has acted responsibly to resolve her 
financial issues, or that she made a good-faith effort to repay her creditors. Applicant 
has not provided any basis for disputing the debts alleged in the SOR, nor does it 
appear that she has taken any steps to contact the alleged creditors to investigate or 
inquire about the SOR debts.13 Finding no evidence to the contrary, I find that 
Applicant’s financial problems are ongoing and that her finances are not under control. 
As such, Applicant’s unresolved delinquent debts continue to cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant failed to meet her burdens 
of production and persuasion. In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant 
chose to rely on the written record. In doing so, however, she failed to submit sufficient 
information or evidence to supplement the record with relevant and material facts 
regarding her circumstances, articulate her position, and mitigate the financial concerns. 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence showing the resolution of her delinquent 
debt or any evidence to show financial rehabilitation. The security concerns raised in the 
SOR remain. Following Egan14 and the clearly-consistent standard, I resolve these 
doubts in favor of protecting national security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:     Against Applicant 
 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No. 87-1800 (App. Bd. Feb. 14, 1989) 
  
11 GE 5-8. 
 
12 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
13 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. July 30, 2008) (an applicant is expected to present documentation 
to substantiate his or her claim about the debts at issue).          
 
14 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
