                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 14-00363
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
December 18, 2014
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on August 8, 2013.  On March 20, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.
Applicant Answered the SOR in writing on April 3, 2014, and requested an
Administrative Determination by an administrative judge.  Department Counsel issued a
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on June 9, 2014.  Applicant initially submitted nothing
in response to the FORM.  The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2014.  Based
upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information was denied by a Decision issued by the undersigned on August 21, 2014.
However, unbeknownst me, a JPAS 562 was issued on July 31, 2014; and as a result, I
lacked jurisdiction to issue the August 21, 2014, Decision.  That Decision was vacated
on August 28, 2014.
2
“During the week of October 27, 2014,” however, the Chief Department Counsel
discovered that Applicant’s “former employer was again sponsoring him” for a security
clearance.  (Appellate Exhibit 1.)  As a result, the case was “reopened to provide
Applicant with an opportunity to respond to the FORM.”  (Id.)  Applicant’s undated
Response to the FORM was received by DOHA on November 20, 2014.  The case was
reassigned to me on December 5, 2014.  Based upon a review of the pleadings and
exhibits, to include Applicant’s Response, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, dated April 3, 2014, Applicant admitted the factual
allegations in Paragraphs 1.a., 1.c., 1.f., 1.m., 1.p., 1.r., 1.t.~1.v., and 1.bb. of the SOR,
with explanations.  He denied the factual allegations in Paragraphs 1.b., 1.d., 1.e.,
1.g.~1.l., 1.n., 1.o., 1.q., 1.s., and 1.w.~1.aa. of the SOR.
Applicant is 39 years of age, and attributes his current past-due indebtedness to
being “unemployed from the dates of 12 December 2009 to 11 November 2011,” nearly
two years.  (Item 3 at page 1, and Item 4 at page 4.)  In his Response he further avers
that he “was going through personnel (sic) issues with family.”  (Response at page 1.)
1.a.  The first debt is a tax lien in favor of the IRS for about $10,247.  Applicant
admits this debt and avers he is making payments to the IRS pursuant to a payment
plan.  He has submitted documentation as to the payment plan, and has also submitted
a Certificate of Release of Federal Tax Lien from the IRS.  (Item 3 at pages 4~5, and
Response at page 2).  This allegation is found for Applicant.
1.b.  The second debt is to Creditor B in the amount of about $10,197.  (Item 14
at page 1.)  Applicant denies this debt averring that he moved out of a “shared”
apartment “not owing any money.”  (Item 3 at page 1.)  However, he has also submitted
a most recent, November 2014, credit report, showing that this debt has been “Placed
for collection.”  (Response at page 8.)  This allegation is found against Applicant.
1.c.  The third debt is to Creditor C in the amount of about $1,432.  Applicant
admits this debt, and has also submitted a most recent, November 2014, credit report,
showing that this debt has also been “Placed for collection.”  (Response at page 9.)
This allegation is found against Applicant.
1.d.  The fourth debt is a medical debt to Creditor D in the amount of about $35.
(Item 14 at page 1.)  Applicant denies this debt averring that “the VA [Veterans
Administration] will take care of this amount.”  (Item 3 at page 1.)  As he has submitted
nothing in support of his bare averment, and as this debt still appears on Applicant’s
June 2014 credit report, I find that it is past due.  (Item 14 at page 1.)  This allegation is
found against Applicant.
1.e.  The fifth debt is a medical debt to Creditor E in the amount of about $550.
(Item 14 at page 1.)  Applicant denies this debt averring that it “has been paid in full.”
(Item 3 at page 1.)  However, he has also submitted a most recent, November 2014,
3
credit report, showing that this debt has been “Placed for collection.”  (Response at
page 10.)  This allegation is found against Applicant.
1.f.  The sixth debt is to Creditor F in the amount of about $451.  (Item 14 at page
1.)  Applicant admits this debt averring that “the [cable TV] equipment was sent off to . .
. [Creditor F] this morning [the date of his Answer, April 3, 2014].”  (Item 3 at page 1.)
However, he has also submitted a recent, October 2014, credit report, showing that this
debt is still in “Collection.”  (Response at page 17.)  This allegation is found against
Applicant.
1.g.~1.i., 1.w. and 1.x.  I find that allegations 1.g. and 1.x. are one and the same
debt.  I also find that allegations 1h. and 1.w. are one and the same debt.  The seventh
through ninth debts are to Creditor G in an amount totaling about $1,491.  Applicant
denies these debts.  However, he has also submitted a most recent, November 2014,
credit report, showing that two of these debt have been “Placed for collection.”
(Response at page 10.)  Furthermore, the third debt appears on Applicant’s February
2014 credit report.  (Item 13 at page 2.)  These allegations are found against Applicant.
1.j., 1.k. and 1.n.  The tenth, eleventh and fourteenth debts are to Creditor J in an
amount totaling about $2,603.  Applicant denies these debts, and has formally disputed
them, as reflected on his most recent, November 2014, credit report.  (Response at
pages 9 and 11.)  These allegations are found for Applicant.
1.l.  The twelfth debt is to Creditor L in the amount of about $1,962.  Applicant
denies this debt, and has formally disputed it, as reflected on his most recent,
November 2014, credit report.  (Response at page 11.)  This allegation is found for
Applicant.
1.m.  The thirteenth debt is to Creditor M in the amount of about $260.  Applicant
admits this debt, and he has submitted a recent, October 2014, credit report, showing
that this debt is still in “Collection.”  (Response at page 13.)  This allegation is found
against Applicant.
Allegation 1.n. has already been discussed, above.
1.o.  The fifteenth debt is to Creditor O in the amount of about $143.  Applicant
denies this debt, but offers little else.  (Item 3 at page 1.)  As this debt still appears on
Applicant’s February 2014 credit report, I find that it is past due.  (Item 13 at page 2.)
This allegation is found against Applicant.
1.p.  The sixteenth debt is to Creditor P in the amount of about $641.  Applicant
admits this debt, and avers to have paid $1,000 towards this and another debt owed to
this creditor.  (Item 3 at page 1.)  He has also submitted a payment agreement with the
creditor (Item 3 at 7), and on his most recent, November 2014, credit report it is noted
as “Closed - Paid.”  (Response at page 3.)  This allegation is found for Applicant.
1.q.  The seventeenth debt is to Creditor Q in the amount of about $308.
Applicant denies this debt, claiming it was “paid,” but offers little else.  (Item 3 at page
4
2.)  As this debt still appears on Applicant’s February 2014 credit report, I find that it is
past due.  (Item 13 at page 2.)  This allegation is found against Applicant.
1.r.  The eighteenth debt is to Creditor R in the amount of about $222.  Applicant
admits this debt, but offers his most recent, November 2014, credit report, where it is
noted as “Paid collection.”  (Response at page 12.)  This allegation is found for
Applicant.
1.s.  The nineteenth debt is to Creditor S in the amount of about $13,025.
Applicant denies this debt, claiming the amount is wrong for this car repossession, but
offers little else.  (Item 3 at page 2.)  As this debt still appears on Applicant’s February
2014 credit report, I find that it is past due.  (Item 13 at page 2.)  This allegation is found
against Applicant.
1.t.  The twentieth debt is to Creditor T in the amount of about $16,497.
Applicant admits this debt, claims the amount is wrong, but offers little else.  (Item 3 at
page 2.)  I find that it is past due.  This allegation is found against Applicant.
1.u.  The twenty first debt is to Creditor U in the amount of about $17,646.
Applicant admits this debt, but offers little else.  (Item 3 at page 2.)  I find that it is past
due.  This allegation is found against Applicant.
1.v.  The twenty second debt is to Creditor V in the amount of about $3,045.
Applicant admits this debt, and has submitted “a monthly payment plan” showing he has
made only one payment of $50 to this creditor in September 2013.  (Item 3 at page 6,
and Response at page 22.)  I find that it is past due.  This allegation is found against
Applicant.
Allegations 1.w. and 1.x., are duplicate debts, and have already been discussed,
above.
1.y.  The twenty third debt is to Creditor Y in the amount of about $116.
Applicant denies this debt, claiming it was “paid in full,” but offers little else.  (Item 3 at
page 2.)  As this debt appears on Applicant’s August 2013 credit report, I find that it is
past due.  (Item 12 at page 8.)  This allegation is found against Applicant.
1.z.  The twenty fourth debt is to Creditor Z in the amount of about $174.
Applicant denies this debt, but offers little else to support his denial.  (Item 3 at page 2.)
As this debt appears on Applicant’s August 2013 credit report, I find that it is past due.
(Item 12 at page 8.)  This allegation is found against Applicant.
1.aa.  The twenty fifth debt is to Creditor AA in the amount of about $357.
Applicant denies this debt, and has submitted documentation from the creditor showing
it has been paid.  (Item 3 at page 8.)  This allegation is found for Applicant.
1.bb.  The twenty sixth debt is to Creditor BB in the amount of about $2,479.
Applicant admits this debt, claims he “will begin making payments”, but offers little else.
(Item 3 at page 2.)  I find that it is past due.  This allegation is found against Applicant.
5
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  (AG Paragraph 2.)  The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.
According to AG Paragraph 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”  The administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG
Paragraph 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  In
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical
and based on the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive Paragraph E3.1.15,
the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut,
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department
Counsel. . . .”  The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a
favorable security decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
6
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
Subparagraph 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations@ may raise security concerns.  Applicant has significant past-due debts,
which he has not yet resolved.
I can find no countervailing Mitigating Condition that is applicable here.  Although
Applicant can attribute his past-due debts to his nearly two years of unemployment, he
has failed to act “responsibly under the circumstances,” as required by Subparagraph
20(b) with respect to the majority of his debt.  Furthermore, Subparagraph 20(d)
requires that “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.”  Applicant has yet to address 18 debts totaling in excess of
$68,000.  Accordingly, Applicant has not met his burden of persuasion.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  Under AG Paragraph 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept.
The Administrative Judge should also consider the nine adjudicative process
factors listed at AG Paragraph 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
7
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  The record evidence leaves me with
questions and doubts as to his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.
Applicant has over $68,000 in past-due indebtedness that he has yet to address.  For
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the
whole-person concept arising from his Financial Considerations.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.o. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p. For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.q. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.r. For Applicant
8
Subparagraph 1.s. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.t. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.u. Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.v. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.w. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.x. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.y. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.z. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.aa. For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.bb. Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
