1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-00335
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
December 31, 2014
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigation Processing (e-
QIP) on September 6, 2013. (Government Exhibit 1.) On April 18, 2014, the Department
of Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under
Guideline H (Drug Involvement) concerning Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 6, 2014 (Answer), and requested
a hearing by an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) . Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 23, 2014. This case
was assigned to me on June 27, 2014. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 25,
2014. I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 11, 2014. The Government
offered Government Exhibits 1 and 2, which were admitted without objection. Applicant
submitted Applicant Exhibits A through H, which were admitted without objection,
Applicant also testified that this event occurred in 2011, instead of 2009. (Tr. 69-71, 75-76.) 1
2
testified on his own behalf, and called four additional witnesses. DOHA received the
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on September 22, 2014. Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 25, single, and has a bachelor of science degree. He has been
employed by a defense contractor since August 2013 and seeks to obtain a security
clearance in connection with his employment. (Government Exhibit 1 at Section 13A.)
Applicant admitted all the allegations of the SOR, with explanations. Applicant’s
admissions are incorporated into the following findings of fact.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H, Drug Involvement)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he used illegal drugs.
Applicant admits that he used a variety of drugs between 2005, when he was in
high school, and his last use in August 2013. The drug he used most often was
marijuana, which Applicant used during this entire period approximately 50 times. (Tr.
47-48; Applicant Exhibit A.)
In 2012 and 2013 Applicant expanded his drug use to other, harder, drugs.
These included psychedelic mushrooms, LSD, cocaine, and ecstasy. Applicant
explained that he used these drugs, “For the experiment of what it would feel like initially
and then the music festivals they - - they facilitated that idea too.” (Tr. 56, 59-60.) Other
than cocaine, Applicant states that he used the harder drugs about three to five times.
With regards to cocaine the figure was ten to twelve times. (Answer, Attachment 1 at 2;
Government Exhibit 2.)
Applicant attended college from 2007 to 2013. Until 2009 his college expenses
were paid by his parents. In about May of that year Applicant was informed by his
parents that they would no longer pay his expenses.  Applicant then began selling1
marijuana to friends in his fraternity. He stated that:
[T]hese are good guys I can trust and it was $5, $10, $10, up to $45 and
that was it. Anything more than that it was not happening and I just wasn’t
a part of it. And at that time I was looking for a quick solution to a problem
I was put in and I didn’t actually enjoy that and I didn’t end up making as
much money on it at all. I stopped a month after starting. (Tr. 53.) (See
Government Exhibit 2.)
3
Applicant admitted that he failed a drug test when applying for a job with a
different company. This occurred in about November 2012. (Tr. 60-63.)
Mitigation
Applicant submitted a signed statement, in which he stated he “would comply
with laws, rules and regulations, specifically addressing the use of any illegal drugs such
as marijuana, mushrooms, LSD, cocaine, ecstasy, with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation.” (Answer, Attachment 2.)
Applicant submitted several letters of recommendation from friends and co-
workers. Applicant Exhibit C is from the Manager of the Program Quality Engineering
Department at the contractor where Applicant worked as an intern for 18 months
between November 2011 and April 2013. She states, “I was continuously impressed
with [Applicant’s] unwavering professionalism in handling multiple projects of significant
importance.” (See Applicant Exhibits D through H.)
Applicant’s current supervisor testified for him and provided a letter. (Tr. 82-95;
Applicant Exhibit E.) Applicant stated that he had previously told his supervisor that he
had “partied hard” in college. The supervisor did not have full knowledge of the extent of
Applicant’s drug use until half an hour before he testified. (Tr. 68-69, 76-80.) He is the
person who hired Applicant. With knowledge of Applicant’s drug use, this witness
stated, “I feel [Applicant is] very trustworthy. He has high integrity. He is very
dependable.”  
A co-worker of Applicant also testified and supplied a statement. (Tr. 95-100;
Applicant Exhibit G.) He strongly supports Applicant and recommends that he receive a
security clearance.
Applicant’s aunt also testified for him. (Tr. 101-107.) She lives in the city where
Applicant went to school, and where he currently works. She discussed his
trustworthiness and sense of responsibility.
Finally, a friend and mentor of Applicant testified and provided a statement. (Tr.
18-37; Applicant Exhibit H.) This witness worked with Applicant during the time he was
an intern from 2011 through 2013. He is a program manager for that company. They
remain good friends. He is about 30 years older than Applicant, and is a retired captain
in the US Navy, after serving for 29 years. Before retiring he held an important
command position in the Navy. He has prior knowledge of Applicant’s drug use and
testified that he felt it to be a matter of poor judgment and experience at that time. He
believes Applicant has matured and is now able to make the right decisions with regard
to drug use. In his letter the witness stated, “I’ve adjudicated the character of hundreds
of young men and women in my career, and I continue to be tasked to do so today.
[Applicant] can be trusted with proprietary and classified information, and with his
technical skills, he is destined for future leadership positions that involve government
contracts.”
4
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum. When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a) describing the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision. In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on
his or her own common sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the
ways of the world, in making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
5
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in
AG & 24:      
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1)
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved
medical direction.
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 and especially
considered the following:  
(a) any drug abuse; 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; and
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.
 Applicant admits using marijuana from 2007 through August 2013. He sold
marijuana for a month during his college years, and tested positive for marijuana when
applying for a job. In addition, he used psychedelic mushrooms, LSD, ecstasy, and
cocaine during the 2012-2013 period. Each of these disqualifying conditions have
application in this case.
I have studied all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 and especially
considered the following: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
6
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1)
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
Applicant offered insufficient evidence that would support mitigation under AG ¶¶
26 (a), or (b). Applicant’s drug use ended approximately a year ago. While Applicant
stated that he did not intend to use any drugs in the future, and submitted a signed
statement of intent, it is simply too soon to find that he has mitigated security concerns
arising from his pattern and history of drug abuse. Paragraph 1 is found against
Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent and
engaging young man of great potential. However, the evidence, including his testimony
and that of his witnesses, show him to be lacking in maturity at this time for the
responsibility of a security clearance. His understanding of the seriousness of his drug
use, and decision to sell drugs, was superficial at best. His decision not to tell one of his
witnesses, a person who is his supervisor, the entire facts of the case until literally at the
courtroom door is not the act of a mature person. Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), Applicant’s
conduct is recent. Based on the state of the record, I cannot find that there have been
permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, at the present time, I
find that there is the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress (AG ¶
2(a)(8)), and that there is an unacceptable likelihood of recurrence (AG ¶ 2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
7
conclude Applicant has not yet mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug
use. 
On balance, it is concluded that Applicant has not successfully overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a DoD security clearance. Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1of the Government's Statement of Reasons.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.g.: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
