 
1 
 
  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS and APPEALS 
  
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02552 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Louis Leichter, Esq.  
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. When he retired from the U.S. 
military, he took home a classified binder. The security violations and personal conduct 
security concerns have been mitigated. Clearance is granted.  
 
History of the Case 
 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on July 28, 2014, 
the DoD issued an SOR detailing security concerns. DoD adjudicators could not find 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s 
security clearance. On August 25, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
hearing. On September 17, 2014, I was assigned the case. On October 6, 2014, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing for the 
hearing convened on October 23, 2014. I admitted Government’s Exhibits (Ex) 1 and 2 
and Applicant’s Exhibits A-1 through A-7, without objection. Applicant testified at the 
hearing, as did four additional witnesses on his behalf. On November 3, 2014, DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted the factual allegations in the SOR. 
His admissions are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
In 2006, Applicant mishandled classified information. When he retired from the 
military he took a binder containing classified information with him and stored it in a 
closet at his home. (Tr. 20) He stated, “I can’t defend what I did, I can’t justify what I did, 
in retrospect it was an incredibly stupid decision.” (Tr. 45) In 2010, the material was 
returned to a military criminal investigative organization (MCIO). 
 
 Since February 2011, Applicant, age 48, has been a fraud investigator for a state 
attorney general’s office, and seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Ex. A-1, Tr. 13, 65, 
66) From 1986 through 2006, he was on active duty in a MCIO. At the time of his 
honorable discharge, he was a master sergeant (E-7). His decorations and medals he 
received while on active duty included the Meritorious Service Medal, a Commendation 
Medal with four devices, and an Achievement Medal. (Ex. A-5, Ex. A-7) His enlisted 
performance reports are outstanding and indicated exceptional judgment, duty 
performance, and job knowledge, each recommending his immediate promotion. (Ex. A-
6, Tr. 75-84) In 2003, he was rated in the top 5% of all senior noncommissioned officers 
in the command. (Ex. 6, page 26, Tr. 80) He received a special memorial award at a 
military training course for his excellence of character, integrity, and dedication to duty 
as determined by the staff and course attendees. (Ex. A-8, Tr. 28) 
 
During the last seven years of service, Applicant was responsible for technical 
surveillance operations. Applicant’s last active-duty commander2 stated Applicant is 
highly ethical, professional, with a perfectionist’s nature, with integrity above reproach, 
and has high moral character. (Ex. A-2, Tr. 114) His work product and reports were 
exceptional and his dedication to the mission and the United States was exemplary. (Tr. 
114) When Applicant told his prior supervisor of the loss of his security clearance, he 
took full responsibility for his actions and was ashamed of his poor decision. (Ex. A-1)  
 
A coworker states Applicant is highly intelligent, very professional, extremely 
dedicated to his job, and a loyal public servant. (Ex. A-3) This coworker would trust 
Applicant “even with my own life.” (Ex. A-3) Another coworker stated Applicant was a 
“man of integrity, intelligence and loyalty” and that Applicant showed his integrity and 
                                                          
2 Applicant’s commander served 43 years with the military, 30 of which were in a MCIO.(Tr. 117) 
 
3 
 
willingness to accept responsibility for his actions, thereby revealing Applicant’s high 
moral character. (Ex. A-4)  
 
While in the military, Applicant was trained in electronics. (Tr. 22) He worked in 
an electronic laboratory repairing equipment. (Tr. 25) In 1999, he was promoted to 
technical sergeant (E-6) and changed career fields, transferring to a MCIO. (Tr. 27) He 
became a technical services agent involved in classified surveillance and surveillance 
countermeasures. (Tr. 29, 31, 42) While in the service, he produced a “first of its kind 
instrument” used in death scene reconstruction. (Tr. 31) He had numerous overseas 
deployments including the Korea, Japan, Panama, and Middle East. (Tr. 32, 40) His 
actions were instrumental in his unit being selected detachment of the year. (Ex. A-5, 
page 14, Tr. 40) He was a supervisor for most of his MCIO career. (Tr. 44) 
In 2000, one year after transferring to the MCIO, Applicant was sent for training 
in technical surveillance operations and countermeasures. (Tr. 45) During training, at a 
facility for intelligence professionals, he received a three-volume set of training material 
in three-ringed binders containing secret, confidential, and for official use only (FOUO) 
material. (Tr. 47, 52, 98, 99, 106) The set of books was prepared specifically for 
Applicant and for each individual attending the course. (Tr. 46) Applicant’s name was 
printed on the reference material. The participants were told to maintain and care for the 
material because they would not be issued another set. (Tr. 46, 50, 106)  
 
After receiving the binders, Applicant had no requirement to use the reference 
material and never opened the material during his time in the MCIO. (Tr. 47) The 
material referenced antiquated material and was to be used should the individual come 
across “really old technology.” (Tr. 47) Although unused, Applicant properly maintained 
the material in his offices from 2003 through 2006. Agents, such as Applicant, who have 
served at least five years, are allowed to keep their toolkits, which consist of hand tool, 
test equipment, and other tools. (Tr. 48) Additionally, they are allowed to take all 
reference material. (Tr. 48) 
 
In 2006, as Applicant was packing up his material and cleaning out his office in 
preparation for retirement, his commander told him to be sure to take his things 
because all that was left behind would be destroyed. (Tr. 48) Applicant was not told, nor 
did he ask, to take the classified binder home. (Tr. 48) When he retired, a number of 
positions were opened up to civilians and Applicant competed for one of those 
openings. (Tr. 49) He was motivated to protect the material from being destroyed so 
that it would be available when he returned to MCIO employment. (Tr. 93) He wanted to 
keep his reference library and toolkit intact so that he could immediately return to work 
unimpeded. His attitude was “I’m keeping that all as a set, I’m going to be back in a 
couple of months and I’ll protect it and put it back where it belongs.” (Tr. 100) He was 
not selected for an MCIO position. 
 
While Applicant’s application was pending with the MCIO, as a back-up plan, he 
obtained a job providing electronic countermeasures to a major computer company. (Tr. 
34) He worked for the company from 2006 through 2008. (Tr. 61) In 2008, he changed 
 
4 
 
employers and went to work on a surveillance team with world-wide missions. Of the 
operations performed, 80 to 90 were top secret. (Tr. 124) The mission coordinator 
stated, while on foreign assignments, he and Applicant relied on each other for their 
lives. (Tr. 126) While working together, Applicant’s suggestions and advice were 
invaluable in developing and implementing devices used in the field. (Tr. 128) 
Once it was double boxed, Applicant took the material home and stored it in a 
bedroom closet with his uniforms and other paraphernalia. (Tr. 50) For four years, the 
box sat in the closet, unopened and untouched. (Tr. 51, 95) In 2010, during a pre-
polygraph interview he was asked if he had ever taken classified information home. He 
answered “no,” not counting his student handbooks. (Tr. 51) He took responsibility and 
discussed the material. (Tr. 52) He was told to retrieve the material, which he did. (Tr. 
52) He offered to return the FOUO and confidential material, but the MCIO was not 
interested in that material. (Tr. 53) At that point, the MCIO asked that he be removed 
from the contract, which resulted in the termination of his employment. (Tr. 53, 101) 
There is no indication Applicant’s clearance was denied or revoked. (Tr. 121  
 
Applicant asserts he would never again take classified material home. (Tr. 94) He 
stated: 
 
Obviously, I made a bad decision and on paper I’ve been trained, I 
understood the rules, and I did, I’m not saying I did not, and yet I made a 
faulty decision, so I could see where that would cast doubt on my future 
decisions. One could argue that you make a mistake, maybe that’s just the 
way you operate. At first blush it looks like disregard for the rules. That 
wasn’t the case. I wasn’t cavalier about it. I thought I was doing the right 
thing by protecting the documents. Like I said, in retrospect, that sounds 
ridiculous coming out of my mouth, but I don’t think that activity, that one 
time [breach] over my entire career is indicative of what the future will 
bring. (Tr. 87) 
 
In 1985, Applicant was 19 years old when he married his wife. They have two 
children, ages 23 and 25. (Tr. 14, 54) He married, following high school graduation, and 
prior to enlisting in the military. (Tr. 22) In 2000, he received a letter of counseling (LOC) 
for identifying himself as a special agent in a personal situation because so doing could 
be considered abusing his position. (Ex. A-6, page 35, Tr. 57) The LOC did not affect 
his annual evaluation. He acted as he did out of concern for his daughter. (Tr. 59)  
 
In 2000, Applicant’s children were 8 and 11. (Tr. 54) One day in 2000, when he 
met the bus to pick up his children, his son got off, but not his daughter. His son told him 
the bus driver had kicked his sister off the bus. (Tr. 55) Earlier, in March 2000, Applicant 
received a letter from the school stating his son’s bus privileges had been revoked and 
Applicant would have to provide transportation for one week, which was the appropriate 
method to inform parents a child would not be allowed on the bus. (Tr. 55)  
 
 
5 
 
Applicant questioned the bus driver, asking where his 11-year-old daughter was. 
(Tr. 56) His daughter had been put off the bus at an off-base location some seven miles 
from their home. The driver stated she did not have to talk to him. He told the bus driver 
she could not put a child off the bus the way she did. The bus driver said she had been 
a bus driver for 14 years and knew the laws. (Tr. 56) Applicant then stated he was a 
federal agent and also knew the law. He had been an MCIO agent about 7 months at 
the time. (Tr. 57) He asked where his daughter had been put off the bus and then 
retrieved his daughter. 
 
Applicant’s command told him that had the child not been his child but someone 
else’s child, his conduct would have been entirely appropriate. (Tr. 92) Because it was 
his child, his conduct was personal in nature.  
 
Applicant’s coworker, an attorney in the state attorney general’s office, stated 
Applicant has a desire to do things correctly and seeks out attorney advice. (Tr. 139) 
She stated, Applicant has a cautious, well-reasoned approach to things and wants to 
make sure that what he is doing is not only legal, but also correct. (Tr. 139, 142) A 
sergeant criminal investigator working with Applicant stated Applicant is a great 
investigator with much experience and integrity. (Tr. 150) This coworker would trust 
Applicant with his life. (Tr. 152)  
 
In 2011, Applicant attended and completed the eight-month police academy 
course. (Tr. 66) He was president of his class and graduated second in class ranking. 
(Tr. 66) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
6 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
The security concern for handling protected information is set out in AG ¶ 33: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) collecting or storing classified or other protected information at home or 
in any other unauthorized location; and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information. 
 
Applicant had classified information stored in his home. The evidence raises the 
above disqualifying conditions. 
 
7 
 
Conditions that could mitigate handling protected information security concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 35. The following is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Security violations are one of the strongest possible reasons for denying or 
revoking access to classified information, as they raise very serious questions about an 
applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Once it is established that an 
applicant has committed a security violation, he or she has a very heavy burden of 
demonstrating that he or she should be entrusted with classified information. Because 
security violations strike at the very heart of the industrial security program, an 
administrative judge must give any claims of reform and rehabilitation strict scrutiny. In 
many security clearance cases, applicants are denied a clearance for having an 
indicator of a risk that they might commit a security violation (e.g., alcohol abuse, 
delinquent debts, or drug use). Security violation cases reveal more than simply an 
indicator of risk. The frequency and duration of the security violations are also 
aggravating factors. 
 
 While on active duty, Applicant received three binders of reference material, one 
of which contained material classified secret. While on active duty, he properly 
maintained the material. While packing up his material and cleaning out his office in 
preparation for retirement, his commander told him to be sure to take his things 
because all that was left behind would be destroyed. Applicant had hoped to shortly 
obtain a civilian tech agent position. Being motivated to protect the material from being 
destroyed and wanting to keep his reference library and toolkit intact for his return to the 
MCIO, he took the reference binders with him.  
 
Applicant’s thoughts were, “I’m keeping that all as a set, I’m going to be back in a 
couple of months and I’ll protect it and put it back where it belongs.” When he was not 
selected for a position, the material sat untouched in his closet with his other military 
paraphernalia for four years. He acknowledged that, “I can’t defend what I did, I can’t 
justify what I did, in retrospect it was an incredibly stupid decision.” In 2010, when asked 
about classified material at home, he revealed the reference material and returned it.  
 
Applicant has not tried to hide his conduct and was credible in his testimony. He 
acknowledged he made a bad decision and, in retrospect, acknowledged his thoughts 
of attempting to protect the material were ridiculous. I am convinced that Applicant is 
remorseful for his actions, and he will not repeat the behavior. He possesses a positive 
attitude toward the discharge of his security responsibilities. 
 
There was the single event of taking the material home, which was continuing in 
nature until the material was returned. The material was returned more than four years 
ago. The unusual nature of the reference material having been made just for each of the 
 
8 
 
participants in the course and the warning to maintain the material because there would 
be no replacements are unusual circumstances. It is unlikely the conduct of taking 
classified material home would recur. His prior commander, prior mission coordinator, 
and current coworkers speak highly of Applicant’s duty performance, dedication, 
professionalism, integrity, and high moral character. Two of them stated they would, and 
have, trusted Applicant with their lives. The mitigating condition set forth in AG ¶ 35(a) 
applies.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government cross-referenced the allegations in SOR ¶ 1 as a security 
concern under Guideline E. Additionally alleged were his 2010 termination and a 2000-
letter of counseling. In 2010, after the material had been returned to the MCIO, the 
MCIO asked that Applicant be removed from the contract, resulting in the termination of 
his employment. This conduct and the initial taking home of the material were previously 
addressed under Guideline K and those facts will not be repeated in the discussion 
under Guideline E.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides a condition that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
In 2000, Applicant received a LOC for identifying himself as an MCIO special 
agent when trying to locate his daughter. He was a concerned father attempting to 
locate his 11-year-old daughter. Had he been attempting to locate a neighbor’s child, his 
conduct would have been perfectly correct and acceptable. However, because he was 
attempting to locate his daughter he should not have announced that he was a special 
agent. The matter was appropriately handled at a low level with the LOC. The conduct 
occurred 14 years ago and was never repeated. The mitigating condition set forth in AG 
¶ 17(c) applies.  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines K and E in this whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. I 
considered Applicant’s honorable and outstanding military service. His conduct and 
work performance since leaving the service has also been outstanding. Numerous 
individuals spoke highly of his character and work. I found Applicant to be honest and 
candid about taking the classified material home. Applicant showed his integrity and 
willingness to accept responsibility for his actions, which reveals high moral character.  
 
I believe the returning of the material, the termination from employment, and the 
experience of going through the adjudicative process had an additional value, in that 
Applicant is more cognizant that he must be more diligent in his responsibilities for 
safeguarding classified information. He has met his heavy burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant his security clearance. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has mitigated the handling 
protected information and personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Security Violations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 
10 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2c:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
