 
1 
 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-09944 
                                                                      )     
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
On October 29, 2012, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic 
Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). The Department of Defense (DOD) 
issued Applicant an undated Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The letter transmitting the SOR to 
Applicant was dated June 24, 2013. DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant provided a notarized answer to the SOR, dated July 27, 2013, and 
requested that his case be determined on the written record. The Government compiled 
 
2 
 
 
its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on September 27, 2013. The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 11. By letter dated September 30, 2013, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) forwarded a copy of the FORM to 
Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional information and/or objections within 
30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on October 7, 2013. His response was 
due on November 6, 2013. Applicant timely submitted a one-page commentary within 
the required time period. On November 13, 2013, the case was assigned to me for a 
decision. I marked Applicant’s one-page commentary as Item A and entered it in the 
record without objection.  
 
                                                   Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains eight allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h.). In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted all allegations, with the exception of the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.b., 
which he denied. Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact. (Item 1; Item 3.) 
  
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and by information provided by Applicant. The record evidence includes Applicant’s 
October 29, 2012 e-QIP; official investigation and agency records; Applicant’s 
correspondence with DOHA and his responses to DOHA interrogatories;1 and 
Applicant’s credit reports of November 15, 2012, June 21, 2013, and December 16, 
2009. (See Items 4 through 11.) 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old and, since August 2011, he has been employed as an 
independent contractor. He seeks reemployment as a technician by a government 
contractor. He earned a high school diploma in 1990, and he enlisted in the military in 
1999, where he served for four years. In 2004, 2005, and 2006, he attended a technical 
school and earned several certificates of completion. (Item 1; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant was married for the first time in 1995, and he and his first wife divorced 
in 2001. Applicant married again in 2003. He is the father of a son born in 1996.  He 
was investigated for a security clearance in 2010, awarded an interim clearance, and 
sent overseas on assignment. While on assignment, he was served with interrogatories 
related to his financial responsibilities and directed to respond by a time certain. 
Because of the location and nature of his assignment, he was unable to respond timely 
to the interrogatories. As a result, his interim clearance was revoked, and Applicant was 
                                            
1
 Applicant was interviewed by authorized investigators from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) on June 2, 2010 and December 11, 2012. In response to DOHA interrogatories, he reviewed the 
investigators’ reports and provided additional information. On June 8, 2011, Applicant signed a notarized 
statement after reviewing his June 2010 interview and stated that he either found the report to be 
accurate or he had corrected entries to make them accurate. On June 17, 2013, he made certain 
changes to the report and then signed a notarized statement asserting that the investigator’s report of 
December 2012 did not accurately reflect the information he provided on the day of his second interview. 
(Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
relieved of his assignment and sent back to the United States. (Item 3; Item 6; Item 7; 
Item 8.) 
 
 On his e-QIP, Applicant reported two periods of unemployment. He listed 
unemployment from May 2003 until October 2003, and from July to September 2011. 
(Item 4.)  
  
 The SOR alleges that Applicant owes eight delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $11,972. They include a delinquent account in collection status to a bank 
for $1,115 (SOR ¶ 1.a.); a credit card debt of $2,183 in collection status (SOR ¶ 1.b.); 
and a credit card debt of $1,002 in collection status (SOR ¶ 1.f.). Additionally, the SOR 
alleges that Applicant is responsible for a defaulted student loan debt of $6,768 (SOR ¶ 
1.d.). He also owes the following three debts in collection status: $91 (SOR ¶ 1.c.); $394 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.); and $333 (SOR ¶ 1.g.). Finally, the SOR alleges that Applicant is 180 
days or more past due on a government account with a balance of $86 (SOR ¶ 1.h.). 
Applicant’s delinquent accounts are listed on the three credit reports in the FORM, and 
the balance due on his delinquent student loan account is specified in a documentary 
response to DOHA interrogatories. (Item 6; Item 9; Item 10; Item 11.) 
 
 In his interview with an authorized investigator in June 2010, Applicant attributed 
his student loan financial delinquency to unemployment. He told the investigator he 
intended to pay all of his delinquencies in full, and he did not intend to become past due 
on any future debts. (Item 5.)  
  
 In May 2013, DOHA served Applicant with financial interrogatories and requested 
current information on his financial delinquencies. In his June 2013 reply, Applicant 
asserted that he was disputing the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.f. and requesting 
that they be removed from his credit report because they were non-collectable under 
the statute of limitations in his state. He did not provide supporting documentation. 
 
 Applicant denied the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b., even though the debt was listed 
on his credit bureau reports of December 2009 and November 2012. He reported that 
he was seeking payment arrangements for the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.e., and 
1.g. He also reported he had filed a deferment request for his delinquent student loan 
account (SOR ¶ 1.d.), citing unemployment. (Item 6.) 
 
 With his answer to the SOR, Applicant claimed the delinquent federal debt of 
$86, alleged at SOR ¶ 1.h. had been paid in full. He attached a notice from the creditor, 
dated July 12, 2012, stating that if payment of a negative balance of $80 was not 
received in 60 days, Applicant would be charged interest on the debt. Applicant 
attached a photocopy of the face of a check, dated July 20, 2013, made payable to the 
federal creditor for $80. The record contains no documentation that the creditor received 
or accepted the payment. (Item 3.)  
 
 With his answer to the SOR, Applicant also claimed that the $91.56 delinquent 
medical debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. had been paid in full. He enclosed a photocopy of 
 
4 
 
 
the face of a check, dated July 20, 2013, showing payment of $91.56 to the creditor 
identified at SOR ¶ 1.c. The record contains no documentation that the creditor received 
or accepted Applicant’s payment. (Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing payments on two of his student 
loans. His remaining student loans, in delinquency status, are alleged in the SOR. In his 
June 2013 response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided documentation 
showing he was eligible for unemployment benefits, and in June 2013, he filed a 
statement with the student loan creditor requesting a deferment in paying his delinquent 
student loans for financial reasons. (Item 3; Item 6.) 
 
 In June 2013, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant filed a personal 
financial statement showing his monthly net income and his wife’s net monthly income. 
Applicant’s net family monthly income totaled $2,510. He reported the following monthly 
expenses: rent, $945; groceries, $400; utilities, $271; car expenses, $150; and child 
support, $300. Applicant’s monthly expenses total $2,066.2  
 
 On his financial statement, Applicant identified his $6,768 student loan debt, 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d., as in deferred status. In the assets category, he listed bank 
savings of $500 and a vehicle valued at $18,000. The record does not reflect that 
Applicant has had financial credit counseling. (Item 5; Item 6.) 
  
                                       Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                            
2 Applicant also reported miscellaneous expenses, but the amount he included was not legible. (Item 6.) 
 
5 
 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
   
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
6 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns.   
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied responsibility for a credit card debt of   
approximately $2,183. The debt appears on Applicant’s credit reports of 2009 and 2012. 
In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), DOHA’s Appeal Board 
explained: “It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations under 
[Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden shifts to applicant 
to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for the debt or that matters in 
mitigation apply.” (Internal citation omitted). Applicant failed to demonstrate that he was 
not responsible for the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b.  
  
Applicant provided photocopies of the faces of two checks, which he claimed 
were written to satisfy the delinquencies alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.h. However, the 
record does not contain documentation establishing that the creditors received or 
accepted the payments. Applicant has been aware of the remaining six unpaid debts 
since at least 2010, and they remain unresolved. This evidence is sufficient to raise 
security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)). Finally, security concerns 
related to financial delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)). 
   
 
7 
 
 
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies, and his delinquencies remain 
unresolved. He asserted that his unemployment in 2003 and 2011 affected his ability to 
meet his financial obligations. Applicant’s unemployment may have been a condition 
beyond his control. However, while he notified his student loan creditor of his 
unemployment in 2011 and, in June 2013 requested deferment, he failed to provide 
documentation that he had taken responsible steps to contact his other creditors, inform 
them of his unemployment and diminished capacity to pay his debts, and request 
forbearance. 
 
Applicant stated in his answer to the SOR that he had disputed the debts alleged 
at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.f. because he believed they were no longer collectible under the 
statute of limitations in his state. He failed to provide documentation to support his 
assertion. Moreover, Applicant fails to distinguish between an acceptable legal remedy 
and a good-faith effort to resolve his long-standing financial delinquencies. DOHA’s 
Appeal Board has explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], 
an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at 
resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term 
“good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she 
relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy [or a statute of 
limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition.] 
 
(ISCR Case No. 06-14521 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 15, 2007) (quoting ISCR Case No. 03-
20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). 
 
Applicant’s reported periods of unemployment were for short periods of time in 
2003 and 2011. The majority of his debts remain unresolved. While Applicant deserves 
some credit for attempting to resolve two of his eight delinquent debts, he failed to 
provide documentation that the creditors to whom he sent checks in July 2013 received 
and accepted the payments. In disputing two debts as uncollectible under his state’s 
statute of limitations, he failed to provide documentation to support his dispute and to 
demonstrate a credible and continuing good-faith effort to satisfy and resolve his 
delinquent debts. There is no evidence that his financial situation is under control. While 
AG ¶ 20(d) applies in partial mitigation, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 
20(e) are not applicable in Applicant’s case. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
     
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. His 
financial delinquencies are significant in number and in duration. He has been aware of 
them since at least 2010, when he was interviewed by an authorized investigator and 
asserted that he intended to pay all of his delinquent debts in full. He appears to have a 
monthly net remainder that he could use to pay the delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR. Applicant’s inability or unwillingness to resolve his debts raises concerns about 
his trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, and ability to protect classified information. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from his financial delinquencies. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.h.:                Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
                                                         Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                 
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
