 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 07-09380 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines H (Drug 
Involvement), E (Personal Conduct), and J (Criminal Conduct). Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on January 20, 2007. On 
April 13, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines H, E, and J. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 15, 2010; answered it on May 6, 2010; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on May 
10, 2010. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on July 14, 2010, and the case 
was assigned to me on July 20, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 30, 
2010, scheduling it for August 18, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, presented the testimony of two witnesses, and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 
on August 26, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d, 
2.b, and 3.a. He stated that he admitted SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 3.b, alleging falsification of a 
security clearance application, but his answer made it clear that he admitted providing 
incorrect information but denied intentional falsification. I have treated his answers to 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 3.b as denials. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 24-year-old designer employed by a defense contractor since 
September 2006. He began working for his current employer shortly after receiving an 
associate’s degree from college. He is unmarried and has no children. He has never 
held a security clearance.  
 
 When Applicant submitted his security clearance application in January 2007 
(GX 1), he provided detailed information about previous residences, persons who knew 
him at each residence, his educational background, his foreign travel, and his 
employment record. He disclosed that he was fired from his job in a grocery store for 
eating store food. He answered “No” to question 24, asking if he had illegally used any 
controlled substance since the age of 16 or during the last seven years. He wrote, 
“Thank you for your time,” in the space for additional comments at the end of the 
application.  
 
 In February 2007, Applicant was arrested and charged with permitting, 
establishing or maintaining a common nuisance; possession of cocaine; and possession 
of marijuana with intent to distribute. At the time, Applicant was living with two male 
roommates. Based on an anonymous complaint about noise, the smell of marijuana, 
and the number of people coming and going from the home, the police searched the 
home pursuant to a “common nuisance” warrant. They seized marijuana, cocaine 
residue, baggies, a scale, and drug paraphernalia. The scale and baggies were found in 
Applicant’s room. One of Applicant’s roommates admitted that the cocaine was his and 
not Applicant’s. (GX 2 at 6.)  
 
Applicant notified his security officer of his arrest. (Tr. 43.) He pleaded guilty to 
the nuisance offense, not guilty to possession of cocaine, and guilty to possession of 
marijuana with intent to distribute. For the nuisance offense, he was sentenced to 12 
 
3 
 
 
months in jail (suspended), a $250 fine, and probation for 12 months. For the marijuana 
possession, he was sentence to 12 months in jail (suspended) and a $2,500 fine. (GX 3; 
GX 4.) 
 
 In May 2007, Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator about his 
arrest. Even though a scale and baggies were seized from his room and he pleaded 
guilty to possessing marijuana with intent to distribute, he denied selling marijuana and 
told the investigator that he used the scale to weigh his own purchases. During the 
course of the interview, Applicant disclosed that he used marijuana 10 to 15 times over 
a four-month period before his arrest. (GX 2 at 8.) There is nothing in the record 
suggesting that the investigator knew about Applicant’s prior use of marijuana before 
the interview. 
 
In September 2007, Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator about 
his failure to disclose his marijuana use on his security clearance application. He told 
the investigator he thought the question about illegal drug use applied only to arrests or 
charges of illegal drug use. (GX 2 at 5-6.) At the hearing, he testified that he hurriedly 
completed his application and did not carefully read the questions. (Tr. 40)  
 
 Applicant now has his own home and recently purchased a new car. He no 
longer associates with his former drug-using friends. At the hearing, he was enthusiastic 
about his job. He is taking college courses with a view toward obtaining a bachelor’s 
degree in nuclear engineering. (Tr. 33-34.) He has not received any drug treatment or 
counseling, but he has not used illegal drugs since his arrest in February 2007. 
 
 A lifelong friend of Applicant, who is also employed by a defense contractor and 
holds a security clearance, testified that Applicant has always been a good friend. The 
witness had no first-hand knowledge of Applicant’s drug use. The witness testified that 
Applicant is “hard headed” and sometimes “just needs something to rattle his cage a 
little bit.” The witness testified that Applicant has become more responsible since his 
arrest. (Tr. 50-52.) 
 
 Applicant’s live-in girlfriend for the past two years testified that she would not live 
with him if he were still using drugs. She considers him to be responsible, hard working 
and trustworthy. (Tr. 54-56.) 
 
 A friend and coworker who has known Applicant for four years submitted a letter 
describing him as “dependable, reliable, trustworthy, caring, courteous, and genuine.” At 
work, Applicant “displays professionalism, leadership, willingness to help others, and 
always goes above and beyond his work assignments and work ethics.” (AX A.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
 
4 
 
 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant used marijuana from at least 2006 to at least 
February 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.a) and purchased marijuana (SOR ¶ 1.b). It also alleges that 
he was arrested in February 2007 for maintaining a common nuisance, possession of a 
controlled substance, and possession of marijuana with intent to distribute; that he was 
convicted, pursuant to his pleas of guilty, of the nuisance offense and possession of 
marijuana with intent to distribute; and that he was sentenced to suspended jail time, 
fines, and probation (SOR ¶ 1.c). Finally, it alleges that Applicant used marijuana after 
submitting a security clearance questionnaire (SOR ¶ 1.d). 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 24: AUse of an illegal drug or 
misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's reliability and 
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.@ AG ¶ 
24(a)(1) explains that Guideline H encompasses Adrugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens).”  
 
The evidence raises the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse, defined in AG ¶ 24(b) as “the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction”; and 
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia. 
 
 Since the Government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (c), the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of 
proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the 
Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the behavior 
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that 
it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 26(a). The first prong of AG ¶ 26(a) 
(Ahappened so long ago@) focuses on whether the drug involvement was recent. There 
are no Abright line@ rules for determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination 
must be based on a careful evaluation of the evidence. If the evidence shows Aa 
significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,@ then an 
administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates Achanged 
 
6 
 
 
circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ 
ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004).  
 
 More than three years have passed since Applicant’s arrest. He used marijuana 
for about four months, a relatively short period. The cocaine found during the search 
belonged to one of Applicant’s roommates, and there is no evidence Applicant used 
cocaine. Since his arrest, he has moved away from his fellow drug-users, matured, 
become seriously involved with a young woman who will not tolerate drug use, worked 
hard, continued his education, and gained a reputation for dependability and 
trustworthiness. I conclude AG ¶ 26(a) is established.  
 
Security concerns also may be mitigated by “a demonstrated intent not to abuse 
any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and 
contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation.” AG ¶ 26(b). The evidence establishes the first 
three prongs of this mitigating condition. No other enumerated mitigating conditions are 
applicable. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified material facts on his security clearance 
application by answering “No” to question 24, asking if he had ever illegally used any 
controlled substance, such as marijuana, since the age of 16 or in the last seven years, 
and by failing to disclose his marijuana use from 2006 to at least January 2007 (SOR ¶ 
2.a). It also cross-alleges SOR ¶ 1.d, his use of marijuana after submitting his security 
clearance application (SOR ¶ 2.b). The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 
15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition pertaining to Applicant’s security clearance 
application is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire.” When a falsification allegation is 
controverted, as in this case, the Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, 
standing alone, does not prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the 
record evidence as a whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the 
omission.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s 
level of education and business experience are relevant in determining whether a failure 
to disclose relevant information on a security clearance application was deliberate. 
ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
7 
 
 
 When Applicant submitted his security clearance application, he had no record of 
drug offenses. It was only after his arrest that the identity of his fellow drug-users was 
known. Applicant had considerable work experience and he had earned an associate’s 
degree. He presented himself at the hearing as intelligent and articulate. I find his 
explanation for answering “No” to question 24 implausible and not credible. His 
explanation that he hurriedly completed the form is belied by the detailed information he 
presented throughout the form and the fact that he took the time to add the comment, 
“Thank your for your time,” in the space for additional comments at the end of the form. 
His intent to conceal the extent of his drug involvement was illustrated during the May 
2007 interview when he denied selling marijuana, even though a scale and baggies 
were seized from his room and he pleaded guilty to possession of marijuana with intent 
to distribute.  I conclude AG ¶ 16(a) is raised. 
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application or during a security interview may be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). The security interview 
in May 2007 was triggered by Applicant’s arrest. There is no evidence that the 
investigator was aware of Applicant’s prior marijuana use until Applicant disclosed it. 
Thus, it does not appear that he was “confronted” with evidence of his prior marijuana 
use. On the other hand, Applicant did not initiate the interview, nor did he initiate any 
other efforts to correct his response to question 24. He receives some credit for 
voluntarily disclosing his prior marijuana use, but his lack of effort to correct his 
response to question 24 on his own initiative precludes full application of this mitigating 
condition.  
 
 Applicant’s use of marijuana after submitting his security clearance application 
raises questions about his judgment and willingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, and it was likely to adversely affect his professional reputation among his 
neighbors, associates, and coworkers. Thus, his conduct raises the following 
disqualifying conditions: 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
 
8 
 
 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations; and  
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established for Applicant’s falsification of his security 
clearance application, because it was a serious offense undermining the integrity of the 
security clearance process and a felony, as discussed below. Although significant time 
has passed since Applicant falsified his application, he perpetuated his falsification in 
his security interview in September 2007, his response to the SOR, and his testimony at 
the hearing. I conclude that AG ¶ 17(c) is not established for the falsification.  
 
 Applicant’s attempt to conceal the extent of his drug involvement in the May 2007 
interview, and his false explanation for his answer to question 24 that he offered in the 
September 2007 interview, his response to the SOR, and his hearing testimony are not 
alleged in the SOR. Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered to assess an 
applicant=s credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; 
to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider 
whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole-
person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations 
omitted). I have considered his lack of candor in the May 2007 and September 2007 
interviews, his response to the SOR, and his hearing testimony for these limited 
purposes. 
 
 Applicant has not used marijuana since his arrest in February 2007. For the 
reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶ 26(a), I conclude that AG ¶ 17(c) is 
established for Applicant’s marijuana use after submitting his security clearance 
application. 
 
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct may be mitigated if “the individual 
has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or 
taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that 
caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(d). Applicant has acknowledged his illegal use of marijuana, 
found new friends, become involved in a serious relationship with a young woman who 
will not tolerate drug use, and has devoted his energies to his work. However, he has 
not acknowledged his lack of candor on his security clearance application or during 
 
9 
 
 
follow-up interviews. I conclude that AG ¶ 17(d) is established for his use of marijuana 
after submitting his security clearance application, but it is not established for his 
falsification of his security clearance application.  
 
 Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “the individual 
has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 17(e). This mitigating condition is established because 
Applicant has belatedly disclosed the full extent of his drug involvement, stopped using 
illegal drugs, and terminated his contact with drug-users. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 SOR ¶ 3.a cross-alleges the drug-related conduct in SOR ¶ 1.c, and SOR ¶ 3.b 
cross-alleges the falsification of his security clearance application alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. 
The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity creates 
doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it 
calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and 
regulations.” The relevant disqualifying conditions are AG ¶ 32(a) (“a single serious 
crime or multiple lesser offenses”) and AG ¶ 31(c) (“allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, 
or convicted”). 
 
 It is a felony, punishable by a fine or imprisonment for not more than five years, 
or both, to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statement or representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive branch 
of the Government of the United States. 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Security clearances are 
matters within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the Government of the United 
States. A deliberately false answer on a security clearance application is a serious 
crime within the meaning of Guideline J. Applicant’s arrest and conviction of drug-
related offenses in February 2007 and his deliberately false answer on his security 
clearance application raise AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c) 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “so much time has 
elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). Security concerns also may 
be mitigated if “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to 
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job 
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.” AG ¶ 32(d). For the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶¶ 
17(c) and 26(a). I conclude that AG ¶¶ 32(a) and (d) are established for Applicant’s 
drug-related arrest and conviction in February 2007, but they are not established for his 
falsification of his security clearance application.  
 
 
10 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H, E, and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a young adult, relatively new to the workplace and the 
responsibilities inherent in a security clearance. He appears to have left his 
irresponsible collegiate lifestyle behind him. However, his lack of candor on his security 
clearance application and in subsequent proceedings raises serious concerns about his 
trustworthiness and reliability.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines H, E, 
and J, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised by his drug involvement, but he 
has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his lack of candor. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
 
  
 
11 
 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J: (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
