                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 07-15020 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s marijuana use and drug involvement concerns are mitigated because 
his marijuana use ended in 2005 and was not recent. However, Applicant intentionally 
omitted complete information about his marijuana use on his 2003 and 2006 security 
clearance applications. Personal conduct and criminal conduct concerns are not 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 9, 2003, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86), and on December 15, 2006, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF-86). (GE 1, 5) 
On October 29, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005. 
  
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines H (drug involvement), E 
(personal conduct), and J (criminal conduct). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed 
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the 
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, 
or revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On November 13, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On April 22, 
2010, Department Counsel indicated she was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On 
May 3, 2010, DOHA assigned Applicant’s case to me. On May 12, 2010, DOHA issued 
a hearing notice. (HE 1) On June 2, 2010, Applicant’s hearing was held. At the hearing, 
Department Counsel offered five exhibits (GE 1-5) (Tr. 23), and Applicant offered 11 
exhibits. (Tr. 25-27; AE A-J) There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-5 and AE 
A-J. (Tr. 23, 27) Additionally, I admitted the hearing notice, SOR, and Applicant’s 
response to the SOR. (HE 1-3) On June 9, 2010, I received the transcript.    
 
Procedural Issue 
 
Department Counsel made a motion to change the year in SOR ¶ 2.e from 
“2009” to “2008,” because 2008 was the correct year Applicant responded to DOHA 
interrogatories. (Tr. 16-17; HE 3) There was no objection and I granted Department 
Counsel’s motion. (Tr. 16-17) 
 
At Applicant’s hearing, the SOR was amended adding an allegation under SOR ¶ 
2.f that Applicant intentionally failed to disclose his marijuana use on his September 9, 
2003 SF-86. (Tr. 69-70) There was no objection to the SOR amendment. (Tr. 69-70) I 
granted the motion to amend the SOR. 
   
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted the following allegations: (1) he purchased 
marijuana (SOR ¶ 1.b); and (2) he used marijuana after being granted a Secret security 
clearance (SOR ¶ 1.c). (HE 3) In regard to SOR ¶ 2.d, he admitted that he erroneously 
indicated that he did not use marijuana while holding a security clearance. (HE 3) He 
denied the remaining SOR allegations. His admissions are accepted as factual findings.   
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (Tr. 6) He 
graduated from high school in 1997, and in 2003, he earned a bachelor of technology 
 
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
degree with a major in commercial graphics. (Tr. 6) He married in August 2007. (Tr. 7) 
He has a two-year-old child, and his spouse is expecting twins. (Tr. 7, 29) 
 
Drug involvement 
 
 Applicant said he used marijuana five or six times when he was a senior in high 
school. (Tr. 38) He used marijuana because of peer pressure. (Tr. 36-37) When 
Applicant purchased marijuana, it was for personal use, and not for resale or 
distribution. (Tr. 42) He did not go to class or to work impaired by previous marijuana 
consumption. (Tr. 39-40) When he was in college, he purchased marijuana about once 
a month. (Tr. 43) He increased his marijuana use in college to one or two times a 
month. (Tr. 43)  
 
 In 2003, before Applicant started employment with his current employer, he 
stopped using marijuana so that he could pass any drug screenings. (Tr. 52) He 
stopped using marijuana from about May 2003 to about June 2004. (Tr. 93-94) In 
September 2003, Applicant began his employment with his current employer. (Tr. 47) 
 
 On March 19, 2005, Applicant was arrested for possession of marijuana. (Tr. 59-
61; SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 3.a; GE 3) He did not remember who gave him the marijuana. (Tr. 50) 
He was found guilty and sentenced to 10 hours of community service, to pay a $331 
fine, and to attend ten Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or Narcotics Anonymous (NA) 
meetings. (Tr. 56; AE B, C, D) In October 2005, he completed his community service. 
(AE C) Applicant attended ten NA meetings. (Tr. 57; AE B) In November 2006, he 
disclosed his arrest to his facility security officer. (Tr. 55, 62-63) He did not report the 
arrest earlier because he thought it was just a ticket or citation. (Tr. 62) In December 
2006, he completed all court-ordered requirements. (Tr. 63; AE B-D) 
  
Applicant’s most recent marijuana use was in March 2005. (Tr. 46) Applicant 
does not associate with the friends from college who used marijuana with him. (Tr. 46) 
However, he “may have smoked” marijuana with his younger sister. (Tr. 54) His sister 
no longer smokes marijuana. (Tr. 54) Applicant’s spouse does not smoke marijuana. 
(Tr. 48) After Applicant was arrested for possession of marijuana, he informed his future 
spouse of the arrest. (Tr. 49) In 2005, she had a security clearance and she was 
shocked when he advised her of his arrest. (Tr. 49-50)  
 
2003 security clearance application 
 
On September 9, 2003, Applicant signed his SF-86. (Tr. 66-67; SOR ¶ 2.f; GE 5) 
On his September 9, 2003 SF-86 he responded, “No” to Question 27, which asks: 
 
Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity—Illegal Use of Drugs Since 
the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally 
used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack 
cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, 
etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription drugs?  (Tr. 67-68)  
 
At his hearing, Applicant said that he did not disclose his extensive marijuana 
use on his 2003 SF-86 because he was ashamed of his marijuana use and did not want 
his employer to know about it. (Tr. 68)2  
 
2006 security clearance application and August 2007 Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) interview 
 
On December 15, 2006, Applicant signed his SF-86. (GE 1) Section 23d asks, 
“Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) related to alcohol or 
drugs?” Applicant responded “Yes” and explained that in March 2005 he was arrested 
for possession of marijuana. (GE 1) He described the court’s sentence, indicated he 
completed all court-ordered requirements, and the charge was dismissed on December 
12, 2006. (GE 1) SOR ¶ 2.b indicated Applicant provided false information because the 
offense was actually in February 2006. Applicant’s arrest was on March 19, 2005, and 
he had a court date in February 2006. Accordingly, Applicant’s explanation for Section 
23d was actually accurate. (Tr. 71-72; SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 3.b)     
 
Section 24 of his 2006 security clearance, asks: 
 
24. Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity 
 
The following questions pertain to the illegal use of drugs or drug activity. 
You are required to answer the questions fully and truthfully, and your 
failure to do so could be grounds for an adverse employment decision or 
action against you, but neither your truthful responses nor information 
derived from your responses will be used as evidence against you in any 
subsequent criminal proceeding. 
 
a. Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have 
you illegally used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, 
cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, 
heroin, etc.), amphetamines, depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, 
tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or prescription 
drugs? (Tr. 72-73; SOR ¶¶ 2.c and 3.b; GE 1) 
 
b. Have you ever illegally used a controlled substance while employed as 
a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; while 
possessing a security clearance; or while in a position directly and 
immediately affecting public safety? (Tr. 75; SOR ¶¶ 2.d and 3.b; GE 1)   
 
 
2 As indicated previously, SOR ¶ 2.f was added to the SOR. (Tr. 69-70) SOR ¶ 2.f alleged 
Applicant failed to disclose his marijuana use on his September 9, 2003 SF-86. (Tr. 69-70)  
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Applicant responded “Yes” to section 24a and “No” to section 24b. (GE 1) In the 
comments section, he said that he used marijuana from June 2004 to March 2005 in 
social settings on multiple occasions. (SOR ¶ 1.c; GE 1) Applicant did not list his earlier 
marijuana use because he was apprehensive and scared that he would lose his job. (Tr. 
73-74) He admitted that he should have indicated he used marijuana starting in the 
summer of 1999, and that his answer was deliberately false. (Tr. 74-75) He was aware 
that on his previous SF-86 he had not disclosed his marijuana use. (Tr. 86) He 
emphasized that he was worried that he would lose his job. (Tr. 87) He believed a 
longer period of marijuana use would make him look worse, and he did not know he 
would be interviewed by an investigator. (Tr. 91-92) When Applicant responded to SOR 
¶ 2.c, he denied that he deliberately misrepresented his marijuana usage dates. (HE 3) 
At his hearing, he admitted that he deliberately misrepresented his marijuana usage 
dates, and his SOR response denying the allegation was based on the incorrect date for 
his arrest in SOR ¶ 1.d. (Tr. 90-91; HE 3) 
   
Applicant had a security clearance continuously from 2003 to December 12, 
2006, and his incorrect answer to section 24b was because he failed to carefully read 
the question. (Tr. 75, 89-90) He thought it was limited to police officers, prosecutors, 
and courtroom officials, and did not notice the part about security clearance holders. (Tr. 
75-76; SOR ¶ 2.d) As indicated previously, he did admit on the same SF-86 that he has 
used marijuana as recently as March 2005.   
 
SOR ¶ 2.e indicated Applicant provided false information to an OPM investigator 
on August 16, 2007, when he indicated his most recent marijuana use was in March 
2005. At the time the SOR was written, the Government erroneously believed 
Applicant’s arrest for marijuana possession was in February 2006, rather than on March 
19, 2005. Accordingly, Applicant’s statement to the OPM investigator about his most 
recent marijuana use was accurate. (Tr. 76-77)     
 
 A substance abuse practitioner and assessor evaluated Applicant and 
determined that he was at low probability for future drug abuse. (Tr. 79-80; AE I) The 
assessor recommended Applicant attend 10 AA/NA meetings. (AE I) Applicant provided 
a statement of intent agreeing to automatic revocation of his security clearance for any 
future use of illegal drugs. (AE J) 
  
Character references 
 
 Applicant’s spouse describes him as gentle, dependable, trustworthy, level-
headed, patient, honest, and responsible. (AE H) Before she married Applicant, he told 
her about his drug-related arrest. (AE H) He is a loving father and excellent role model 
to their children. (AE H)   
  
 Applicant’s friend and former supervisor, who has known Applicant for 18 years, 
describes him as having high-moral character and being dependable, reliable, honest, 
and trustworthy. (AE G) Applicant has strong integrity and ethics.  
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 Applicant facility security officer has known Applicant for seven years. (AE E) He 
lauds Applicant’s responsibility, integrity, reliability, and good character. (AE D) 
Applicant is an asset to the company. (AE E)   
      
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines H (drug involvement), E (personal conduct), and J 
(criminal conduct) with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Three drug involvement disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(g) 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “any drug abuse,”3 
“illegal drug possession or sale or distribution,” and “any illegal drug use after being 
granted a security clearance.” These three disqualifying conditions apply because 
Applicant used and possessed marijuana.4 He fully disclosed his drug abuse at his 
hearing. He possessed marijuana before he used it. Applicant’s Secret security 
 
3AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
4AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule (Sch.) I controlled substance. See Sch. I (c)(9). See also Gonzales v. 
Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) (discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule I). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
clearance was approved in 2003, and he used marijuana on multiple occasions from 
July 2004 to March 2005.  
   
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
AG ¶ 26(a) can mitigate security concerns when drug offenses are not recent. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when such conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 
months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period of 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge 
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.”5 
 
5 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
Applicant’s extensive marijuana use lasted several years. He stopped using 
marijuana from about May 2003 to June 2004. Then he resumed his marijuana use until 
his arrest on March 19, 2005 for marijuana possession. Applicant’s most recent 
marijuana use was in March 2005, more than five years prior to his hearing. He 
recognizes the adverse impact on his life of drug abuse. He received some therapy, and 
attended 10 NA meetings. He is now married and has three children. These actions 
create some certitude that he will continue to abstain from drug use. AG ¶ 26(a) applies 
to his marijuana-related offenses.6    
 
Applicant demonstrated his intent not to abuse illegal drugs in the future. He has 
disassociated from his drug-using associates and contacts. He has broken his patterns 
of drug abuse, and he has changed his life with respect to illegal drug use. He has 
abstained from drug abuse for more than five years. He provided “a signed statement of 
intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.” AG ¶ 26(b) applies.  
 
AG ¶¶ 26(c) and 26(d) are not applicable because Applicant did not abuse 
prescription drugs. Marijuana was never prescribed for him. He receives partial credit 
because he attended 10 weeks of NA meetings, and he received a prognosis of low 
probability of recurrence of drug abuse. He does not receive full credit under AG ¶ 26(d) 
because he did not provide sufficient evidence of the qualifications of the person who 
provided the prognosis. More detail about the drug-treatment program he completed is 
necessary to assess its validity.  
  
In conclusion, Applicant ended his drug abuse in March 2005, more than five 
years ago. The motivations to stop using illegal drugs are evident. He understands the 
 
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
6In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
adverse results from marijuana use.7 He has shown or demonstrated a sufficient track 
record of no drug abuse to eliminate drug involvement as a bar to his access to 
classified information.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying with respect to the alleged falsifications of documents used to process 
the adjudication of Applicant’s security clearance in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and  
 
(d)(3) a pattern of dishonesty violations.8 
 
7Approval of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
8The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Applicant intentionally provided false information on his September 9, 2003 SF-
86 when he denied use of illegal drugs in the last seven years.  He did not disclose his 
marijuana use for several years and continuing to May 2003 (SOR ¶ 2.f). When he 
completed his December 15, 2006 SF-86, he intentionally understated the duration of 
his marijuana use when he stated in the comments section that he used marijuana from 
June 2004 to March 2005 in social settings on multiple occasions. He did not disclose 
his marijuana use from 1999 to May 2003. (SOR ¶ 2.c) AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(b) and 16(d)(3) 
all apply. 
 
SOR ¶ 2.d alleges Applicant failed to disclose his marijuana use while holding a 
security clearance on his December 15, 2006 SF-86. Applicant’s statement that he 
inadvertently failed to disclose this information is credible. He disclosed his marijuana 
use and his marijuana arrest on March 19, 2005, and the Government was well aware 
that Applicant held a security clearance in March 2005. Applicant has successfully 
refuted SOR ¶ 2.d.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
Applicant deserves substantial credit in the whole-person analysis for candidly 
admitting he falsified the 2003 and 2006 SF-86s in order to continue his employment. I 
found Applicant’s statements at the hearing and in his SOR response about his 
marijuana use and his reason for falsifying his security documents to be credible. 
However, the personal conduct concerns pertaining to Applicant’s falsification of his 
2006 SF-86 about the duration of his marijuana use (SOR ¶ 2.d), and his falsification of 
his 2003 SF-86 when he denied any marijuana use in the last seven years (SOR ¶ 2.f) 
cannot be mitigated at this time because they are too serious and too recent.  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules 
and regulations.” AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant possessed marijuana on March 19, 2005. (SOR ¶ 3.a) He also 
intentionally failed to disclose the duration of his marijuana use on his 2006 SF-86 as 
discussed in the Personal Conduct section. (SOR ¶ 3.b) For a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 
1001 to occur, the false statement to the Government must be material. The Supreme 
Court defined “materiality” in United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 (1995), as a 
statement having a “natural tendency to influence, or [be] capable of influencing, the 
decision making body to which it is addressed.” See also United States v. McLaughlin, 
386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d Cir. 2004).    
 
  As indicated previously, I found that Applicant intentionally failed to disclose 
information about the duration of his marijuana use on his 2006 SF-86. If Applicant had 
provided an accurate answer on his 2006 SF-86 about the extent of his marijuana use, 
his accurate answer would be capable of influencing the government to deny his 
security clearance because he would have disclosed that he provided false information 
on his 2003 SF-86. It was sufficiently serious9 to jeopardize approval of his security 
clearance. Making a false statement under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious crime, a felony 
 
9 In Applicant’s case, this includes aspects such as, the seriousness of the misconduct, and the 
number of violations of the law, regardless of whether the misconduct resulted in an arrest or conviction. 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(the maximum potential sentence includes confinement for five years and a $10,000 
fine).  In sum, AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) apply because the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 3.a and 
3.b are established.    
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply to all of the offenses. AG ¶¶ 32(b) 
and 32(c) do not apply because Applicant admitted the offenses and no one pressured 
him into committing the offenses. AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) are similar and applicable to 
his possession of marijuana offense. Applicant's marijuana possession in March 2005 is 
a misdemeanor, and Applicant completed all court-ordered requirements. On December 
12, 2006, the marijuana possession charge was dismissed. The marijuana possession 
offense is mitigated by the passage of time (SOR ¶ 3.a).  
 
Applicant’s deliberate falsification of his December 15, 2006 SF-86 is more 
problematic. He deliberately and intentionally falsified his 2006 SF-86 by not disclosing 
the duration of his marijuana use because he wanted to deceive the Government into 
allowing him to retain his employment. 
 
More progress is necessary to assure Applicant has the reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment necessary to safeguard classified information. His 
failure to be fully candid and forthright shows poor judgment and militates against 
approval of a security clearance.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines H, E, and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
was relatively young and immature when he began using marijuana. He served his 
country as an employee of a Government contractor. He stopped using marijuana from 
May 2003 to June 2004, and again after March 19, 2005. He showed he has the ability 
to abstain from marijuana use for lengthy periods of time. In his SOR response and at 
his hearing, he frankly and candidly admitted his extensive history of marijuana use. He 
received some drug counseling and therapy. He knows the consequences of marijuana 
use. Applicant contributes to his company and the Department of Defense. There is no 
evidence of disloyalty or that he would intentionally violate national security. His 
character and good work performance show some responsibility, rehabilitation and 
mitigation. His supervisors evidently support him or he would not have been able to 
retain his employment after his security clearance was called into question. A former 
supervisor, his spouse, and his facility security officer laud his hard work, loyalty, 
trustworthiness, and dedication. I am satisfied that if he continues to abstain from 
marijuana use, and avoids future offenses he will eventually have future potential for 
access to classified information.  
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial.  
Applicant failed to disclose his marijuana use on his 2003 SF-86, and he failed to fully 
disclose his marijuana use on 2006 SF-86. He was sufficiently mature to be fully 
responsible for his conduct. These offenses show a lack of judgment and a failure to 
abide by the law. Such judgment lapses are especially relevant because they were 
made in the context of security requirements. His falsifications of two SF-86s raise a 
serious security concern, and a security clearance is not warranted at this time.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude drug involvement concerns 
are fully mitigated; however, personal conduct and criminal conduct concerns, relating 
to falsifications of two SF-86s, are not mitigated at this time. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not currently eligible for access to classified information.  
 
15 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.d and 2.e:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.f:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
