 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08530 
 SSN:  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Alcohol Consumption security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
G, Alcohol Consumption. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in an undated response that was received by 
DOHA on May 3, 2010, and elected to have the case decided on the written record in 
lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on 
June 11, 2010. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
 
2 
 
Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM on June 17, 2010. As of August 6, 2010, he had not responded. The case was 
assigned to me on August 16, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has a bachelor’s 
degree. His Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), submitted in October 
2007, listed that he had never been married and had no children.1  
 
 Applicant started drinking alcohol when he was about 17 or 18. From that time 
until May 2007, he reported that he would drink about once or twice a week. He would 
drink as much beer as he could afford or was offered to him, between 3 to 14 beers.2   
 
 Applicant worked in a convenience store in 2002. He was cited in 2002 with sale 
of alcohol to a minor. He was working his last day at the convenience store. He did not 
check an individual’s identification and sold the person beer. He pled guilty and paid a 
fine. The convenience store also terminated his employment.3 
 
 Applicant was arrested in about February 2004 and charged with underage 
consumption of alcohol. He obtained a deferred prosecution in which he completed 
community service and attended an alcohol awareness class.4 
 
 Applicant was drinking beer and smoking marijuana on an evening in July 2004. 
He then drove a car. A police officer saw him driving erratically and swerving from side 
to side. Applicant was stopped in the early morning hours for driving out of his marked 
lane. There were empty beer bottles in the car. The officer noted a strong alcohol odor, 
and Applicant flunked a field sobriety test. He refused breath and urine tests. A bag of 
marijuana and a pipe was found in his pocket. Applicant repeatedly used profanity and 
called the officer names. Applicant was arrested and charged with operating a vehicle 
under the influence of alcohol or drugs (OVI), first offense; improper use of marked 
lanes; no seatbelt; driver consuming alcohol underage; possession of drug 
paraphernalia; and possession of marijuana.  He pled guilty to OVI, and the other 
charges were dismissed. He was sentenced to 120 days in jail with 117 days 
suspended, three days to be spent in a residential alcohol treatment program in lieu of 
jail, $350 fines and costs, and probation for two years. Terms of his probation included 
completion of an alcohol and drug evaluation, total abstinence from alcohol and non-
prescription drugs for one year, and Applicant was ordered to write a letter of apology to 
the arresting officer. Applicant has admitted that he “blacked out” and does not 
                                                          
1 Items 5, 6.  
 
2 Items 4, 6.  
 
3 Items 4-7, 9.  
 
4 Items 4-7.  
 
3 
 
remember what took place from the time he was home drinking beer until he was 
stopped by the police. He completed the three-day alcohol treatment program. He was 
advised to seek further treatment, but he declined.5 
 
 Applicant stated that he smoked marijuana on three occasions, including the day 
of his OVI arrest. He has not smoked marijuana since that 2004 arrest.6 
 
 Applicant was stopped again in January 2007 after a police officer saw his car 
swerving. He smelled of alcohol and flunked the field sobriety test. He consented to a 
breath test and his blood alcohol concentration (BAC) was reported at .172%. He was 
arrested and charged with OVI, second offense; OVI with BAC of .172%; and improper 
use of marked lanes. He pled guilty in June 2007 to OVI, second offense, and the other 
charges were dismissed. He was sentenced to 180 days in jail with 170 days 
suspended and 10 days to be spent in jail, $400 fines and costs, driver’s license 
suspended for one year, and probation for two years. Terms of his probation included 
completion of an alcohol and drug assessment, and total abstinence from alcohol and 
illegal substances.7 
 
 Applicant completed an alcohol program in February 2007. The program was 
described as “a two session intervention aimed at high risk alcohol consumption.” This 
program satisfied the court-ordered requirement for an alcohol and drug assessment. 
Applicant also attended bi-weekly sessions with a counsellor until May 2007.8  
 
 Applicant listed his criminal record and marijuana use when he submitted his SF 
86 in October 2007. He was interviewed by an investigator from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) in April 2008. He fully discussed his criminal record, his marijuana 
use, and his alcohol consumption. He stated he was remorseful about his actions. He 
stated that he would never again drive after drinking. He stated at that time, he drank 
about once or twice a month, with a maximum of six beers at any sitting.9  
 
 Applicant’s interview with the OPM investigator was summarized in a report of 
investigation (ROI). Except for several small modifications, Applicant verified the 
accuracy of the ROI when he responded to DOHA interrogatories in December 15, 
2008. He did not provide any additional information about his alcohol consumption. 
There is nothing in the record about Applicant’s alcohol consumption after 2008.10 
 
 
                                                          
5 Items 4-6, 8.  
 
6 Items 5, 6.  
 
7 Items 4-7.  
 
8 Items 4, 6.  
 
9 Items 5, 6.  
 
10 Item 6.  
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for Alcohol Consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
     
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
Applicant has several alcohol-related arrests and convictions. He admitted to 
excessive drinking including a blackout. AG ¶¶ 22(a) and (c) are applicable.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges Applicant’s charge of sale of alcohol to a minor in 2002. While 
alcohol was involved in the charge, it did not involve Applicant consuming alcohol.  SOR 
¶ 1.b is concluded for Applicant. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f alleges that Applicant attended alcohol counseling in February 2007 
due to his alcohol-related arrest that was alleged in another allegation. Alcohol 
counseling is a matter of mitigation. It does not raise a disqualifying condition. SOR ¶ 1.f 
is concluded for Applicant.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.g both allege that Applicant consumed alcohol until at least 
April 2008, except SOR ¶ 1.g added that Applicant’s alcohol consumption was 
“notwithstanding [his] alcohol-related offenses and/or alcohol counseling, as set forth [in 
other allegations].” These two allegations state the same underlying conduct. SOR ¶ 1.g 
simply adds facts and circumstances surrounding the information that is already alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.a. When two allegations under the same guideline allege the same conduct, 
at least one must be concluded for the applicant. SOR ¶ 1.g is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Three Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
 
6 
 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant’s last alcohol-related arrest was in 2007. He has completed several 
court-ordered alcohol programs. He continues to drink alcohol, but indicated that he no 
longer drinks and drives and he only drinks in moderation. There is no favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker. 
There is nothing in the record about Applicant’s current alcohol consumption. Based 
upon Applicant’s history of alcohol-related incidents and absence of current information 
about his alcohol consumption, there is insufficient evidence for a finding that Applicant 
has his alcohol use under control. His alcohol use, resulting in multiple arrests, 
continues to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
None of the mitigating conditions are completely applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
7 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 27 
years old. He has multiple alcohol-related arrests and convictions. He stated in 2008 
that he continued to drink in moderation and he no longer drove after drinking. There is 
no information in the record about his alcohol consumption after 2008. Applicant 
deserves some credit for being truthful on his SF 86 and in his background interview. 
He appears to be remorseful, but at this time, concerns remain about his judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Alcohol Consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.g:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
