 
1 
 
 
                                                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
  ) 
 )   ISCR Case No. 08-06035 
                                                               )  
                                                                      )                                                                                         
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and the whole-person analysis.  His eligibility for 
a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and signed a security clearance application (SF-86) on July 
23, 2007. On September 8, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 29, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 1, 
 
2 
 
 
2009. Applicant’s hearing was scheduled for January 11, 20I0. However, Applicant 
requested a continuance because he was suffering from a serious verified medical 
condition. The Government did not object to Applicant’s request. I granted Applicant’s 
request for a continuance on April 19, 2010. The order granting the continuance and 
Applicant’s supporting documents are identified as Hearing Exhibit (H.E.) 1. 
 
Applicant’s medical condition improved, and, on June 7, 2010, I convened a 
hearing to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
continue a security clearance for Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and 
introduced three exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 through 3 and admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and called no witnesses. He introduced 
nine exhibits, which were identified and marked as Applicant’s Ex. A through Ex. I. All of 
Applicant’s exhibits were admitted without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I 
left the record open for four calendar days, until close of business on June 11, 2010, so 
that Applicant could, if he wished, supply a missing page from his Ex. I. On June 11, 
2010, Applicant reported by e-mail to Department Counsel that he was unable to locate 
the missing page. Applicant’s e-mail is identified as H.E. 2. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on June 14, 2010. 
 
                                                    Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains four allegations under AG E, Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 
through 1.d.). SOR ¶ 1.a. alleged that Applicant was terminated and deemed not eligible 
for rehire by an employer in April 2007 after the employer’s investigations revealed that 
Applicant had engaged in intimidation of others, inappropriate language, possession of 
property for personal gain, and improper instruction of subordinates in time reporting. 
Applicant admitted that the investigation occurred, but he denied the allegation. (SOR; 
Answer to SOR.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b. alleged that Applicant had received a written warning from his 
employer in June 2006 for inappropriate language discussion and intimidation of others. 
He was advised at that time that further violations would result in additional corrective 
action, including possible termination. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the 
facts in allegation in ¶ 1.b. (SOR; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c. alleged that Applicant falsified material facts on the SF-86 he 
executed and signed on July 23, 2007, and attempted to conceal the information 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. when he responded “No” to Question 20 which asked whether he 
had ever been fired from a job; quit a job after being told he would be fired; left a job by 
mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct; left a job by mutual agreement 
following allegations of unsatisfactory performance; or left a job for other reasons under 
unfavorable circumstances. In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.c. 
(SOR; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d. alleged that Applicant falsified material facts when, in an October 
2007 interview with an authorized investigator, he reported that he had resigned from 
 
3 
 
 
his job in April 2007, thereby concealing the information set forth in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.d.  (SOR; Answer to SOR.) 
 
 Applicant, who is 55 years old, has been married and divorced twice. He is the 
father of three adult children. He dropped out of high school before graduation but later 
earned a General Education Development (GED) credential. In 1975, Applicant enlisted 
in the military and served for two years. He has taken some college classes, and he 
received technical training while in military service. He was granted a security clearance 
in 1975. Since 1981, he has been employed as a senior engineer and manager, and he 
was granted eligibility for access to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) in 2003.  
(Ex. 1; Tr. 44-46, 76.) 
 
 From October 2001 until April 2007, Applicant was employed first as an engineer 
and later as manager of product operations by a federal contractor, identified as 
Employer A. As a manager, he was paid $84,000 a year and was responsible for 
supervising seven employees. He had experience as a manager in three previous jobs, 
and Employer A also provided him with management training in January 2007. (Ex. 1 at 
3-4; Ex. 2 at 2-4; Ex. H; Tr. 44-46, 74-77.) 
  
 Employer A provided Applicant’s employment records in response to DOHA’s 
request. Employer A’s business records established that in April 2006, employees under 
Applicant’s management and supervision alleged he had intimidated others in the 
workplace and had used inappropriate language in workplace discussions. The 
employer investigated the allegations and found them to be factually accurate. On June 
27, 2006, the employer issued Applicant an employee corrective action memo, which he 
signed, acknowledging receipt. The employee corrective action memo read, in pertinent 
part: 
 
On 5/11/06 employees that work in the integration and test department . . . 
were interviewed to fact find and obtain information about the work 
environment and your management style. Based on the interviews the 
following violations were corroborated 1) inappropriate language 
discussion and 2) intimidation of others. The company deems your 
behavior to be unacceptable, and in violation of the expectations set forth 
in [Company’s name] expected behaviors.  
 
(Ex. 2 at 32.) 
 
 The employee corrective action memo further stated: 
 
You are expected to interact with others in a professional manner, treat all 
employees with respect and dignity, and exhibit a professional 
management demeanor. Further, you are expected to adhere to all of the 
company’s expectations as outlined in [citation deleted], Expected 
Behaviors. It’s been acknowledged that your behavior has improved over 
the past several weeks with coaching and training. Further violations will 
 
4 
 
 
result in a review for additional corrective action, up to and including 
possible discharge from [Company A].  
 
(Ex. 2 at 32.) 
 
 Additionally, Company A’s business records reflect that in November 2006,  
Company A’s management learned that Applicant instructed three of the employees he 
supervised to charge two hours of time to a program the employees were not working 
on. Company A’s business records also reflect that Applicant directed employees he 
supervised to load three hard plastic cases belonging to a government customer into his 
vehicle. He then told the employees he was taking the cases to his home. He took the 
cases to his home, used them for his own purposes, and did not return them. (Ex. 2 at 
9, 23; Ex. 3 at 4.) 
 
 In January 2007, Company A’s management learned that Applicant confronted 
an employee he supervised and accused him of failing to complete a work task. The 
employee responded that he had completed the task, and he showed Applicant proof of 
completion. Applicant then began to yell at the employee, threatened him with the loss 
of his job, made other threats, and sent the employee home. When Applicant’s 
supervisor learned of the incident, he sent Applicant home. Several employees reported 
that they feared Applicant’s angry flare-ups, intimidating behavior, and retaliation 
threats. (Ex. 2 at 22-23.) 
 
 Employer A convened a threat management team to review Applicant’s 
workplace conduct. The threat management team concluded that Applicant’s behavior 
was of medium to medium-high risk status. By memorandum dated January 24, 2007, 
Company A gave Applicant notice that he was being placed on paid administrative 
leave, pending investigation of allegations of unacceptable workplace behavior, and 
directed him to contact the company’s employee assistance program. He was told he 
could contact his direct supervisor, two human resource generalists, and the individual 
conducting the investigation of his behavior. He was not allowed to communicate with 
any other employees. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the notice of administrative 
leave. (Ex. 2 at 22-24; Ex. E;. Tr. 58-59.) 
 
 Applicant contacted the employee assistance program, and, as a part of the 
investigation, he was interviewed by a psychologist three times in January and February 
2007. On April 6, 2007, Applicant, who remained on paid administrative leave, sent an 
e-mail to his immediate supervisor and one of the human resource generalists. The e-
mail read, in pertinent part: “I[n] light of the current situation I have resigned my position 
with [Company A] effective today.” At his hearing, Applicant defined “the current 
situation” as his inability to obtain from his employer information on the progress of the 
investigation. (Ex. A; Ex. 3 at 4; Tr. 49, 60-61.) 
 
 On April 16, 2007, Company A sent Applicant a letter by certified mail. Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of the letter and offered it as his Ex. C at his hearing. The letter 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
stated that his voluntary resignation had been converted to a discharge. The letter 
further stated:  
 
Since your resignation was submitted prior to closing stages of several 
Corporate Investigations the company is unable to accept your voluntary 
resignation. Based on the investigative findings, and review of the finding 
by the Employee Corrective Action Review Board (ECARB), your actions 
were deemed unacceptable and in violation of the Expected Behaviors for 
all [Company A] employees. The decision of the ECARB was to terminate 
your employment from [Company A] without eligibility for rehire. Enclosed 
is a copy of the Corrective Action Memo (CAM).1 
  
(Ex. C; Tr. 55.) 
 
 After receiving notice of termination from Company A, Applicant applied for 
unemployment benefits. Company A disputed Applicant’s claim for unemployment 
benefits and reported that he had been fired for cause. Applicant was required to repay 
the money he had received in unemployment compensation. (Tr. 87-90.) 
 
 On July 23, 2007, Applicant signed and certified his SF-86. Question 20 on the 
SF-86 seeks information about an individual’s employment record. Specifically, 
Question 20 asks if, in the past seven years, an applicant has been fired from a job; quit 
after being told he or she would be fired; left a job by mutual agreement following 
allegations of misconduct; left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of 
unsatisfactory performance; or left a job for [an]other reason under unfavorable 
circumstances. Applicant answered “No” to Question 20. (Item 1 at 6-7.)  
 
 At his hearing, Applicant acknowledged that he had received the April 16, 2007, 
letter from Employer A terminating his employment without eligibility for rehire before he 
completed and signed his SF-86 on July 23, 2007. When asked by Department Counsel 
why he then answered “No” to Question 20 on his SF-86, he said: “I have never worked 
anywhere in my life where an accepted resignation was rejected two to three weeks 
later and turned into a termination.” (Tr. 55.) 
 
 When pressed further to describe his state of mind when he answered Question 
20, Applicant stated: “I’m not denying that I received the letter. Again, to me, it kind of 
goes back to what came first, the chicken or the egg.” (Tr. 55.) 
 
 The following colloquy then occurred between Department Counsel and 
Applicant: 
 
1 The CAM, dated April 16, 2007, was signed by the human resources generalist. It concluded: “Based on 
the investigative findings the following violations were corroborated: 1) Intimidation of Others; 2) 
Inappropriate Language/Discussion; 3) Possession of Property for Personal Gain; and 4) Improper 
Instruction for Time Reporting. Specifically, your actions since the issuance of a corrective action memo in 
June 2006 are deemed unacceptable and in violation of Expected Behaviors for all [Company A] 
employees.” (Ex. D.) 
 
6 
 
 
 
 DEPARTMENT COUNSEL: Okay, so you made a decision in your head, when 
you read this question, since I quit before they sent me the letter, I’m going to put no? 
 
 APPLICANT: I guess if you wanted to put it that way, it would be a fair statement. 
 
(Tr. 55.) 
 
 On October 23, 2007, Applicant was interviewed by an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator, who asked him about his employment. He provided 
the following facts to the investigator: he was placed on administrative leave pending an 
investigation of a disagreement with a subordinate; the investigation was completed in 
February 2007, and he then returned to work; after he returned to work, some unknown 
person complained that he had stolen company property; he was cursed at work a few 
times; he grew tired of accusations at work and in April 2007 decided to quit his job. His 
daughter is aware that he quit his job, and this could not be used against him in any way 
as blackmail or coercion.  Applicant said nothing to the investigator about his dismissal 
from Company A. (Ex. 3 at 3.) 
 
 On March 12, 2009, DOHA sent Applicant interrogatories, which included a copy 
of his personal subject interview, and requested the following: “Please read carefully the 
investigator’s summary of the statement you made to the investigator during your 
interview. On the last page of these interrogatories, you will be asked to verify the 
accuracy of the investigator’s summary of the interview.” (Ex. 3 at 2.) 
 
 Item 4 on the interrogatory states: “If the report of investigation does not reflect 
accurately the information that you provided, please explain how the report is not 
correct.”  In response to Item 4, Applicant wrote: “While I was aware the investigation at 
[Company A] was completed in Feb. 2007, I remained on Administrative Leave until I 
resigned in April 2007.” He made no other changes, revisions, or additions to the 
investigator’s report. (Ex. 3 at 10.)  
 
 Item 6 on the interrogatory asks for a “Yes” or “No” response from the applicant 
to the following: “Subject to any additions or deletions made above, do you agree with 
and adopt the investigator’s summary as accurately reflecting your interview? If you 
agree, these interrogatories, along with the content of the attached report of your 
interview, may be admitted into evidence at a hearing to determine your suitability to 
hold a security clearance.” Applicant checked “Yes” in response to Item 6.  Then, on 
March 30, 2009, Applicant signed the following statement: “I swear (or affirm) that I 
have read the enclosed summary of my interview conducted on October 23, 2007, and I 
either found the interview to be accurate or I have added corrected entries to Item Four 
(4).” (Ex. 3 at 11.)    
 
 At his hearing, Applicant testified that he did not discuss his employment issues 
at Company A with the investigator in his personal subject interview. He denied telling 
the investigator about being placed on administrative leave after a disagreement with a 
 
7 
 
 
subordinate. He denied telling the investigator that he had been accused of stealing. He 
denied telling the investigator that he had quit his job in April 2007. He denied that he 
intended to lie on his SF-86 or in his interview with the investigator. (Tr. 63, 71-73, 100.) 
 
                                                            Policies  
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
8 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant’s personal conduct raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(b), 
16(d)(2), and 16(e)(1). AG ¶ 16(a) reads: “deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(b) reads: “deliberately 
providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official government 
representative.”  
 
AG ¶16(d)(2) reads: “credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected 
information. This indicates but is not limited to a consideration of . . . disruptive, violent, 
or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace.” AG ¶ 16(e)(1) reads, in pertinent part: 
“personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a 
 
9 
 
 
                                           
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . engaging in activities 
which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing.”   
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.a. and admitted SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant’s former 
employer provided business records that established his unacceptable workplace 
behavior in 2006 and 2007. Company A’s business records and Applicant’s Ex. C and 
Ex. D establish the Government’s prima facie case in allegation 1.a. Applicant provided 
no evidence to rebut or mitigate the allegation. He denied SOR allegations at ¶¶ 1.c. 
and 1.d., which alleged deliberate falsification.2 
 
Applicant, an experienced manager and the supervisor of seven subordinate 
employees, was put on notice by his employer in June 2006 that his unacceptable 
behavior in the workplace had been corroborated through an investigation. He was 
warned that similar behavior in the future could be cause for dismissal. In 2007, 
Applicant was again accused of inappropriate workplace behavior, and during the 
ensuing investigation, his employer placed him on administrative leave. Before the 
investigation was concluded, Applicant sent an e-mail to his employer stating that he 
was resigning from his position with the company. Applicant’s employer refused to 
accept his resignation and notified him by letter dated April 17, 2007, that he was fired.  
 
When he completed and certified his SF-86 three months later, in July 2007, 
Applicant concealed the fact that he had been fired or left a position under unfavorable 
circumstances when he answered “No” to Question 20. In October 2007, when he was 
interviewed by an authorized investigator, he told her he had resigned from his position. 
He failed to disclose to the OPM investigator the fact that the company sent him a letter 
firing him after he had tendered his resignation. At his hearing, he denied discussing his 
workplace problems with the investigator, although he certified as true the investigator’s 
summary which included that information. He acknowledged that he had applied for 
unemployment benefits. At his hearing, for the first time, he also acknowledged that his 
employer informed the unemployment commission that he had been fired for cause, and 
he was then required to repay the unemployment benefits that he had received. 
 
 
2 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). See also ISCR Case No. 08-05637 at 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2010) (noting an applicant’s level of 
education and other experiences are part of entirety-of-the-record evaluation as to whether a failure to 
disclose past-due debts on a security clearance application was deliberate. 
 
10 
 
 
                                           
Applicant denied deliberately falsifying his answer to Question 20. However, he 
provided his employer’s letter of termination as an exhibit for the record. His denial was 
not credible, and he failed to provide a credible reason for failing to inform the 
government that he had been fired.  
 
  At his hearing, Applicant also denied he told the government investigator that he 
had resigned from his position. His statement at the hearing was not credible.3 I believe 
he did in fact tell the OPM investigator he resigned, and he did not disclose his receipt 
of the termination letter. 
 
  Additionally, Applicant’s decision to conceal his unacceptable workplace behavior 
and to conceal his dismissal for cause from his position as a manager made him 
vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. These facts, if known, would affect 
his personal and professional standing.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
 
3 Applicant’s inconsistent statement falls outside the scope of the conduct alleged in the SOR. In ISCR 
Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which 
conduct not alleged in a SOR may be considered: 
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation;(d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e)  to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3. 
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct 24, 2003)). See also ISCR Case No. 08-09232 vat 3 (App. Bd. Sept. 9, 2010) (stating that 
inconsistent statements in exhibits may be considered in assessing an applicant’s credibility and 
evaluating mitigation and rehabilitation evidence even though they are not cited in the SOR as raising a 
security concern.) I have considered Applicant’s non-SOR statement that he did not tell the investigator 
that he had resigned from his job and did not discuss his workplace problems with the investigator for the 
purposes of (a), (b), (c), and (e) and not for any other purpose.  
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
    
I thoroughly reviewed the documentary and testamentary evidence in this case. I 
observed Applicant carefully, and I noted his demeanor and how he responded to 
questions about answering Question 20 and his interview with an OPM investigator in 
October 2007. I also listened carefully to his responses to questions posed during his 
security clearance hearing in order to assess his credibility and state of mind. I conclude 
that there is sufficient record evidence to conclude that Applicant’s “No” response to 
Question 20 and his statement to the OPM investigator that he had resigned from his 
position with Company A were willful and deliberate falsifications. I conclude that none 
of the Guideline E mitigating conditions applies to the facts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 
1.d. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
12 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.         
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult of 55 
years. He has held several managerial positions and was aware of his role and 
responsibilities as a manager. Nevertheless, his behavior toward his subordinates was 
investigated by his employer and found to violate expected behaviors for managers. 
 
Applicant was not a credible witness. He resigned from his position, and then his 
employer sent him a letter terminating his employment. After receiving his termination 
notice, he applied for unemployment benefits. When his employer told the 
unemployment commission that Applicant had been fired for cause, Applicant was 
required to repay the unemployment compensation he had received. In his response to 
Question 20 on his SF-86, Applicant did not reveal that he left employment under 
adverse circumstances.  
 
In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant reviewed his personal subject 
interview. He made one correction, but he did not dispute that he told an OPM 
investigator that he had resigned from his employment after having some problems with 
other employees. At his hearing, however, Applicant denied telling the investigator 
about his workplace issues. I believe Applicant did in fact provide the information 
reported by the OPM investigator in her summary of Applicant’s personal subject 
interview on October 23, 2007. I found his testimony denying the accuracy of the 
summary to be unreliable and lacking in credibility. 
 
Applicant saw a psychologist briefly at the request of his employer, but he has 
not sought professional counseling or treatment for his unacceptable behavior in the 
workplace. The false information he provided is recent and serious. He has not taken 
responsibility for his failure to be candid about his work record. He failed to provide   
evidence of rehabilitation, and he failed to establish that the behavior would not recur, 
raising ongoing concerns about his judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability.    
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Accordingly, I conclude, 
after a careful review of the facts of his case, the personal conduct adjudicative 
guideline, and the whole-person analysis, that Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising from his personal conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline E:  AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
 
                                      Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                    
___________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
