1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-10397
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the criminal and personal conduct security concerns, but
failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concern. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On March 31, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines F (Financial Considerations), E (Personal Conduct), and J (Criminal
Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).
Applicant answered the SOR on April 20, 2010, admitting all of the allegations.
He requested a hearing, and the case was assigned to me on May 28, 2010. On June
3, 2010, DOHA issued a notice of hearing for June 30, 2010. The hearing was held as
2
scheduled. I received eight Government exhibits marked as Government Exhibits (GE)
1 to 8, five Applicant exhibits, marked as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A to E, and
Applicant’s testimony. I left the record open at the conclusion of the hearing, at
Applicant’s request, to allow him to submit additional exhibits. Within the time allotted,
he submitted eight additional exhibits that I received. (AE F to M) DOHA received the
transcript on July 9, 2010. 
Procedural Ruling
At the close of the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR as
follows:
1.c. You are indebted to the United States Internal Revenue
Service for approximately $20,000 for the time period of 2001-2005.
Applicant did not object, and I granted the motion.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 43-year-old married man with three children, ages 20, 16, and
seven. His two oldest children are from prior relationships. His 20-year-old son currently
serves in the United States Navy. 
Applicant works in the information technology field. Since 2004, he has worked
for a defense contractor that focuses on making information technology more accessible
for the disabled. The program particularly targets disabled military veterans. (GE 6 at 4) 
As a teen, Applicant used and sold illegal drugs. In June 1987, Applicant was
arrested and charged with possession of cocaine, marijuana and PCP. (Tr. 59). He was
sentenced to five years in jail (suspended) and three years of probation. 
In November 1988, Applicant was charged with manufacture/distribution of a
controlled dangerous substance, possession of cocaine, possession of cocaine with the
intent to distribute, and carrying a concealed knife. (Tr. 60) In February 1990, Applicant
was found guilty of the first charge. In April 1990, he was sentenced to ten years in
prison. (Tr. 62)
While Applicant was incarcerated, the state charged him with eluding an officer
and resisting arrest. (Tr. 65) These offenses related to an incident that occurred
between the incidents of June 1987 and November 1988. (Tr. 65) Under the terms of a
plea bargain, Applicant pleaded guilty to lesser offenses and was sentenced to an
additional three years to run concurrent to the sentence he was already serving.
Applicant was a model prisoner, earning a bachelor’s degree in general studies in
1994 while incarcerated. (Tr. 28) Because of his good behavior, he was released after
six years. In one rehabilitation class that Applicant took while in prison, he learned what
It is unclear why Applicant completed two security clearance applications. He suspects that after leaving his1
job in 2004 to take his current job, the original investigative process was terminated, and that he did not have
a need for a clearance on his current job until 2008. (Tr. 79)
3
he characterized as the “people, places, and things,” philosophy of life. (Tr. 86)
Specifically, if one avoids people who are involved in illegal activities, and places where
illegal activities occur, one’s likelihood of staying out of trouble is increased. 
Since leaving prison, Applicant has abided by this creed, foregoing illegal drug
use and avoiding his old social milieu. He is highly respected on the job and in his
community. According to his supervisor from 2004 to 2006, Applicant was “an excellent
technician” who was “always up to date on whatever he was working on.” (AE C) 
Currently, Applicant manages a staff of 15 desktop and network support
administrators. His employer, on his yearly evaluation, noted that he was highly
productive and demonstrated solid leadership skills. (AE B at 1, 2)
Applicant is active in local political campaigns and is the chairman of his
homeowner’s association. (GE 3 at 5; Tr. 88) He is an assistant coach on his son’s little
league baseball team, and is a booster for his daughter’s high school cheerleading
squad. (Tr. 88)
Two of Applicant’s friends are police officers. Both provided references for him.
One of the officers characterized him as “an exceptionally intelligent person whom [the
officer] leans on for financial business, and spiritual guidance.” (AE F) The other officer,
who characterized himself as “highly selective of [his] personal circle of friends”
because of the nature of his profession, described Applicant as dependable, honest,
and trustworthy. (AE G)
Applicant completed a security clearance application in March 2004. He failed to
disclose his felonies in response to Question 21. Your Police Record - Felony
Offenses - Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any felony offense?
Applicant misread the question, thinking that he only had to report felonies within seven
years of the date he completed the security clearance application. (Tr. 73) Applicant
disclosed his criminal record to an investigative agent in 2005. (Tr. 76) 
Applicant completed another security clearance application in June 2008.  This1
time, he read it more thoroughly, and “took [his] time completing it. (Tr. 80) In response
to Section 23D - Alcohol/Drug Charges, he answered “yes,” and described them at
length. 
In 2001, Applicant purchased a laundromat. (Tr. 56) The business was
unsuccessful, prompting Applicant to sell it in 2004 (Tr. 33) In 2005, the local
municipality where Applicant operated the business obtained a tax lien against applicant
for $53,497 for unpaid sales and use taxes for tax years 2001 through 2004. Later that
year, the municipality filed another tax lien against Applicant. This lien covered tax year
4
2005 and totalled $6,748 . (GE 3 at 4) Applicant had filed his taxes his taxes timely
during the years in dispute, but miscalculated them. (Tr. 31)
Shortly after receiving the notice of tax liens, Applicant called the local taxing
authority to arrange a payment plan. (Tr. 33) In April 2009, Applicant “went down
physically” to the local taxing authority and made a $100 payment toward the
delinquency. (GE 4 at 4) He has not made any additional payments since then.
At or about the time the local municipality filed the tax liens against Applicant, the
federal government audited his tax returns from 2003 through 2005 and concluded he
owed an additional $41,864 (AE H; Tr. 55, 95) In June 2010, Applicant consulted a
certified public accounting firm to help develop a payment plan for his income tax
delinquencies. (Tr. 39; AE A) He retained the firm a month later, approximately three
weeks after the hearing. (AE J) 
In 2004, Applicant and his wife financed the purchase of a home with a variable
rate mortgage. (Tr. 42) Shortly after the purchase, Applicant discovered the recordation
fees were calculated incorrectly at the settlement, causing the bank to underestimate
the escrow portion of their mortgage payment. Also, over the next four years, the
monthly mortgage payments began to steadily increase. By 2007, it had more than
doubled from $3,800 to $8,000. (Tr. 92) In 2007, Applicant and his wife successfully
refinanced their loan. Under the new loan, the monthly mortgage was fixed at $4,000
monthly.
In 2009, Applicant’s wife, who worked in the real estate industry, was laid off.
Applicant was unable to manage the family’s finances on his income alone.
Consequently, both his mortgage payments and his car payments fell behind.
Currently, Applicant and his wife are receiving counseling through a state
program that seeks to prevent foreclosures. (Tr. 50) Also, a week before the hearing,
they met with a debt counselor to consider consolidating their debts. (Tr. 50)  Recently,
Applicant’s wife obtained another job in the real estate profession. She will be paid a
nominal salary in addition to a commission for any homes sold. As of the date of the
hearing, she had not received her first pay check. 
Applicant earns $75,000 per year. He has approximately $15,000 invested in a
401k plan. (Tr. 58) He intends to apply this money toward his mortgage if his efforts at
preventing foreclosure are unsuccessful. (Tr. 58) Both Applicant’s mortgage and car
payments remain delinquent.
In June 2010, Applicant and his wife applied for a home loan modification. (AE
M) If approved, the bank will reduce their monthly mortgage payment to 31 percent of
their gross income. (Id.)
5
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied together with the factors
listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information” (AG
¶ 18). Applicant’s history of financial problems triggers the application of AG ¶¶ 19(a),
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
6
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s financial problems began when his laundromat business failed, and
were exacerbated when he discovered that he had miscalculated his state and federal
income taxes while the business was in operation. His ability to address these problems
was hampered by the drastic increase in his adjustable rate monthly mortgage payment
and his wife’s subsequent unemployment.
In the past four months, Applicant has retained an accounting firm to help him
resolve his tax delinquency, sought help through a state program for distressed
homeowners, applied for a mortgage loan modification, and met with a credit counselor
about consolidating their debts. AG ¶¶ 14(b) and 14(d) apply.
AG ¶ 14(c) only applies partially. Although there is ample evidence that Applicant
is receiving counseling, it is too soon to conclude that the problem is being resolved or
is under control.
Personal Conduct
The security concern under this guideline is as follows:
[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process (AG ¶ 15). 
Applicant’s omission of his criminal record from a 2004 security clearance application
raises the issue of whether AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or
falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” applies. 
Applicant’s contention that he misread the question is credible in light of his
subsequent disclosure of his arrests to an investigator and his inclusion of the arrest
and the surrounding details on another security clearance application completed four
years later. I conclude AG ¶ 16(a) does not apply, and there are no personal conduct
security concerns.
Criminal Conduct
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness” (AG ¶ 30). Also, “by its very nature, it calls into question
a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations” (Id.). 
7
Applicant was incarcerated for six years in the 1990s after being convicted of
several drug-related charges. AG ¶¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser
offenses,” and 31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether
the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted,” apply. 
Although Applicant admittedly was involved in using and dealing drugs, this
conduct occurred more than 20 years ago when he was in his late teens to early
twenties. While in prison, Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree. Since leaving prison
Applicant has avoided the drug culture, pursued gainful employment, and gotten
married. He is highly respected on the job and is a pillar of his community. The following
mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 apply:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not case doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training, or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The seriousness of Applicant’s criminal conduct is outweighed by his immaturity
when it occurred, the passage of time that has elapsed since it occurred, and the
significant evidence of rehabilitation. Under these circumstances the likelihood of
recurrence is minimal.
Applicant is an exceedingly productive member of society. Applicant testified
persuasively that his motivation to excel on the job stemmed not only from a desire to
earn a lucrative salary, but to his dedication to the people whom he is serving. 
However, these positive attributes cannot overcome the vulnerability to coercion
generated by Applicant’s ongoing financial difficulties. His income tax delinquencies
8
accrued because of good-faith mistakes made when he filed his returns. His ability to
address this problem was hampered first by the drastic increase in his monthly
mortgage payments, then by his wife’s job loss. Although Applicant is aggressively
taking steps to remedy his financial problems, too much uncertainty about his long-term
financial situation exists for me to conclude that it poses no security concern.
Consequently, upon considering Applicant’s case in the context of the whole-person
concept, I conclude that he has not mitigated the security concern.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 3.a - 3.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
