                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )      ISCR Case No. 08-11799
SSN: ------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
September 10, 2010
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
           Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on August 7, 2008.  On August 6, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns
under Guidelines B and C for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on September 2, 2009, in which
he elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted  the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
the Applicant on July 23, 2010.  The Applicant was instructed to submit information in
rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the
FORM on July 29, 2010, and he submitted a reply.  The case was assigned to the
undersigned for resolution on August 19, 2010.  Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE NOTICE
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts
concerning the current political conditions in Iran.  (FORM at pp. 5 - 20 and attachments
1 thorough 16.)  Applicant has no objection.  The request and the attached documents
were not admitted into evidence but were included in the record. The facts
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
FINDING OF FACTS
The Applicant is 50 years old and married.  He is employed by a defense
contractor as an Architect, and is applying for a security clearance in connection with his
employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has foreign contacts
that could create the potential for foreign influence, which could result in the
compromise of classified information.
The Applicant was born in Tehran, Iran in 1959.  He migrated to the United
States in 1977, at the age of seventeen.  He attended college from 1986 to 1989, and
obtained a Bachelor’s Degree.  Over the next twenty-three years, he lived and worked
in the United States and made it his permanent home.  In September 1999, he became
a naturalized United States citizen.  In 2001, he obtained a United States passport.
That same year, he married a native born United States citizen.  He is a dual citizen of
Iran and the United States.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  
His mother, father and sister are citizens of Iran.  His parents reside in Iran.  His
mother is a 75 year old retired school teacher.  His father is an 86 year old retired civil
engineer.  (Government Exhibit 5.)  The Applicant maintains regular telephonic contact
with them on a weekly basis.  His sister currently resides in the United States but he has
no contact with her.  The Applicant states that neither his parents nor his sister are
associated in any way with the Iranian government, nor are they are aware that he is
applying for a security clearance.  The Applicant began working for his current employer
in April 2008.  (Government Exhibit 4.) 
 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline C - Foreign Preference).  The Government alleges in this
paragraph that the Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he has acted in such a
way as to show a preference for another country over the United States.
The Applicant applied for and obtained an Iranian passport in 1976, for the
purposes of traveling to Iran.  After becoming a United States citizen in 1999, he
renewed his Iranian passport in May 2004, and used it to enter and exit Iran in March or
April 2005, during his travel to Iran to visit his parents.   His Iranian passport expired in
May 2009.  When learning of DoD’s policy concerning possession of a foreign passport,
3
the Applicant gave his passport to the security officer at his company for safekeeping, to
be returned when needed.  (See Government Exhibits 5 and 6.)  He has not destroyed
his Iranian passport.  (See Government Exhibit 3 and Response to the FORM.)  The
Applicant states, “I have maintained my dual citizenships [sic] only to enable me to
travel to Iran in cases of medical emergencies that may occur due to the aging of my
parents”.  (Response to FORM at p. 3.)  In fact, he indicates that he would not renounce
his Iranian citizenship because he wants the ability to travel to Iran to visit his parents
without being harassed by the Iranian government.  (Government Exhibit 3.)
In the past, when the Applicant’s previous security officer, to whom he had given
his passport for safekeeping, terminated her position with the company, the Applicant’s
passport was returned to him.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  
The United States Government’s concerns with Iran’s policies include, but are
not limited to the following: (1) its clandestine efforts to acquire nuclear weapons, and
other weapon of mass destruction, (2) its sponsorship of international terrorism, (3) its
intervention into the internal affairs of Iraq, (4) its aggressive efforts to undermine the
Middle East peace process, and (5) its human rights violation against its own people.
As a result of these concerns, the U.S. prohibits most trade with Iran.  Also, the United
States does not encourage travel to Iran.
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided
into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline B (Foreign Influence)
6.  The Concern.  Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not
in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.
Adjudication under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of
terrorism.
 
Condition that could raise a security concern:
7.  (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or
coercion. 
4
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline C (Foreign Preference)
9.  The Concern.  When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for
a foreign country over the United States, then he or he may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.
Condition that could raise a security concern:
10.  (a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
11.  (a) dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a foreign
country;
11.  (e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security
authority, or otherwise invalidated.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The voluntariness of participation;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other pertinent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress;
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
5
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSION
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in foreign influence and foreign preference that
demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant is subject to foreign influence (Guideline B) and has a foreign preference
(Guideline C).  This evidence indicates unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of
the Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude
there is a nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guidelines B and C of the SOR.
6
Under Foreign Influence, Guideline B, Disqualifying Condition 7(a) contact with a
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who
is a citizen of or resident of a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion applies.  None of
the mitigation conditions are applicable.  
The Applicant is a dual citizen of Iran and the United States.  Although he has
lived in the United States for many years, has become a naturalized citizen, and is
married to a native born American citizen, he has close, immediate family members in
Iran that he has a strong emotional bond with.  This is evidenced by his regular weekly
telephonic contact with his parents in Iran.  The nature of his relationship with his
parents in Iran is not casual and/or infrequent, but clearly of a nature that is regular,
consistent and ongoing. This deep emotional bond with his parents in Iran are foreign
contacts that pose a security risk.  Under the heightened scrutiny analysis, the
Applicant’s family in Iran pose a significant security risk.  Accordingly, I find against the
Applicant under this guideline.   
Admittedly, the Applicant is a citizen of Iran by birth.  However, he has exercised
a right and privilege of a foreign citizen, by applying for and using an Iranian passport,
after becoming a United States citizen.  Although he has recently given his now expired
Iranian passport to his company’s security department, he has not “surrendered” the
passport in a manner that satisfies the language, meaning and intent of the regulation.
Since, he may retrieve it at any time, and renew it, it has not been surrendered.  He has
not destroyed it, nor does he intend to.  It is apparent that he will use it in the future if he
decides to travel to Iran.  He has specifically indicated that he does not wish to
renounce his Iranian citizenship because he would like to travel to Iran to visit his
parents when he chooses.    
Under Foreign Preference, Disqualifying Condition 10(a) exercise of any right,
privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the
foreign citizenship of a family member applies.  Mitigation Conditions 11(a) dual
citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a foreign country and, 11(e)
the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or
otherwise invalidated are arguably applicable in this case, but are not controlling here.
The Applicant is not willing to renounce his dual citizenship with Iran that clearly shows
a foreign preference.  Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under this guideline.  
I have considered all of the evidence presented, including his favorable
recommendations, however, it does not mitigate the negative effects of his foreign
influence and foreign preference and the effects that it can have on his ability to
safeguard classified information.
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.  
7
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
   
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
 
CONCLUSION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey-Anderson
Administrative Judge
