                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-12134 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E 
(personal conduct) security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 23, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 5, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct). The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 17, 2010. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on April 21, 2010. The case was assigned to me on April 27, 2010. 
1 
 
2 
 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 3, 2010, scheduling the hearing for May 18, 
2010. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, 
which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf. I held the 
record open until May 25, 2010, to afford the Applicant the opportunity to submit 
additional evidence. Applicant did not submit additional evidence. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 25, 2010.  
 
Procedural Issue 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 Before the hearing, the Government moved to amend SOR ¶ 2.a., clarifying the 
wording as follows: 
 
You falsified material facts on an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP), certified by you on about September 
23, 2008, in response to ‘Section 27, Financial Record c. In the last 
seven years, have you had a lien placed against your property for failing to 
pay taxes or other debts.’ You answered “no”; whereas in truth, you 
deliberately failed to disclose the tax liens  listed in subparagraphs 1.ll and 
1.mm, above.1 
 
Without objection from the Applicant, I granted the Government’s request to amend 
SOR ¶ 2.a. (Tr. 11-14.) 
 
 At the hearing, based on Applicant’s testimony and evidence presented, the 
Government moved to amend the SOR further by adding the following additional 
allegation: 
 
1.yy. You failed to file your [name] state and federal tax returns as 
required for tax years 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2009.  
 
After argument by both parties, I granted the Government’s request to further amend 
and add SOR ¶ 1.yy. Additionally, I gave the Applicant the opportunity to submit 
additional material that would mitigate or rebut SOR ¶ 1.yy., discussed supra. As noted, 
Applicant did not submit additional evidence. (Tr. 81-85.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.jj., 1.nn. through 1.qq., 1.ss. through 
1.xx., and stated in response to 2.a. and 2.b. (falsification allegations) that after 
reviewing his credit report, he should have answered the questions affirmatively. He 
                                                          
1 The underlined words replaced the following language in allegation 2.a. of the original SOR: “In the last 
7 years, have you had any liens against you that have not been paid?”  
3 
 
denied SOR ¶¶ 1.kk. through 1.mm., and 1.rr. His admissions and denials were 
accompanied with explanations. His admissions are accepted as findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old owner of a security consultant company, who seeks a 
security clearance to provide consulting services on a military installation. He held an 
interim secret clearance from September 2008 to February 2010 until it was revoked as 
a result of these proceedings. Without a clearance, Applicant is unable to bid or work on 
Government contract jobs. (Tr. 20-24.) Before becoming a consultant, Applicant was 
employed for 21 years by a defense contractor at the same military installation where he 
hopes to provide consulting services. During those years, he held a security clearance. 
(Tr. 35, 39-40.)  
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in June 1976. He has no formal education 
beyond high school. All his employment-related skills were acquired through on-the-job 
training. (Tr. 26.) Applicant married in October 1982. He and his wife have two children, 
a 27-year-old son, and a 19-year-old son. Their older son lives on his own, and their 
younger son lives at home. (GE 1, Tr. 24-26.)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed his financial situation and 
included the review of his September 2008 e-QIP, his April 2009 Responses to DOHA 
Interrogatories, and his record of judgments and liens, as well as his October 2008 and 
October 2009 credit reports. Applicant’s SOR identified 50 separate debts. (GE 1 – 5.) 
 
Applicant’s debts include a variety of creditors – 46 medical bills; one utility bill; 
one cell phone bill; one state tax lien for $5,947, filed in February 2003; and one federal 
tax lien for $10,998.74, filed in August 2005. The 50 debts alleged total $50,838. (SOR 
¶¶ 1.a. – 1.xx, Tr. 16.) Applicant contracted an illness in 2000, which was later 
diagnosed as fibromyalgia. Apart from his tax debts, he attributes the majority of his 
debts to uncovered medical bills. Before his hearing, Applicant submitted 
documentation reflecting that he made modest payments a medical debt creditor from 
November 2004 to March 2009. (Response to SOR.)  
 
At his hearing, he submitted documentation showing that he made a $50 and a 
$100 payment to the same medical debt creditor in April 2010; however, the same 
documentation reflected a balance of $27,035.53. His medical bills have been in a 
delinquent status since 2003. (GE 4.) At his hearing, Applicant was unable to discuss or 
provide meaningful information about the status of his delinquent medical bills. (AE C, 
AE D, Tr. 45-56, 78.) 
 
Additionally, Applicant claimed the debt for a utility bill was paid, but offered no 
documentation to support his claim. (SOR ¶1.kk.), Tr. 50.) He has not sought financial 
counseling (Tr. 52.) Applicant submitted a letter from his accountant dated March 15, 
2010 stating he, “is in the process of compiling and preparing [Applicant’s] tax returns 
4 
 
                                                          
for the periods of 2006 through 2009,” and further indicated “[w]e are working with the 
IRS to establish a payment plan to the outstanding liabilities.” (Response to SOR.) 
Applicant’s initial tax liability began in 2001 and has been ongoing. As of the hearing 
date, Applicant had not resolved his state and federal tax arrearages; had not filed tax 
returns for tax years 2006 through 2009; and the last time he filed a state or federal tax 
return was in 2005. (Tr. 56-69.)2 
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement completed in March 2009, reflects a joint 
net monthly income of $3,325, with a monthly remainder of $590. (GE 3 at 83, Tr. 73-
75.) He did not demonstrate through his documentation or testimony that he has 
maintained any meaningful interaction with his creditors or that he has regained 
financial responsibility. In short, Applicant’s financial situation has not improved in any 
significant way since his SOR was issued. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 In September 2008, Applicant completed his e-QIP. He answered “no” to 
question 27 inquiring whether he had a lien placed against his property for failing to pay 
taxes or other debts. He also answered “no” to question 28 inquiring whether he had 
ever been over 180 days delinquent on any debts in the last seven years, and whether 
he was currently delinquent on any debts over 90 days. Both answers are clearly wrong. 
 
Applicant denies intending to falsify his clearance application. He explained that 
medical debts did not “count or whatever” when obtaining credit in the past. (Tr. 70-71.) 
He acknowledged that he should have listed his tax liens on his e-QIP, but claimed he 
did not know of their existence. (Tr. 71-72.) He acknowledged that he had completed 
security clearance applications “every five or ten years” and was experienced with the 
process. He further acknowledged that his signature page on his e-QIP certified the 
information he provided was true and accurate. (Tr. 69-70, 72-73.) I find neither claim 
credible. Applicant was well versed and experienced in completing security clearance 
applications, so he was familiar with the forms and the process. The language of the 
questions is straightforward. I do not find Applicant’s explanation plausible given his 
security clearance experience, the number of debts involved, and knowledge of his 
ongoing tax problems. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted a copy of his consulting agreement to work on base. (AE A.) 
He also submitted 25 certificates recognizing his contributions and training received as 
a defense contractor employee. These certificates were awarded to him during the 
years he was employed on base, discussed supra. (AE B (1-25).) 
 
 
 
 
2 Applicant’s testimony prompted Department Counsel to move to amend the SOR adding Applicant’s 
failure to file state and federal tax returns. See Amendment of SOR, supra. 
5 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 provides three financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations,” and 
“(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the 
fraudulent filing of the same.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt and failure to file tax 
returns is established by his admissions and the evidence presented. The Government 
established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(g).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through (e) 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
7 
 
                                                          
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there is 
more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. Therefore, 
his debts are a “continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Applicant receives only partial credit under AG ¶ 20(b). 
His past medical problems no doubt contributed to his financial difficulties; however, his 
modest efforts to resolve his medical debts are insufficient to fully mitigate concerns. 
Furthermore, there is no convincing evidence that his medical problems precluded him 
from paying his taxes or from filing his state and federal income tax returns from 2006 to 
2009.   
 
Applicant remains heavily leveraged with no apparent plan to regain financial 
responsibility. Considering his conduct in the aggregate, his actions do not show that he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.3 The remaining mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶¶ 20(c) through (e) are not applicable. Applicant did not receive financial 
counseling, he did not initiate a good-faith effort to repay his creditors or otherwise 
resolve his debts, nor did he demonstrate through documented efforts that he had a 
reasonable basis to dispute any past-due debts. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 articulates the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
3“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component of the 
analysis is whether Applicant maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep his debts current. 
 
8 
 
                                                          
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
Applicant failed to disclose his state and federal tax liens, his current debts over 90 days 
and past debts over 180 days delinquent when completing his September 2008 e-QIP. 
The Government established through the evidence presented the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b).4 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could potentially mitigate security 
concerns about his personal conduct: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
4Deliberate and materially false answers on a security clearance application violate 18 U.S.C. § 1001. 
The Supreme Court defined “materiality” in United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 (1995): as a 
statement having a “natural tendency to influence, or [be] capable of influencing, the decision making 
body to which it is addressed.” See also United States v. McLaughlin, 386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d Cir. 2004). If 
Applicant had provided accurate answers on his security clearance applications, his accurate answers 
are capable of influencing the government to deny his security clearance. His failure to disclose financial 
problems are sufficiently serious to potentially jeopardize approval of his security clearance. Making a 
false statement under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious crime, a felony (the maximum potential sentence 
includes confinement for five years and a $10,000 fine).  
9 
 
                                                          
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant does receive some credit 
for later acknowledging that he should have answered these questions affirmatively 
when responding to the SOR. However, his rather qualified response is not enough to 
overcome his willful misrepresentation of his true financial situation.5 His own evidence 
demonstrates the existence of his substantial medical debt. He was no neophyte to the 
security clearance process – he had over 21 years of experience as a defense 
contractor employee and previously held clearances in that capacity. He knowingly and 
deliberately chose not to disclose complete and accurate information regarding his 
unfavorable financial history.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
5The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
10 
 
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
whole-person concept analysis. Applicant’s lack of financial responsibility began in 
approximately 2000 and has been ongoing. His deliberate falsifications, if relied upon, 
could have adversely affected or influenced the security clearance adjudication process 
to the detriment of the Government.  
 
Applicant receives credit for 21 years of service as a Government contract 
employee. His work while working for a Government contractor is excellent, and aside 
from the SOR allegations no other disciplinary or security-related problems surfaced. 
His record of good employment weighs in his favor. There is a dichotomy between how 
Applicant handled his financial affairs and his past work-related performance.  
 
  Applicant’s deliberate failure to disclose information on his security clearance 
application is serious, recent, and not mitigated. As such, I have concerns about his 
current ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the 
context of the whole-person, I conclude he has not mitigated security concerns 
pertaining to financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors” and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has failed to mitigate or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.yy.:  Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 2.a. - 2.b.:  Against Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
