 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 08-11834 
            )                                                                                 
                                                             ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
G, Alcohol Consumption, and Guideline F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
On May 11, 2006, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 12, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, and Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR was dated April 21, 2010. With his answer, he   
requested that his case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. The 
Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on June 11, 2010. The 
FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 12. On June 14, 2010, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on 
June 22, 2010. His response was due on July 22, 2010. Applicant filed additional 
information within the required time period. On September 17, 2010, the case was 
assigned to me for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains eight allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG G, Alcohol 
Consumption, (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b(1), 1.b(2), 1.b(3), 1.b(4), 1.c., 1.d., and 1.e.) and four 
allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. 
through 2.d.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the eight Guideline G 
allegations, and he admitted three of the four Guideline F allegations (¶¶ 2.a., 2.b., and 
2.c.). He denied the SOR allegation at ¶ 2.d. Applicant’s admissions are admitted as 
findings of fact. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
  
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and by Applicant’s response to the FORM. The record evidence includes Applicant’s 
2006 e-QIP; the FORM from ISCR Case No. 02-13857, dated November 19, 20041; the 
DOHA administrative judge’s decision in ISCR Case No. 02-13857, dated February 17, 
2005; Applicant’s response to DOHA interrogatories concerning alcohol, dated October 
15, 2009; Applicant’s response to DOHA interrogatories (Adoption of Statement), dated 
October 15, 2009;2 Applicant’s medical and alcohol treatment records; Applicant’s 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy records, and a credit bureau report for Applicant, dated February 
1, 2010. In his response to the FORM, Applicant provided information about his alcohol 
consumption, his student loan debt, and his divorce from his second wife. (See Items 5 
through 12 and Applicant’s response to FORM.) 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old senior software engineer. From 1987 until 1995, he 
served in the U.S. military. In 1993, he was awarded a Bachelor of Science degree in 
computer science. He has worked for his present employer, a government contractor, 
since 1998. He was first awarded a security clearance in 1996. (Item 5.) 
 
1 On August 23, 2004, DOHA issued Applicant an SOR. In response to the SOR, Applicant requested an 
adjudication on the record. DOHA then prepared and served Applicant with the FORM dated November 
19, 2004. 
 
2Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) on July 25, 2008. On October 15, 2009, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant signed a 
notarized statement affirming that he had read the summary of the interview and found it to be true and 
correct. He also added information about his abstinence from alcohol, his attendance at meetings of 
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), and his church work. Additionally, he enclosed a copy of his 2008 
performance evaluation.  (Item 9.) 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant has been married and divorced twice. He married for the first time in 
1991, and he and his wife divorced in 1994. When he married for the second time in 
2000, Applicant became the step-father of two children, who are now young adults. 
Applicant was granted a divorce from his second wife in May 2010. The record does not 
reflect that children were born to either of Applicant’s marriages. (Item 5; Applicant’s 
response to FORM at 3.)  
 
 Applicant’s father and older brother were alcoholics. Applicant began to consume 
alcohol in college. His average alcohol consumption was six or seven beers a day. 
From 1996 until at least August 2007, he consumed alcohol to excess and to the point 
of intoxication. (Item 1; Item 4; Item 9 at 2; Item 10 at 1.) 
 
 In August 2004, DOHA issued Applicant an SOR alleging two alcohol-related 
incidents and one treatment for alcohol dependence. Applicant requested that DOHA 
adjudicate his case on the record. A DOHA administrative judge reviewed the FORM in 
Applicant’s case and made the following findings of fact: 
 
Applicant was arrested in November 1996 and charged with Driving Under 
the Influence (DUI). His blood alcohol levels were .147% and .162%. 
Applicant was found guilty of DUI, sentenced to one year supervised 
probation, ordered to attend DUI Counterattack School and participate in a 
Victim Awareness Program, and to complete 50 hours of community 
service. He was fined $492.50, and his driver’s license was revoked for six 
months.     
 
From February 1997 until May 1997, Applicant received outpatient 
treatment for a condition diagnosed as alcohol dependence. 
 
Applicant was arrested in January 2000 and charged with (1) Driving 
Under the Influence of Alcohol or Drugs and (2) Driving While Having a 
.08% or Higher Blood Alcohol Level. Count (1) was dismissed. Applicant 
was found guilty of Count (2), sentenced to three years unsupervised 
probation, fined $1,464, plus court costs, and sentenced to 48 hours in jail. 
He was also ordered to attend a Driving While Intoxicated (DWI) program, 
and his driver’s license was restricted for 90 days. 
 
Applicant continued to drink intoxicating beverages after he was 
discharged from the program in which he had been treated for alcohol 
dependence in 1997.3  
 
(Item 6; Item 7) 
 
 
3 Applicant completed Basic Outpatient Substance-Abuse Treatment on May 28, 1997. His discharge 
diagnosis was “Alcohol Dependence, (in apparent remission).” His prognosis was good, provided he 
followed treatment recommendations to abstain from all mood-altering substances and attend AA 
meetings. (Item 6.)  
 
4 
 
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant objected to the SOR allegation that he 
continued to abuse alcohol and, by letter dated November 11, 2004, he provided the 
following information to the administrative judge: 
 
I am not sure how to put this, but I have made many positive changes in 
my life since February 2002. During the months of February and March of 
2002, I really woke up, when my wife and stepchildren confronted me with 
my drinking problem. I started going to a local church . . . where I live. I 
spoke with the pastor and he mentioned it would be a good idea to start 
attending [AA] meetings. At first I was scared, but when I stepped into the 
AA doors I realized for the first time that I needed this. After a few 
meetings, I spoke up and got me a sponsor. A sponsor is a person that 
had a drinking problem at sometime in his life. He really helps me if I get 
the urge to drink. I have been in the AA program for over two years now. 
This has changed my life. I spend my nights at home with my family, and 
we have dinner together, and it’s a joy. I also take time with my 
stepchildren now, and they love me. I go to my kid’s games and events 
now. 
 
(Item 6 at 5.) 
 
 The administrative judge weighed all of the evidence in light of the applicable 
adjudicative guideline and the whole-person standard. In February 2005, he granted 
Applicant a security clearance. (Item 6; Item 7.) 
 
 In early August 2007, Applicant visited his parents and other family members in a 
neighboring state. He father had suffered a stroke, and his mother was in hospice care. 
Applicant felt stress because of his parent’s illnesses. His relatives were heavy drinkers, 
and Applicant felt social pressure to join them in drinking alcohol. Applicant drank 
alcohol with his relatives every day for a week. At the end of the week, he realized he 
could not stop drinking by himself, and he sought medical help. (Item 9 at 2.) 
 
 When he presented himself for treatment at a hospital, he was transferred by 
ambulance to a mental health and chemical dependency facility. His diagnosis at 
admission was Bipolar Disorder. His diagnosis by a physician at the hospital after 
evaluation was, in part, alcohol dependence. He was treated at the facility in August 
2007. He was treated at the facility also from December 2007 until January 2008.  (Item 
9 at 2; Item 10 at 12, 20.) 
 
 Clinical notes from the mental health and chemical dependency facility report that 
Applicant’s Bipolar Disorder was treated with medication. In designing an individualized 
treatment plan for Applicant, an interdisciplinary team of mental health professionals 
identified Applicant’s assets and strengths as “motivated for treatment” and “able to 
benefit from [treatment] milieu.” They identified his stressors or weaknesses as “poor 
coping skills,” financial difficulties,” and “substance abuse.” (Item 9 at 4; Item 10 at 15, 
25.) 
 
5 
 
 
 In discussing his alcohol consumption, Applicant stated that he had used alcohol 
since 1987. He stated that consequences of his excessive alcohol use were compulsive 
spending, arguments with his wife about his alcohol use, two DUIs, blackouts, and 
work-related stress. (Item 10 at 26.) 
 
 After completing inpatient care, Applicant was provided with a discharge plan that 
included out-patient therapy, group aftercare, participation in a 12-step recovery group, 
and medication management. Clinical notes in the record reflect that Applicant was 
treated at a family psychiatry practice and saw a psychiatrist for therapy from about 
September 2007 until May 2009. (Item 10 at 8, 29-30.) 
 
 When he was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) in July 2008, Applicant stated that he intended never to 
use alcohol in the future. He further stated that his judgment was affected negatively 
when he drank alcohol. He said his return to alcohol use in August 2007 was an isolated 
incident. (Item 9 at 2-4.) 
 
 In his October 15, 2009 response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant reported 
that he had not drunk alcohol since August 2007. He also stated that he attended AA 
meetings “almost every day,” had an AA sponsor, and was involved in his church. 
Applicant also provided a copy of his 2008 performance evaluation. The performance 
evaluation reflected that he was a valued employee who carried out his assignments 
and met his employer’s expectations. (Item 9 at 7-15.)    
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline F that Applicant has filed for bankruptcy 
protection three times. In February 1995, he filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy; his debts 
were discharged in bankruptcy in May 1995. (SOR ¶ 2.a.) Seven years later, in March 
2002, Applicant filed again for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection, and that bankruptcy 
was discharged in July 2002. (SOR ¶ 2.b.) In April 2008, Applicant and his wife filed for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection; and that bankruptcy case was closed in January 
2010. (SOR ¶ 2.c.) The SOR also alleges that Applicant is responsible for delinquent 
student loan debts totaling approximately $22,313. (SOR ¶ 2.d.) Applicant admitted the 
three bankruptcies but denied the student loan delinquencies.  (Item 1; Item 4; Item 11; 
Item 12.) 
 
 In a July 2008, interview with an OPM investigator, Applicant stated that he filed 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy because his wife incurred large balances on her eight credit 
cards, and, because she had a low income, they were unable to pay the credit card 
debts. He stated he was paying the bankruptcy trustee $612 a month and would 
continue these monthly payments for five years. Applicant took an on-line course in 
credit counseling before filing for bankruptcy. (Item 9.)  
 
 Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy documents establish that Applicant’s petition 
for bankruptcy was confirmed in July 2008. He reported assets of $160,397 and 
liabilities of $221,690. His total non-priority unsecured debt was $70,909. He proposed 
to pay the trustee $685 a month for 60 months, for a total of $41,100. The payment plan 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
was modified in June 2009 to reflect five monthly payments of $175 to the trustee, 
beginning July 1, 2009, and thereafter $275 a month for 41 months for a new plan base 
amount of $21,740. The modification was sought to cure plan arrears to the trustee, to 
modify treatment for home mortgage and automobile secured claims after Applicant’s 
surrender of collateral with no further payments due, and to reflect changed income and 
expenses. (Item 11.)    
 
 On December 7, 2009, the trustee submitted a final report and account. He 
reported $10,042 paid by or on behalf of the debtor. Of that amount, $2,772.61 was 
identified as expenses of administration, and $7,269.39 was disbursed to creditors. On 
January 14, 2010, a United States bankruptcy judge signed an order discharging the 
standing trustee, terminating further liability on bond, and closing Applicant’s Chapter 13 
case. (Item 11.) 
 
 Applicant reported a gross monthly income of $7,078.40 and payroll deductions 
of $1,867.86, for a net monthly income of $5,210.54. His wife reported $700 in monthly 
income. Together, Applicant and his wife reported a net monthly income of $5,910.54. 
(Item 11.) 
 
 Applicant reported the following monthly expenses: rent or home mortgage4, 
$1,040; electricity and heating oil, $200; water and sewer, $90; cell phone, internet, and 
cable, $350; food, $350, clothing, $75; laundry and dry cleaning, $150; medical and 
dental expenses, $200; recreation, clubs and entertainment, newspapers, magazines, 
$400; automobile, $90; alimony, maintenance, and support paid to others, $1,100; and 
attorney fees, $1,000. His net monthly remainder is $165.54. (Item 11.)   
 
 Applicant filed a response to the FORM dated August 23, 2010. He denied that 
his student loans were in delinquent status. He stated that he was paying his student 
loans through his Chapter 13 payment plan. He provided a document showing that his 
student loans totaled $26,018 and entered repayment status in September 1994. As of 
July 31, 2010, Applicant owed an outstanding principal student loan balance of $22,308 
and an outstanding interest balance of $3,670.5 (Applicant’s response to FORM at 1-2.) 
 
 Applicant’s documentation established that his student loans were in repayment 
status as of September 15, 1994; in forbearance status as of October 7, 2003; in 
repayment status as of May 19, 2004; in forbearance status as of July 20, 2007; in 
repayment status as of February 19, 2008; and stayed by his Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
filing, active as of May 30, 2008. Applicant’s documentation does not establish that 
payments were made on his student loans by the bankruptcy trustee. (Applicant’s 
response to FORM at 2; Item 11; Item 12.) 
 
 
4 Applicant’s wife reported that she paid $700 each month in rent or in a mortgage payment. (Item 11.) 
 
5 The document provided by Applicant contained small print which was difficult to read, which may 
explain why the outstanding principal balance and the outstanding interest balance do not appear to 
equal the total student loan amount. (Applicant’s response to FORM at 2.)  
 
7 
 
 
 In his August 23, 2010 response to the FORM, Applicant stated:  
 
All of my financial problems have been brought forward from my wife 
getting credit cards in her name without telling me and other items. This 
caused me to file bankruptcy twice. To resolve this situation, I have 
divorced her. I am up to date with my chapter 13 and I always paid my 
credit debts, it was all of her credit cards. My credit reports will show this. 
 
(Response to FORM at 1.) 
 
 Applicant provided for the record a copy of a judicial order granting him a divorce 
from his wife. The order is dated May 4, 2010. (Response to FORM at 3.) 
  
         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
8 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risks of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, applies in this case to a determination of 
eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline G, “[e]xcessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability.” 
 
 The following conditions could raise disqualifying security concerns under ¶ 22 
of the alcohol consumption adjudicative guideline: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work in an 
intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
 
9 
 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22. Applicant   
consumed alcohol to excess and at times to intoxication from 1996 to at least August 
2007. In 1996, he was arrested, charged, and found guilty of DUI. From February 1997 
until May 1997, he was treated in an alcohol treatment program for a condition 
diagnosed as alcohol dependence. After completing the treatment program, he 
continued to consume alcohol, and in January 2000, he was arrested and found guilty of 
driving while having a blood alcohol level of .08% or higher. In August 2007, he 
consumed alcohol with family members for a week, and when he realized he could not 
stop drinking alcohol on his own, he sought admission to a hospital for treatment. Upon 
admission, he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent and treated. Later, he continued his 
treatment for alcohol dependence at the hospital from December 2007 until January 
2008. Additionally, he was under psychiatric care and treated for his alcohol 
dependence from September 2007 until at least May 2009. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 22(a), 
22(c), 22(d), and 22(f) apply to the facts in this case.  
 
The Guideline G disqualifying conduct could be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(a) if 
“so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The disqualifying 
conduct could also be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(b) if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).”  If “the individual is a current 
employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no history of 
previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress,” then AG ¶ 23(c) 
might apply.  Finally, mitigation might be possible under AG ¶ 23(d) if “the individual has 
successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with 
any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
 
10 
 
 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and has 
received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.” 
  
 Applicant was found guilty of a DUI in 1996. He was diagnosed as alcohol 
dependent in 1997 and completed outpatient treatment. He continued to consume 
alcohol, and three years after completing his outpatient treatment, he was arrested and 
found guilty of driving with a .08% or above blood-alcohol level. His letter of November 
11, 2004, in response to the FORM he was sent by DOHA in October 2004, suggests 
that he continued to consume alcohol until at least February and March 2002, when his 
wife and step-children confronted him about his drinking problem.  
 
 After this confrontation, Applicant, to his credit, sought help for his alcohol 
dependence. He joined AA, obtained a sponsor, and became active in a church. He 
became involved in the life of his family. In light of his apparent rehabilitation, he was 
granted a security clearance.  
 
  However, three years later, Applicant felt stress while visiting his parents, both of 
whom were seriously ill, and he drank alcohol every day for a week. He again sought 
and received treatment for his alcohol dependence. He is again in AA, has a sponsor, 
and seeks to permanently abstain from alcohol use. He claims he has not used alcohol 
since August 2007. 
 
 Applicant’s excessive use of alcohol spans a period of at least eleven years and 
is habitual. He acknowledged that his alcohol use impairs his judgment while it also 
relieves his stress. Twice, after treatment for alcohol dependence, Applicant returned to 
the use of alcohol. His relapses have occurred at intervals of about three years, despite 
his active participation in AA, making the possibility of future alcohol use likely at this 
time. Under these circumstances, I conclude that insufficient time as passed to 
demonstrate that Applicant’s use of alcohol is unlikely to recur. I conclude that none of 
the Guideline G mitigating conditions fully applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The Guideline F security concern is set out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
 
11 
 
 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns. AG ¶ 19(f) reads: “financial problems that are linked to 
drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling problems, or other issues of security concern.” 
 
Applicant has a history of financial delinquency. In his alcohol treatment, he 
stated that his drinking resulted in financial problems and compulsive spending. In 1995, 
2002, and 2008, Applicant’s failure to pay his creditors and satisfy his financial 
obligations led him to seek protection from his creditors through bankruptcy. With his 
first Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge, Applicant received a fresh start in his financial life, 
and there was the possibility that he would acquire financial discipline and avoid the 
financial overextension that caused his debts to overwhelm him. However, this did not 
happen, and by 2002, Applicant again had so many debts that he filed for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy again. Six years later, in 2008, Applicant’s repeated indebtedness led him to 
file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. After three bankruptcies, he failed to satisfy the student 
loans he incurred in 1994. From 1998 to the present, Applicant had steady and lucrative 
employment with one employer. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(f) apply to 
the facts in Applicant’s case.    
 
Guideline F also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions could apply to the 
security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. Unresolved financial 
delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” (AG ¶ 20(a)). 
Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the conditions that 
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control, (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, 
or separation, and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 
20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might be applicable include evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or 
“the individual initiated a good faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)).  Finally, security concerns related to financial 
delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)). 
   
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies that dates to at least 1995. 
Despite resolving some of his debts through Chapter 13 bankruptcy, and despite a 
gross annual salary of approximately $84,000, he continues to owe over $22,313, plus 
interest, in student loans which he incurred in 1994. His delinquencies are recent and 
on-going. They have occurred under circumstances that are likely to recur.  
 
Applicant has been steadily employed with his current employer since 1998. He 
stated that his financial delinquencies resulted from his wife’s spendthrift behavior, but 
 
12 
 
 
he failed to provide documentation to establish that his wife, and not he, was 
responsible for the debts that led to his 2002 and 2008 bankruptcies. The record does 
not support a conclusion that his failure to satisfy his creditors is the result of 
circumstances beyond his control. Applicant’s financial counseling was limited to an on-
line course he took before filing for his most recent bankruptcy. His net monthly 
remainder is $165, suggesting that an unexpected expense could cause him to fall 
behind.  
 
In determining an individual's security worthiness, the Government may consider 
his or her financial history. The discharge or partial resolution of an applicant’s debts in 
bankruptcy “does not immunize the applicant’s history of financial problems from 
scrutiny for its security significance.” ISCR Case No. 98-0156 at 2 (App. Bd. November 
12, 1998.) Applicant’s reliance upon consecutive bankruptcies as a tool for resolving 
financial delinquency raises concerns about his trustworthiness and reliability. I 
conclude that none of the financial considerations mitigating conditions fully applies to 
the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has battled alcohol 
dependence for many years. Unfortunately, he relapsed after participating in two alcohol 
treatment programs, thereby causing security concerns about his ability to protect 
classified information. Insufficient time has elapsed since his last relapse to conclude 
that he can abstain from alcohol use in the future. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies which arose in part from his 
excessive use of alcohol. He blamed his second wife for the financial delinquencies that 
 
13 
 
 
caused him to petition for bankruptcy in 2002 and 2008, and he provided documentation 
to show that he had divorced his second wife in May 2010. He failed to establish that 
the financial delinquencies were primarily the consequence of his wife’s actions. 
Moreover, he provided no documentation to show a plan to pay his debts and remain 
solvent in the future. After three bankruptcies in 13 years, Applicant must establish a 
track record of financial responsibility before the Government can have confidence in 
his judgment and reliability. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his alcohol consumption and 
financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:                     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b(1) - 1.b(4): Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c. - 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. - 2.d.:  Against Applicant 
 
                                               Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
