 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10711 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Personal Conduct concerns, but he has not mitigated Drug 
Involvement security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 19, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 5, 2010, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 12, 2010. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on July 28, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
August 19, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
 
2 
 
received without objection. Applicant testified, called two witnesses, and submitted 
Exhibits (AE) A through J, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 27, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served in the 
United States military from 2003 until he was honorably discharged in 2007. He seeks 
to retain his security clearance. He has an associate’s degree from a community 
college. He attends a university in pursuit of a bachelor’s degree. He is divorced and 
has no children.1 
 
Applicant had a Top Secret (TS) security clearance and was eligible for access to 
Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) while he was in the military. There is no 
evidence that he has ever had a security violation. Applicant started working for his 
current employer while he was on terminal leave before his discharge from the military. 
He has held a security clearance during his entire tenure at his current employment. 
The level of his security clearance as a civilian employee is not completely clear, but it 
was at least a Secret clearance.2 
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana on about seven occasions from May 2007, which 
was after he was discharged from the military, until April 2008. He held a security 
clearance during each occasion that he smoked marijuana. He smoked marijuana on 
two occasions with a classmate from the community college he was attending. The 
classmate offered him the marijuana. He smoked marijuana on occasions at concerts 
when the marijuana was passed around by concert attendees. He also smoked 
marijuana on one occasion when it was offered to him by his brother. Applicant admitted 
he exhibited poor judgment by smoking marijuana. He stated that he was exercising his 
newfound freedom from the military.3  
 
 Applicant decided to quit smoking marijuana. He has not used illegal drugs since 
April 2008. He attended several Narcotics Anonymous (NA) sessions. In April 2008, he 
notified his security officer about his drug use so that the information could be forwarded 
to the Department of Defense. He fully discussed his marijuana use in an interview with 
an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in August 2008.4 
 
Applicant no longer associates with the community college classmate. He rarely 
attends concerts, and if he does attend one, he avoids anyone who appears to be using 
drugs. His brother lives in another state, and Applicant does not see him often. 
Applicant told his brother that he no longer uses illegal drugs, and that his brother 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26, 29, 35; GE 1, 3; AE F. 
 
2 Tr. at 26-28; GE 1, 3; AE H-J. 
 
3 Tr. at 29-32; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5; AE B. 
 
4 Tr. at 14, 26, 31; GE 5; AE B. 
 
3 
 
should also abstain and not use any drugs around him. Applicant received a substance 
abuse evaluation and was given a drug test in June 2010. The results of the evaluation 
“indicated a low probability of Substance Dependence Disorder,” and the drug test was 
negative. He was not recommended for further treatment. Applicant credibly testified 
that he did not intend to use illegal drugs again. He deeply regretted the poor decisions 
he made when he smoked marijuana. He submitted a signed statement of intent not to 
use illegal drugs, with automatic revocation of his clearance for any violation.5 
 
Applicant received a medal while in the military recognizing his meritorious 
service. Two witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf and praised his job performance, 
technical ability, honesty, responsibility, reliability, professionalism, and trustworthiness. 
His most recent performance evaluation reflects superior job performance and shows 
that Applicant is a valued and trusted employee.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 16, 32-36; AE A, B. 
 
6 Tr. at 37-43; AE D, E, G. 
 
 
4 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for Drug Involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24:   
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse;7  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant smoked marijuana while holding a security clearance. He had to 
possess marijuana in order to smoke it. The evidence is sufficient to raise all the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1. a and 1.b allege the same illegal drug use, except SOR ¶ 1.b alleges 
that the marijuana use occurred after Applicant “had been granted SCI eligibility” in 
2006 and “given access to Top Secret” in February 2008. When two allegations under 
the same guideline allege the same conduct, at least one must be concluded for the 
applicant. SOR ¶ 1.a is concluded for Applicant. 
                                                          
7 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from 
approved medical direction.  
 
5 
 
Two Drug Involvement mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
 Applicant used marijuana while holding a security clearance on seven occasions 
between May 2007 and April 2008. He has not used illegal drugs since April 2008. He 
no longer associates with any drug-using associates except his brother, who he rarely 
sees. He attended several Narcotics Anonymous sessions, and he notified his security 
officer about his drug use. He credibly testified that he will not use illegal drugs in the 
future. I find that illegal drug use is unlikely to recur. Applicant signed a statement of 
intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation. AG ¶ 26(b) is applicable.  
 
 There is no bright-line rule as to whether conduct is recent. Applicant has not 
used illegal drugs since April 2008. However, he served in the military for four years and 
knew that illegal drug use was inconsistent with holding a security clearance. 
Applicant’s drug use continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) is partially applicable.  
 
 In sum, I conclude that security concerns remain despite the presence of some 
mitigation.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information.  
 
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant used marijuana while holding a security clearance. That conduct 
created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is 
applicable. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant stopped using marijuana in April 2008 and informed his security officer 
about his marijuana use. He has taken positive steps to reduce his vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 17(e) is applicable. Personal Conduct 
security concerns have been mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable military service as well as his superior job 
performance and the reputation he has earned at his current job. I found him to be a 
credible witness. However, even if Applicant never uses illegal drugs again, his illegal 
drug use while holding a security clearance, knowing it was illegal and counter to DoD 
policy, raises doubts about his current judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Two 
plus years of abstinence is not yet long enough to mitigate his incidents of extremely 
poor judgment, disregard for the law, and violation of the trust instilled in him while 
holding a security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated Personal Conduct concerns, but he has not mitigated Drug 
Involvement security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   For APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
