 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-06448 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on May 4, 2009. On April 9, 
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 1, 2010, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 18, 2010, and 
 
2 
 
 
the case was assigned to me on May 20, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
May 24, 2010, scheduling the hearing for June 24, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through P, which 
were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until July 23, 2010, to enable 
Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX Q, which 
was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 30, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old operations specialist employed by a defense 
contractor. He served as an enlisted sailor in the U.S. Navy from 1992 to July 1994 and 
participated in a baccalaureate completion program. He graduated from college in 
December 1993. He served as an officer from July 1994 to February 2005. After he left 
active duty, he was unemployed until he began working for a defense contractor in May 
2005. He has worked for his current employer since April 2006. He held a security 
clearance in the Navy.  
 
 In November 2005, Applicant purchased a residence for about $750,000, and 
rented out his previous residence that he had purchased in 1997. He purchased a large 
home because his fiancée, trained as a social worker, wanted to have foster children in 
addition to her three children from a previous marriage. (Tr. 31.) He made a down 
payment of about $100,000 on the new residence, using part of his $70,000 separation 
pay from the Navy, cash generated by a second mortgage on his previous residence, 
and the savings he and his fiancée had accumulated. (Tr. 61, 80.) Applicant is the sole 
owner of the residence and the sole obligor on the mortgage. (Tr. 66.)  
 
When Applicant purchased the new residence, he was earning about $60,000 
per year. Applicant and his fiancée received additional income for foster children placed 
in their home. The amounts varied, depending on the number of children and their 
special needs, but they were sometimes as much as $5,000 per month. (Tr. 93.) With 
his income, his fiancée’s income from a commercial daycare facility, the foster-care 
payments, and the rental income from his previous residence, he was able to make all 
his mortgage payments. His monthly mortgage payments on the new residence were 
about $5,000. In 2006, he refinanced the property for $810,000, and took out his equity, 
increasing the monthly mortgage payments to about $5,500. (GX 2 at 6; Tr. 82-83.) He 
later refinanced again, increasing the monthly payments to about $6,600. (Tr. 91-92.)  
 
 At about the same time he purchased the new residence in November 2005, he 
also purchased a one-year-old Cadillac Escalade. He borrowed $40,000 to purchase it 
and had monthly payments of $670 on it. (Tr. 90.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s tenant in his previous residence stopped making payments in 
January 2006. He evicted his tenant and was able to sell the property after making the 
mortgage payments for about three months. (GX 2 at 6; AX N.) Also in January 2006, 
his fiancée’s daycare facility was shut down for violations of state regulations.  
 
Applicant and his wife married in March 2006. (Tr. 31.) As a result of 
complications associated with pregnancy and child birth in 2007, Applicant’s wife was 
unable to find other employment. The five foster children were transferred to another 
home in February 2007. They became foster parents to another family in August 2007.  
 
 When they purchased the new residence, Applicant and his fiancée agreed that 
she would pay the mortgage from her income and Applicant would pay the other 
expenses. After their child was born, Applicant discovered that his wife had not been 
making the mortgage payments. (Tr. 95.) 
 
Applicant received a foreclosure notice on the new residence in April 2008. He 
attempted a short sale of the house, but did not receive any offers acceptable to the 
lender. He requested a loan modification, but he had not received a response from the 
lender as of the date the record closed. (Tr. 98.)  
 
Judgments were entered against Applicant in September 2007 and February 
2009 for delinquent homeowners’ association assessments. The judgments are alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. Both judgments have been satisfied. (AX B.) He failed to pay a 
$75 medical bill and a $484 bill for cable service, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d. Both 
bills have been resolved. (AX C and D.) 
 
Applicant also fell behind on his student loan payments, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e-
1.h and 1.j-1.m. As of the date of the hearing, he was in a rehabilitation program for his 
delinquent student loans and had made six of the nine payments required to rehabilitate 
the loans. (AX E through K.) The payments are being made by direct deductions from 
his pay. (Tr. 102-103.) 
 
Applicant and his wife separated in July 2008 and divorced in April 2010. (Tr. 95-
96.) He pays her $1,200 per month in child support, and he pays $600 per month in 
child support for another child from a previous relationship. (Tr. 100-101.) His ex-wife 
has the Cadillac Escalade and is making the monthly payments on it. (Tr. 101.) In June 
2009, his wife filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition in her own name, but Applicant did 
not know whether she received a discharge. (Tr. 99.)  
 
Applicant’s ex-wife now lives in the new residence with her children and foster 
children. He testified his ex-wife wants to stay in the house and is considering assuming 
the mortgage in her name. (Tr. 98.) The past due mortgage payments on the new 
residence are alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant lives with his 92-year-old grandmother. He does not pay rent, but he 
cares for her in return for rent-free lodging. (Tr. 39.) He drives a 16-year-old car that is 
fully paid for, and he has a second job delivering pizzas in the evening.  
 
Applicant enrolled in a consumer credit counseling program in May 2010. The 
program encompasses five debts totaling $18,000 (Tr. 37-38; AX L.) The plan requires 
Applicant to pay $472 per month. None of the debts in the program were alleged in the 
SOR. Under the budget proposed under the plan, Applicant will be able to pay current 
expenses, including the $472 paid to the program, but will have no monthly remainder. 
The program does not include any payments on the foreclosed residence. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
 
5 
 
 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges two unsatisfied judgments (¶¶ 1.a, 1.b), a delinquent medical 
bill (¶ 1.c), a delinquent cable service bill (¶ 1.d), a delinquent home mortgage (¶ 1.i), 
and eight delinquent student loans (¶¶ 1.e-1.h and 1.j-1.m). The concern under this 
guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Applicant’s financial record raises the following disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”), AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history 
of not meeting financial obligations”), and AG ¶ 19 (e) (“consistent spending beyond 
one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative 
cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis”).  
 
AG ¶ 19(b) (“indebtedness caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending and the 
absence of any evidence of willingness or intent to pay the debt or establish a realistic 
plan to pay the debt”) is not raised. It was irresponsible for Applicant to purchase an 
expensive home and a luxury car on his limited income. However, he has demonstrated 
willingness to pay his debts, even though he is currently unable to resolve the 
delinquent mortgage. Thus, the second prong of AG ¶ 19(b) (absence of willingness or 
intent to pay the debt) is not established. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Since the Government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c) and 19(e), the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are recent, numerous, and did not occur under circumstances making 
them unlikely to recur. His decision to incur heavy debt on limited income with no fall-
back plan for unforeseen circumstances raises questions about his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is not established.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person’s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established.  
 
 Applicant encountered several conditions beyond his control: a downturn in the 
housing market, his tenant’s failure to pay rent, the failure of his spouse’s daycare 
business, his spouse’s medical problems and inability to work outside the home, and 
the breakup of his marriage. His purchase of an expensive home and a luxury 
automobile at the same time was irresponsible, but he acted responsibly after his 
financial house of cards collapsed. He has resolved all the delinquent debts alleged in 
the SOR except the delinquent mortgage. He has sought to resolve the mortgage 
through a short sale or a loan modification but has been unsuccessful. He is living 
frugally and working a second job in an attempt to satisfy his financial obligations. I 
conclude AG ¶ 20(b) is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
belatedly sought counseling, and he has resolved several delinquent debts. He is on his 
way to rehabilitating his delinquent student loans. However, his delinquent mortgage --
the root of his financial problems -- is not resolved. He has a realistic plan to resolve 
several debts not alleged in the SOR. I conclude that this mitigating condition is 
established for all the debts alleged except the delinquent mortgage.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). The concept of good faith “requires a showing that a person acts in 
a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
 
7 
 
 
obligation.” ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). 
Applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. However, he must demonstrate that he has established a 
plan to resolve his financial problems and has taken significant actions to implement 
that plan. ADP Case No. 06-18900 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008). 
 
 Applicant resolved the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d, and he has made 
significant progress toward rehabilitating his student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.h 
and 1.j-1.m. However, he has made no progress in resolving the delinquent home 
mortgage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i. His attempts at a short sale or loan modification have 
not been successful. Although he testified his ex-wife wants to stay in the house and 
take over the mortgage obligation, he presented no evidence that any steps by his ex-
wife to relieve him of his mortgage obligation have occurred. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) 
is established for all the debts alleged in the SOR except ¶ 1.i. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated adult. He served as a Navy officer for 
almost 11 years, held a clearance in the Navy, and was honorably discharged. He was 
candid and sincere at the hearing. However, with his background, experience, and 
education, it is difficult to understand his poor judgment in purchasing a $750,000 home 
and borrowing $40,000 to buy a luxury automobile on his limited income. After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I conclude he has not 
 
8 
 
 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.m:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
