                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01617 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
On February 28, 2008, 17 days after Applicant left his employment with 
corporation B, a classified document was discovered in Applicant’s former office at 
corporation B. He also engaged in inappropriate behavior in the workplace. Handling 
protected information and personal conduct concerns are not mitigated at this time. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 1, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86) (GE 1). On 
August 28, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR 
to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended and modified; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline K (handling protected 
information).  (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not 
make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked (HE 2). 
 
On September 24, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) On April 22, 
2010, Department Counsel amended the SOR, and added five allegations under 
Guideline E (personal conduct). On April 22, 2010, Department Counsel indicated she 
was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On May 3, 2010, DOHA assigned Applicant’s 
case to me. On May 7 and 10, 2010, Applicant responded to the Amended SOR. (HE 4) 
On May 12, 2010, DOHA issued a hearing notice. (HE 1) On June 1, 2010, Applicant’s 
hearing was held. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered 11 exhibits (GE 1-11) 
(Tr. 23), and Applicant offered 17 exhibits. (Tr. 24-28; AE A-Q) The only objections went 
to the weight of the evidence not to admissibility, and I admitted GE 1-11 and AE A-Q. 
(Tr. 23, 28) Additionally, I admitted the hearing notice, SOR, Applicant’s response to the 
SOR, the amended SOR, and Applicant’s responses to the amended SOR. (Tr. 22; HE 
1-4) At his hearing, Applicant was offered an opportunity to submit additional 
documentation, especially of his allegations of bias or unethical conduct of his 
supervisors, after his hearing. (Tr. 50-51, 154) On June 18, 2010, I received the 
transcript. On July 9, 2010, I received six additional exhibits from Applicant. (AE R-W)  
The only objection went to the weight of AE U not to admissibility, and I admitted AE R-
W. I closed the record on July 10, 2010.   
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant’s SOR response denied knowledge of inappropriate storage of 
classified materials in his former office at corporation B, and discussed a variety of 
possible explanations to address the allegation of inappropriate storage of classified 
materials. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b; HE 3) He admitted he received four documents from his 
employer which contained negative information about his job performance at 
corporation B:  
 
(1) a letter of counseling dated January 25, 2007, regarding his unexcused 
absence from his workplace on or about January 8, 2007. (SOR ¶ 2.b; HE 4);  
 
(2) a performance evaluation dated January 25, 2005, for rating period January 
2004 through September 2004, which stated, “His more recent task load has been light, 
and questions have been raised as to his ‘frequently working at home’ or other 
unexplained absences that are not commensurate with his task responsibilities.” (SOR ¶ 
2.c; HE 4; GE 10 at 4, Block II);   
 
 
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(3) a memorandum dated December 9, 2004, regarding his inability or 
unwillingness to comply with company or section procedures. (SOR ¶ 2.d, HE 4); and 
  
(4) a memorandum dated December 9, 2004, regarding his unprofessional 
behavior in the workplace. (SOR ¶ 2.e, HE 4)  
 
However, he did not agree that the negative counseling or comments were warranted 
by his conduct. His admissions are accepted as findings as fact.  
 
Applicant is the 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor working as a 
Ph.D.-level scientist in analytical chemistry. (Tr. 5, 81) He received his Ph.D. from a 
well-known U.S. educational institute in 1993. (Tr. 5) He is married, and his two children 
are ages 14 and 18. (Tr. 6) He was employed at corporation B, a defense contractor, for 
9 ½ years. (GE 2 at 3) About two years ago, he began working for his current employer. 
 
Applicant’s employer presented a “Key Contributor Award” to Applicant for his 
contributions to a work-related project on September 5, 2003. (Tr. 90-94; GE 11 at 11; 
AE G) After the presentation, Applicant sent an email to his supervisors stating, “While I 
sincerely appreciate the key contributor award presented this morning, I am fairly 
disappointed that the potential professional development activity (focus group) was only 
a farce. It might be more prudent to disguise future award ceremonies as some less 
meaningful activity.” (GE 11 at 11) Applicant was disturbed that the presentation was a 
surprise award ceremony. (Tr. 94) A supervisor, two levels above Applicant’s 
supervisor, responded in a conciliatory and professional manner to Applicant’s email, 
emphasizing his desire to avoid disruption of work and describing the need to hold 
meetings to explain new organizations and address questions. (Tr. 90-93; GE 11 at 11) 
 
 Applicant received a December 9, 2004 memorandum from his manager, GB,2 
regarding Applicant’s inability or unwillingness to comply with company or section 
procedures. (SOR ¶ 2.d, HE 4; GE 11 at 1-4) This memorandum cited: (1) “an 
unwillingness to present a project review for you[r] project”; (2) issues relating to 
“compliance with our peer review requirements”; (3) “apparent issues with time card 
recording policies”; and (4) attacks on a management official for “his method in 
recognizing and rewarding some staff for their excellent performance (including you).” 
(GE 11 at 1) The memorandum used various emails as a basis for these complaints 
about Applicant’s lack of compliance with procedures. With the exception of Applicant’s 
complaint in September 2003 for providing a certificate to Applicant without warning him 
of the presentation, none of the cited emails substantiate management’s complaints 
about Applicant’s alleged failure to comply with procedures. (GE 11 at 5-11) Although 
 
2 In the late 1990s, Applicant learned that his manager, GB, lied about giving permission to an 
employee to hold a bake sale. (Tr. 44-45; AE U at 5) When an employee confronted GB about lying about 
giving permission, GB threatened the employee with disciplinary action for insubordination. (Tr. 45; AE U 
at 5) After that incident Applicant did not trust GB. (AE U at 5) Applicant listed nine additional reasons 
why he believed GB was untrustworthy, including that GB had a problem with excessive alcohol 
consumption. (AE U at 5-6) For example, at a meeting, GB told employees not to play computer games 
on their office computers. (Tr. 50) Applicant later observed GB playing computer games on his office 
computer. (Tr. 50) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Applicant bluntly expressed some misgivings about some of the new requirements and 
policy changes (for example, he indicates the new peer review policy will result in 
“chaos and inefficiency” and he labels a management decision to change the timecard 
policy as “outrageous”, “stupidity” and an “incredibly poor decision based on a knee-jerk 
response” (GE 11 at 9-10)), the attached emails to not contain any refusal by Applicant 
to comply with any policy or procedure.  
 
Applicant received a December 9, 2004 memorandum regarding Applicant’s 
unprofessional behavior in the workplace. (SOR ¶ 2.e, HE 4; GE 11 at 1) Under the 
caption “Unprofessional Behavior” the memorandum included the comment that 
Applicant posted signs on several occasions with personal comments about 
management and noted, “these signs show a lack of respect for maintaining a 
professional work place and a childish and unprofessional attitude.” (GE 11 at 1) 
Applicant posted a message on the door of his office listing priorities “so that anybody 
who was requesting [his] time would be able to understand very clearly where my 
priorities were.” (Tr. 126) Apparently a project manager noticed the sign and was 
unhappy that his project did not merit a high priority. The memorandum also described 
Applicant’s negative comments in an email about the career rewards for working on a 
large project, and asserted Applicant’s comments about the impact on careers was 
“unprofessional and unfounded.” (GE 11 at 1) Applicant’s email was sent to GB and it 
described the large program as “chaos, politics, frustration, and high stress” resulting in 
damage to one’s career or mental state that could ruin one’s attitude toward 
employment with Applicant’s corporation. (GE 11 at 5) RB responded with the comment, 
“I need to strongly caution you against advising any staff, especially new staff, that 
working on [the project] will somehow damage their careers.” (GE 11 at 5) RB also 
objected to Applicant going over RB’s head to be released from working on a project. 
(GE 11 at 5)   
 
Applicant received a January 25, 2005 performance evaluation for rating period 
January 2004 through September 2004, which stated, “His more recent task load has 
been light, and questions have been raised as to his ‘frequently working at home’ or 
other unexplained absences that are not commensurate with his task responsibilities.” 
(GE 10 at 4, Block II) (SOR ¶ 2.c; HE 4) Applicant said that he had no idea what 
absences from work were being addressed in this evaluation. (Tr. 116-117; HE 4 at 5) 
Applicant provided a rebuttal to the rating which focused on other performance 
elements, and the cover letter from GB focused on Applicant’s removal from projects 
due to disagreements with program managers.3 Applicant unsuccessfully sought 
clarification of the basis for the allegation about unauthorized absences from work. (Tr. 
122-123) The file is devoid of specific information about any absences from work during 
2004.  
 
 
3 A program-manager employee, RS, asked Applicant to certify some analytic chemistry analysis 
results, and Applicant refused to provide the certification because he did not have time to complete his 
analysis. (Tr. 46-47) RS reprimanded Applicant for refusing to certify, and Applicant accused RS of 
misleading the government. (Tr. 47) RS asked GB to remove Applicant from the program. (Tr. 47) GB did 
not support Applicant’s refusal to comply with RS’ demands, and instead GB ordered Applicant to 
continue working with RS. (Tr. 48) 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
There is no adverse documentation pertaining to Applicant from January 25, 
2005 until January 25, 2007. Applicant received a positive rating for the period October 
2004 through May 2005. (GE 9 at 1-2) This rating did not include the negative comment 
about absences that was included in his previous evaluation.  
 
Applicant received a letter of counseling on or about January 25, 2007, because 
of his unexcused absence from his workplace on or about January 8, 2007. (SOR ¶ 2.b; 
HE 4) Applicant said he was the pilot of a small plane that crashed, and he was one day 
late for work. (Tr. 121-122) He called several staff members and advised them that he 
was going to be late; however, he was not sure whether anyone told his supervisor, RB, 
that he was going to be late. (Tr. 124-125) He was supposed to make a presentation at 
a conference and his absence caused management some concern.  (Tr. 123-124) He 
provided his slides to someone to ensure the presentation at the conference could be 
made. (Tr. 121-125) 
 
Allegations of Management Bias and Retribution 
 
Applicant expressed the concern that management may have placed the 
classified documents in his office then reported him for a security violation as an act of 
retribution for Applicant’s outspoken criticism of management practices and exposure of 
“corruption at multiple levels.” (AE U at 8) Applicant said he was determined to expose 
the corruption in corporation B. (Tr. 58) Applicant asserted that management has an 
“intense motive to destroy” Applicant’s professional career. (AE U at 2) Management’s 
placement of a classified document in his file cabinet after he departed corporation B 
presented a “[g]olden opportunity that nobody in the division would ever question what 
took place in [his] former office after [he] left.” (AE U at 2) A security manager, MT, was 
aggravated and insulted by Applicant. (Tr. 58) MT was a vengeful person, who had the 
reputation for obtaining retribution against those who upset him. (Tr. 58) GB, RB, and 
MT could have planted classified information in Applicant’s office after he left 
employment with B because “conditions were ripe for retributions to take place.” (Tr. 59) 
Applicant placed special emphasis on RB as the most likely suspect for placing 
classified materials in his office to damage Applicant’s reputation and career. (AE U at 
2-4, Item 11) 
 
Applicant also believed management was upset with him because “they are very 
sensitive to losing seasoned staff.” (Tr. 59) However, Applicant’s assertion that this 
might be a motive for planting the classified documents in his office seems inconsistent 
with management forcing Applicant to leave employment through a reduction in force 
(RIF).   
 
 Applicant’s immediate supervisor, RB, learned that Applicant was invited to an 
important conference scheduled for May 7 and 8, 2007, and instead of permitting him to 
attend, went herself. (Tr. 41-42, 78-79; GE 7 at 1; AE O at 1; AE U at 13-15)4 On May 4, 
 
4 Applicant noted another trip that he made on behalf of corporation B that was coveted by RB, 
stating that when RB learned of his trip, “she gritted [her] teeth, gave [Applicant] a wild stare and said ‘I 
should be on that plane.’” (AE U at 4)  
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
2007, Applicant requested an ethics investigation of RB. (Tr. 41-43; 103-105; GE 7 at 1; 
AE U at 14-15) He accused RB of “unethical behavior, and the obvious conflict of 
interest.” (AE O at 3) An ethics investigation found that RB was invited to attend the 
conference, including an executive session, and Applicant was not invited to attend the 
executive session. (GE 7 at 1) RB did not violate ethics rules. (Tr. 43) Shortly thereafter, 
Applicant was removed as task lead on a project for performance reasons unrelated to 
his complaint about not being permitted to attend the conference (GE 7 at 2); however, 
Applicant alleged that “evidence was fabricated on behalf of management in order to 
present a case.” (AE O at 4) He accused management of taking retribution for making 
the complaint against RB or possibly for leaving his name on a survey form. (AE O at 7) 
He said he realized “the outrageous nature of [RB’s] apparent ignorance of [the number 
and timing of sample testing relating to the project where he was task lead revealed] 
that there was no merit to her [argument], since the topic had been discussed so many 
times previously.” (AE O at 4) He accused RB and management of making “fabricated 
accusations” and providing “blatant fabrication of scenarios” against him. (AE O at 5, 6) 
He labeled management’s actions as a “text book example of the corruption that exists 
within multiple levels of management on our division.” (AE O at 7) He urged additional 
investigation of management because many “issues exist that have been simply swept 
under the carpet.” (AE O at 8) 
 
 In July 2007, Applicant sent an email to his corporation’s CEO, who then directed 
a meeting to address Applicant’s concerns. (Tr. 107-108) Applicant made a PowerPoint 
presentation at the meeting about the procedures and goals for an investigation of 
management. (Tr. 108; AE P)  
 
In August 2007, Applicant sought information through a survey from 11 
employees in his division about why employees were leaving his company. (Tr. 100-
101). Applicant chose his sample population from “people [in his division] who I knew 
would not turn me in, people who I trusted.” (Tr. 53-55; AE A at 8-9; AE K) There are 
50-100 people in his division. (Tr. 100-102) Eight employees responded to his survey. 
(Tr. 102) He determined from his survey that management practices were poor. (Tr. 54) 
 
In December 2007, the CEO directed additional investigation. (Tr. 109; GE 7 at 
3) On December 19, 2007, the ethics committee issued a two-page report reiterating 
that Applicant’s allegations against management were not substantiated. (Tr. 109-110) 
On December 20, 2007, Applicant sent a four-page letter, to his CEO, and his letter 
includes this description of RB:5 
 
[She] is a corporate accident waiting to happen. She has demoralized a 
wide number of staff, has manipulated people into uncomfortable 
positions, has generated outright lies about the performance of 
 
5 On one occasion RB was unhappy with Applicant because he received a compliment from a 
customer. RB showed her unhappiness by “sitting in the corner with [the] corners of her mouth pushed 
down as far as they could go displaying intense aggravation over my compliment from the client.” (AE U 
at 4) Other colleagues described RB to Applicant as “vicious,” “pure evil,” vindictive,” and “untrustworthy.” 
(AE U at 5) 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
subordinates, has put large programs at risk, has discredited subordinates 
in front of other subordinates and managers, has pursued aggressive 
activities to intimidate staff, has had people threaten to turn in letters of 
resignation if they are forced to report to her---the list goes on. [RB] is a 
nasty individual whose character is perfectly aligned to perform the 
unethical activities that she has committed against me. It is impossible for 
the ethics committee to have heard relevant testimony and not come up 
with a shred of evidence to suggest that the events in question happened 
exactly how I have described them. This is a scenario out of the Twilight 
Zone. (AE O at 7)     
 
Applicant attached his survey results from August 2007 to the December 20, 2007, 
letter. (Tr. 110-111) The survey “demonstrated the fact that management [of Applicant’s 
department] was atrocious and untrustworthy.” (Tr. 55) A significant percentage of 
responders to his survey described improper conduct by management, including false 
statements and false employee performance reviews. (Tr. 57) A stamp on Applicant’s 
December 20, 2007 letter shows it was received by his CEO. (Tr. 55, 103; GE 7 at 5) 
 
  Management’s comments on Applicant’s January 8, 2008 performance review 
indicated Applicant did not meet expectations in the area of communications skills, and 
that improvement was expected in customer focus, expertise, flexibility, and teamwork. 
(GE 6 at 1; AE K) Applicant provided the typed comments on page one and described 
his performance in very positive terms, such as he “demonstrated teamwork most 
astoundingly . . ,” whereas he described management as being in panic and 
overreacting to events. (GE 6 at 1; AE K) He subsequently added handwritten 
comments on the review itself, contesting the review. (Tr. 111-114) He also attached a 
copy of his August 2007 survey because he wanted human resources “to be aware that 
. . . management is completely out of control.” (Tr. 114) He repeatedly described the 
issues raised in his evaluation as “fabricated performance issues” (AE K at 9, 10, 12)   
 
Improper storage of classified material 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges Applicant improperly stored classified documents in a 
container in his office. His office and the container were not approved for storage of 
classified material.  
 
On February 11, 2008, Applicant left employment with B, due to a RIF. (GE 3 at 
1) Applicant received about an hour of notice, and an administrative assistant was 
present while Applicant cleared out his office. (Tr. 146-147) A manager from within 
Applicant’s division6 was clearing his office on February 26, 2008, and found four 
documents in a file cabinet of security concern:  
 
 
6 Applicant alleges RB was the person who discovered the classified material in Applicant’s file 
cabinet. (Tr. 57; AE U at 4) As indicated previously, Applicant had a personality conflict with RB. (Tr. 57) 
However, GB also had access to Applicant’s office after he left employment with B. (Tr. 59) 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(1) Memorandum from a client dated August 1999, which was attached to a 
classified cover sheet. 
 
(2) Document dated October 1999 on blue paper describing various processes 
for chemicals. In 1999, blue paper was used to designate a classified document. 
 
(3) Document dated April 2003, with classified headers and footers removed by 
tearing. “This was apparently a copy that was being marked up for a work in progress.” 
(GE 3 at 3)  
 
(4) “Another apparent work in progress was a classified document with marker 
blackouts of some of the classified content.” (GE 3 at 3) It is unclear whether additional 
classified information remained in the document. 
 
The building where the documents were found is not a controlled area. (GE 3 at 
1) Applicant’s office is not a room where open storage of classified material is permitted. 
The cabinet where the documents were found is not approved for classified storage. 
(GE 3 at 1) For item one, Applicant noted that it would violate the NISPOM for a 
classified cover to be placed on an unclassified document, and that someone should 
have placed the classification markings on each page of the memorandum itself, if it 
actually was classified. (Tr. 61-62; AE U at 9)  
 
For item two, Applicant said that blue paper was available near the copiers, and 
was sometimes used for unclassified purposes. (Tr. 61; AE U at 9) If someone left blue 
paper in the copier, Applicant could have copied something onto blue paper that was 
unclassified. (Tr. 61; AE U at 9) 
 
For items three and four, Applicant explained that sometimes documents had 
specific parts of the documents marked as classified, and the overall document was 
classified. (Tr. 62-63; AE I, J; AE U at 9) If the user removed or redacted the classified 
parts, then the user could cross off or tear out the classification markings on the 
document. (Tr. 63-65, 95, 148) This scrubbing or declassification process was permitted 
by the employer. (Tr. 65, 128-130, 148; AE V; AE W) Applicant did not have any 
documentation authorizing this user-level declassification process. (Tr. 95-96) Applicant 
was a document control officer at B, and never had any instances where he was cited 
for improper handling of documents, or for losing accountability for assigned 
documents. (Tr. 77) Applicant was never cited for failing to sign-in or sign-out of 
controlled-access areas. (Tr. 68) 
 
The security officer conducting the security violation investigation noted, “A 
detailed accounting of found classified documents was provided under separate cover 
to affected government agency on 2/28/08 for their assessment.” (GE 3 at 3) The 
response to request for assessment is not part of the record evidence. 
 
Applicant provided an affidavit from his current Director of Security, who 
indicated in August 2008, a U.S. Government Security Official telephonically advised 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Applicant’s company that Applicant “had not committed a classified security infraction.” 
(AE B) The rationale for this determination is not part of the record.  
 
Applicant’s storage of classified materials was in violation of paragraphs 5-100, 
5-303, and 5-306 of Department of Defense Manual 5220.22-M, National Industrial 
Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM). (February 28, 2006). The pertinent 
paragraphs are unchanged from the version in effect from July 31, 1997 to February 28, 
2006, except as indicated in footnotes.  Those three paragraphs provide: 
 
¶ 5-100. General. Contractors shall be responsible for safeguarding 
classified information in their custody or under their control. Individuals are 
responsible for safeguarding classified information entrusted to them. The 
extent of protection afforded classified information shall be sufficient to 
reasonably foreclose the possibility of its loss or compromise.     
  
¶ 5-303. SECRET Storage. SECRET material shall be stored in the same 
manner as TOP SECRET material without supplemental protection or as 
follows:7 
 
a. A safe, steel file cabinet, or safe-type steel file container that has an 
automatic unit locking mechanism. All such receptacles will be accorded 
supplemental protection during non-working hours.8 
 
b. Any steel file cabinet that has four sides and a top and bottom (all 
permanently attached by welding, rivets or peened bolts so the contents 
cannot be removed without leaving visible evidence of entry) and is 
secured by a rigid metal lock bar and an approved key operated or 
combination padlock. The keepers of the rigid metal lock bar shall be 
secured to the cabinet by welding, rivets, or bolts, so they cannot be 
removed and replaced without leaving evidence of the entry. The drawers 
of the container shall be held securely, so their contents cannot be 
removed without forcing open the drawer. This type cabinet will be 
accorded supplemental protection during non-working hours.  
 
5-306. Closed Areas. Due to the size and nature of the classified 
material, or operational necessity, it may be necessary to construct Closed 
Areas for storage because GSA-approved containers or vaults are 
unsuitable or impractical. Closed Areas must be approved by the CSA and 
 
7 The February 28, 2006 version of this subparagraph states, “5-303. SECRET Storage. 
SECRET material shall be stored in a GSA-approved security container, an approved vault, or closed 
area. Supplemental controls are required for storage in closed areas. The following additional storage 
methods may be used until October 1, 2012:” 
 
8 The February 28, 2006 version of this subparagraph states, “a. A safe, steel file cabinet, or safe-
type steel file container that has an automatic unit locking mechanism. All such receptacles will be 
accorded supplemental protection during non-working hours.” 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
be constructed in accordance with Section 8 of this Chapter. Access to 
Closed Areas must be controlled to preclude unauthorized access. This 
may be accomplished through the use of a cleared employee or by a 
supplanting access control device or system. Access shall be limited to 
authorized persons who have an appropriate security clearance and a 
need-to-know for the classified material/information within the area. 
Persons without the appropriate level of clearance and/or need to know 
shall be escorted at all times by an authorized person where inadvertent 
or unauthorized exposure to classified information cannot otherwise be 
effectively prevented. The Closed Area shall be accorded supplemental 
protection during non-working hours. During such hours, admittance to the 
area shall be controlled by locked entrances and exits secured by either 
an approved built-in combination lock or an approved combination or key-
operated padlock. However, doors secured from the inside with a panic 
bolt (for example, actuated by a panic bar), a dead bolt, a rigid wood or 
metal bar, or other means approved by the CSA, will not require additional 
locking devices.9 
 
9 The February 28, 2006 version of paragraph 5-306 states: 
 
5-306. Closed Areas. Due to the size and nature of the classified material, or for 
operational necessity, it may be necessary to construct closed areas for storage because 
GSA-approved containers or vaults are unsuitable or impractical. Closed areas must be 
constructed in accordance with section 8 of this chapter. Access to closed areas must be 
controlled to preclude unauthorized access. This may be accomplished through the use 
of a cleared person or by a supplanting access control device or system. Access shall be 
limited to authorized persons who have an appropriate security clearance and a need-to-
know for the classified material/information within the area. Persons without the 
appropriate level of clearance and/or need to know shall be escorted at all times by an 
authorized person where inadvertent or unauthorized exposure to classified information 
cannot otherwise be effectively prevented. Closed areas storing TOP SECRET and 
SECRET material shall be accorded supplemental protection during non-working hours. 
During non-working hours and during working hours when the area is unattended, 
admittance to the area shall be controlled by locked entrances and exits secured by 
either an approved built-in combination lock or an approved combination or key-operated 
padlock. It is not necessary to activate the supplemental controls during working hours. 
Doors secured from the inside with a panic bolt (for example, actuated by a panic bar, a 
dead bolt, a rigid wood or metal bar) or other means approved by the CSA, will not 
require additional locking devices.  
 
a. Contractors shall develop and implement procedures to ensure the structural integrity 
of closed areas above false ceilings and below raised floors.  
 
b. Open shelf or bin storage of SECRET and CONFIDENTIAL documents in closed areas 
requires CSA approval. For SECRET material only areas protected by an approved 
Intrusion Detection System (IDS) will qualify for such approval. Open shelf or bin storage 
of TOP SECRET documents is not permitted.  
 
c. The CSA and the contractor shall agree on the need to establish, and the extent of, 
closed areas prior to the award of the contract, when possible, or when the need for such 
areas becomes apparent during contract performance.  
 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
a. Open shelf or bin storage of classified documents in Closed Areas 
requires CSA approval. Only areas protected by an approved intrusion 
detection system will qualify for such approval. 
 
b. The CSA and the contractor shall agree on the need to establish, and 
the extent of, Closed Areas prior to the award of the contract, when 
possible, or at such subsequent time as the need for such areas becomes 
apparent during performance on the contract. 
 
 As an example of his timely compliance with security rules, Applicant said when 
he learned camera-cell phones were not permitted in the work area, he immediately 
scratched out the lens in his cell phone. (Tr. 74) He was commended by security staff 
for his conscientious enforcement of security rules. (Tr. 79) There were no security 
issues over the last two years at his current employment. (Tr. 79-80; AE B) He did not 
have any timecard violations. (Tr. 75) Applicant does not gamble, use illegal drugs, 
consume alcohol, or have a criminal record. (Tr. 75) He paid off about $45,000 in 
student loans. (Tr. 75)  
 
Character references 
 
 On March 7, 2008, one of Applicant’s colleagues at corporation B wrote that he 
was “shocked and appalled” that Applicant was RIF’d from his employment. (AE E) He 
described Applicant as a “class act” and urged Applicant not to “sink to their level.” (AE 
E)  
 
 Applicant’s church trusts Applicant to handle church funds. (Tr. 70) Applicant 
generously contributes $400 to $600 a month to his church. (Tr. 70-71) 
 
 Applicant received excellent ratings in the areas of reliability and dependability 
from his current employer. (Tr. 71, 97-98; AE D, AE T) He is proactive with safety and 
abides by security guidelines. (Tr. 71; AE D; E, T) In his 2009 rating, he received a top-
level rating in reliability and dependability. (AE T at 2) Applicant’s current employer has 
entrusted him with great leadership and supervisory responsibilities. (Tr. 72-73) 
 
 Applicant’s Director of Security at his current employment has an exceptional 
background in security and counter intelligence, which makes him an extraordinary 
character witness on Applicant’s behalf. (AE S) The Director of Security described 
Applicant as “100% security compliant”, and very honest and trustworthy. (AE S) There 
were no records of security infractions at his current employment. (AE B) Applicant “has 
diligently complied with all security requirements, especially as pertains to the handling, 
maintenance and protection of classified material.” (AE B) He makes valuable 
contributions to his corporations security team. (AE S) He highly recommends that 
Applicant retain his security clearance. (AE S) 
 
 
d. The CSA may grant self-approval authority to the FSO for closed area approvals 
provided the FSO meets specified qualification criteria as determined by the CSA. 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 Applicant’s current supervisor lauded Applicant’s performance of duty, diligence, 
dependability, reliability, integrity, and trustworthiness. (AE C) Applicant is conscientious 
about security and follows security procedures. He recommends Applicant for further 
work with classified materials and projects. 
  
 A scientist-colleague, who worked with Applicant at corporation B, has known 
Applicant for 10 years. He lauds Applicant’s “exceptionally high personal and 
professional ethics” and loyalty to the United States. (AE V) He supports reinstatement 
of Applicant’s security clearance. (AE V) 
 
 Another scientist-researcher at B (W) has worked with Applicant for several 
years. (AE W) W describes Applicant as hardworking, passionate, careful, and helpful. 
(AE W) W disclosed that W had been disciplined and removed from his position for 
insubordination in 2000. (AE W) W described improper conduct by MT, GB, and RB. 
(AE W) 
     
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a security 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  The DOHA Appeal Board has repeatedly stated: 
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
“The application of disqualifying and mitigating conditions and whole 
person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them 
apply to the particular facts of a case. Rather, their application requires the 
exercise of sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  
 
ISCR Case No. 09-01015 at 3 (App. Bd. July 16, 2010); ISCR Case No. 07-16427 at 2 
(App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 07-16841 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2008).  
  
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline K (handling protected information) and E (personal 
conduct).  
 
 
 
 
14 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Handling Protected Information 
 
  AG ¶ 33 articulates the security concern relating to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
AG ¶ 34 provides nine handling protected information disqualifying conditions 
that could raise a security concern:  
 
(a) deliberate or negligent disclosure of classified or other protected 
information to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to personal 
or business contacts, to the media, or to persons present at seminars, 
meetings, or conferences; 
 
(b) collecting or storing classified or other protected information at home or 
in any other unauthorized location; 
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling classified reports, data, or other information on any unapproved 
equipment including but not limited to any typewriter, word processor, or 
computer hardware, software, drive, system, gameboard, handheld, 
“palm” or pocket device or other adjunct equipment; 
 
(d) inappropriate efforts to obtain or view classified or other protected 
information outside one's need to know; 
 
(e) copying classified or other protected information in a manner designed 
to conceal or remove classification or other document control markings; 
 
(f) viewing or downloading information from a secure system when the 
information is beyond the individual's need-to-know; 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information; 
 
(h) negligence or lax security habits that persist despite counseling by 
management; and 
 
(i) failure to comply with rules or regulations that results in damage to the 
National Security, regardless of whether it was deliberate or negligent. 
 
On March 7, 2008, a security investigation concluded that four documents found 
in a filing cabinet, not authorized for storage of classified materials, raised security 
 
15 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
concerns: (1) August 1999 memorandum from a client, which was attached to a 
classified cover sheet; (2) October 1999 document on blue paper describing various 
processes for chemicals. In 1999, blue paper was used to designate a classified 
document; (3) April 2003 document with classified headers and footers removed by 
tearing. “This was apparently a copy that was being marked up for a work in progress;” 
and (4) “Another apparent work in progress was a classified document with marker 
blackouts of some of the classified content.” The investigation does not establish by 
substantial evidence that items one, three, and four were classified. They were not 
properly marked as classified. The employer permits employees to declassify 
documents by scrubbing or deleting the information they believe is classified and then 
marking through the classification or removing the classification markings. The file does 
not contain an “assessment” from the classification authority establishing that the three 
documents were classified.  
 
I conclude item two was established by substantial evidence to be a classified 
document. See discussion of “substantial evidence” in Policies section, supra. The 
contents of the document were printed on blue paper, which the employer used for 
classified documents. “There is a rebuttable presumption of regularity in administrative 
proceedings.” ISCR Case No. 07-15235 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 3, 2008). According, I must 
presume the blue document was actually classified. I am not convinced that Applicant’s 
supervisor, program manager, or anyone else placed the classified document into 
Applicant’s file cabinet and then “discovered it” after Applicant had already left 
employment with corporation B. The storage cabinet was not an authorized storage 
location for the classified document. I conclude Applicant negligently, as opposed to 
deliberately, failed to comply with the rules for storage of classified material. AG ¶¶ 
34(b) and 34(g) apply and further inquiry is necessary about the applicability of any 
mitigating conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 35 lists three conditions that could mitigate security concerns stating: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. The classified document was 
discovered on February 26, 2008, which is relatively recent. Applicant did not accept full 
responsibility for improper storage of the classified document. Applicant had sufficient 
training to understand his security responsibilities. He demonstrates a positive attitude 
towards security; however, the passage of more time without any security violations is 
necessary before handling protected information concerns can be mitigated. 
 
16 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Three personal conduct disqualifying conditions under AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d)(2), and 
16(d)(3), are potentially applicable. Those three disqualifying conditions provide:   
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace; 
and 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d)(2) apply; however, AG ¶ 16(d)(3) does not apply. 
Applicant failed to ensure a classified document was property stored, which is a rule 
violation; however, additional rule violations are not established and there is no pattern 
of rule violations. Applicant missed work on January 8, 2007, and was unsure whether 
anyone told his supervisor he would not be present for duty. There is insufficient 
evidence that he intentionally violated a leave policy. (SOR ¶ 2.b) A memorandum 
alleges Applicant had unexplained absences from January 2004 to September 2004; 
however, there is no specific evidence about when these absences occurred. They are 
too vague to be substantiated (SOR ¶ 2.c) The allegation that Applicant failed to comply 
with procedures as outlined in the December 9, 2004, memorandum is not established 
by substantial evidence. (SOR ¶ 2.d)  
 
17 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
On December 9, 2004, management issued a memorandum alleging Applicant 
engaged in unprofessional behavior in the workplace. (SOR ¶ 2.e) It alleged he posted 
a sign on his office door concerning his priorities, and he sent an email to his manager 
about the stressful, unrewarding work on a particular project. The sign on his door was 
inappropriate behavior because it was basically a statement that he was not going to 
work on low priority projects. The tone of the email to his manager was sufficiently 
negative to constitute inappropriate behavior in the workplace. This conduct shows 
questionable judgment and establishes AG ¶ 16(d)(2). Additionally, a classified 
document was discovered in his office in February 2008 after he left employment with 
corporation B. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a) The 2008 security violation and his 2004 
inappropriate behavior in combination as part of a “whole-person assessment” establish 
AG ¶ 16(c). 
 
Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;   
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Any security concerns raised under SOR ¶¶ 2.b, 2.c, and 2.d is mitigated under 
AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(e), and 17(f). For example, when Applicant was absent from work on 
January 8, 2007, there were excellent extenuating circumstances. He was the pilot of a 
plane that crashed, and he called colleagues to let them know he would miss one day of 
duty. His supervisor showed poor judgment when she failed to incorporate extenuating 
facts in her counseling statement. (GE 8 at 2) The allegation that he had unexplained 
absences from January 2004 to September 2004 has been rebutted. Applicant said he 
was not aware of any unexplained absences, and there is no documentation describing 
a single unauthorized absence during this time period. The allegation that Applicant 
failed to comply with procedures as outlined in the December 9, 2004 memorandum is 
unsubstantiated. Applicant provided some evidence of his excellent character for 
honesty, reliability, and trustworthiness. His evaluations, awards, and character 
witnesses opine that he is trustworthy and has good judgment.   
 
SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.e are established and not fully rebutted. Applicant failed to 
ensure a classified document was property stored. Applicant’s unprofessional behavior 
 
18 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
in the workplace in 2004 would be mitigated but for the unfair, derogatory statements he 
subsequently made to management that are not listed in the SOR.10 Applicant’s 
supervisor had a right to ask to go to the conference in lieu of Applicant’s attendance. 
Management had a right to send whomever they wanted to the conference. Applicant’s 
claim that it was unethical or dishonest to send his supervisor to the May 7 and 8, 2007 
conference is unwarranted and inappropriate conduct. His refusal to accept the 
judgment of the ethics investigation and his response to his evaluation shows poor 
judgment. In July 2007, he wrote a four-page letter to his CEO, and in his response to 
his January 8, 2008, performance review, he used intemperate, disrespectful language 
that showed he had not learned that such language was unprofessional and showed 
poor judgment. His comments in 2007 and 2008 were insubordinate, inappropriate, and 
disrespectful, and such behavior is likely in the future, if he has a dispute with his 
employers over decisions the employer makes. More time is necessary without 
Applicant engaging in abusive conduct before personal conduct security concerns will 
be fully alleviated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
10The SOR did not allege that Applicant made insubordinate, disrespectful, and derogatory 
comments about his supervisor and manager concerning his supervisor’s attendance at the May 7 and 8, 
2007 conference, in a four-page letter in July 2007 to his CEO, and in his response to his January 8, 
2008, performance review. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board 
listed five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). I have considered the non-SOR misconduct for purposes of (a), (b), (c), and (e), and not 
for any other purpose. 
 
19 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines K and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support access to classified information at this time, there are several factors tending to 
support approval of his clearance. Applicant is 43 years old. He is sufficiently mature to 
understand and comply with his security responsibilities. He has a lengthy history of 
timely compliance with security rules, with only one documented exception. He was 
commended by security staff for his conscientious enforcement of security rules. The 
Security Director at his present employment has an extraordinary security background, 
and he vouches for Applicant’s trustworthiness and reliability. There were no security 
issues over the last two years at his current employment. He did not have any timecard 
violations. Applicant does not gamble, use illegal drugs, consume alcohol, or have a 
criminal record. He deserves substantial credit for volunteering to support the U.S. 
Government as an employee of a contractor. There is every indication that he is loyal to 
the United States and his current employer. His previous employment was a stressful 
environment for him, and providing some extenuation for the intemperate comments he 
made to his supervisory chain. Several character witnesses laud his diligence, 
professionalism, and responsibility. I give Applicant credit for admitting that he made the 
insubordinate, disrespectful statements about management at the company where he 
was previously employed. I accept his statement as truthful that he does not remember 
ever storing the classified document (on blue paper) in his filing cabinet. These factors 
show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
The whole-person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial at this time. He stored a classified document in an improper container 
at some time prior to its discovery in February 2008, risking its compromise. He has a 
history of intemperate, insubordinate, and disrespectful comments to management in 
2004, 2007, and 2008. His relationship with management at corporation B raises 
questions about his judgment reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. 
 
I have carefully applied the law to the facts and circumstances in the context of 
the whole person, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), 
Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs. I conclude Applicant has not fully mitigated 
the handling protected information and personal conduct concerns at this time. The 
passage of more time is necessary without conduct raising a security concern before 
granting access to classified information will be warranted.  
 
 
20 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline K:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.b to 2.d: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
