 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-03383 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines E (Personal 
Conduct) and J (Criminal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on October 22, 2008. On 
February 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines E and J. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on March 11, 2010; answered it on March 26, 2010; 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
March 29, 2010. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 3, 2010, and the 
case was assigned to me on May 6, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 24, 
2010, scheduling the hearing for June 25, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 16 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A through J, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on July 1, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR 
except ¶¶ 1.f, 1.l, 1.n, and 1.r, which he denied. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old systems engineer employed by a defense contractor 
since September 2007. He received a master’s degree in management information 
systems in December 2001, and he has worked for federal contractors since September 
2002. In April 2007, he was designated as a “Certified Information Systems Security 
Professional.” (AX J.) 
 
 Applicant married in July 1993. His spouse is a U.S. Army officer on active duty. 
They have an 11-year-old daughter and a seven-year-old son.  
  
 Between 1979 and 1982 Applicant shoplifted various items from sporting goods 
stores. He estimated that he stole items worth $300 to $500. In May or June 1980, he 
was charged with being a minor in possession of alcohol, and he paid a small fine. (GX 
9 at 2.) He stood watch for two friends in 1980 or 1981, while they stole $15-$20 from a 
drunken man who had passed out on a park bench. In 1981 he siphoned gasoline from 
other persons’ vehicles about five times. He broke into a sporting goods shop in 1982 
and stole items worth about $70.  
 
 In August 1985, Applicant was charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI), after 
he struck two pedestrians and killed one of them. The police report reflects that his 
blood-alcohol level was .091, which was then below the legal limit. The charges were 
filed on August 14, 1985, 11 days after the accident. On July 3, 1986, the charges were 
amended to allege reckless driving. In August 19, 1986, he pleaded “no contest” and 
was found guilty of reckless driving. He was fined $800, with $500 suspended, and 
confined for 120 days, with 30 days suspended, ordered to perform 232 hours of 
community service, and placed on probation until August 1989. (GX 8.) 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegation that he was arrested 
and charged with DWI. At the hearing, he testified that he denied the allegation because 
he was not arrested. He testified that he returned to the scene of the accident, identified 
 
3 
 
 
himself to the state trooper as the driver, accompanied the trooper to the station, and 
was charged with DWI several days after the accident. (Tr. 58-59.) 
 
 In November 1985, Applicant, who was then 18 years old, was charged with 
unlawfully being on premises where alcoholic beverages were sold, served, or 
consumed; possessing and consuming an alcoholic beverage; resisting arrest; and 
knowingly displaying and representing as his own a driver’s license issued to another. 
He was placed on probation for 30 days and ordered to perform 80 hours of community 
service. In June 1988, the conviction was set aside upon completion of his probation. 
(GX 7.) 
 
 In 1986, Applicant and three friends, while intoxicated, forcibly robbed a man and 
stole about $100-$150 from him. (GX 11 at 3.) In 1987 or 1988, Applicant damaged 
another vehicle while attempting to park after consuming four or five beers. He left the 
scene without notifying the owner or the police. (GX 11 at 8.)  
 
Applicant was cited for careless driving in July 1989, five speeding violations 
between September 1989 and May 1990, and a stop-sign violation in October 1990. He 
was cited for driving on a suspended or revoked license in March 1991, and driving an 
unsafe vehicle in April 1992. (GX 10.) 
 
In 1989, Applicant was charged with domestic abuse after an altercation with a 
girlfriend (not his current spouse). He spent the night in jail and then paid a fine. He 
completed court-ordered counseling sessions. (GX 9 at 6-7; GX 11.) 
 
 Applicant tried marijuana with friends in 1980, used it 3-4 times a year from 1985 
to 1991, used it once in the fall of 1997, and once in April 2004. He used cocaine 2-3 
times between 1988 and 1990 and used mushrooms (psilocybin) once in 1984. (GX 5 at 
2-3.) 
 
 In October 2002, Applicant executed a security clearance application (SF 86). 
(GX 2.) He answered “No” to question 24, asking if he had ever been charged with or 
convicted of any offenses related to alcohol or drugs. He did not disclose his citation for 
being a minor in possession of alcohol in 1980, the DWI charge in August 1985, or his 
arrest in November 1985 for underage consumption of alcohol and being on premises 
where alcohol is sold or consumed.  
 
On the same SF 86, Applicant answered “No” to question 27, asking if he had 
illegally used any controlled substance during the last seven years or since the age of 
16, whichever period is shorter. He did not disclose his use of marijuana in 1997.   
 
In April 2003, Applicant executed another SF 86. (GX 3.) Once again, he 
answered “No” to questions 24 and 27, and he did not disclose his alcohol-related 
arrests or his marijuana use in 1997.   
 
 
4 
 
 
 In July 2003, Applicant presented a sworn statement to a security investigator, 
stating that he used marijuana in 1984 and 1985, but “did not use it more than half 
dozen times with friends at parties during this timeframe.” He also told the investigator, 
“I have not used any other illegal drugs, to include marijuana, at any time in my life other 
than the marijuana use disclosed above.” (GX 9 at 11-12.) He did not disclose his 
marijuana use between 1980 and 1991, his marijuana use in 1997, his cocaine use 
between 1988 and 1990, and his one-time use of psychedelic mushrooms.  
 
 Applicant was granted a security clearance in January 2003. He submitted an SF 
86 on April 30, 2004, seeking eligibility for SCI access. (GX 4.) He recertified his 
application on November 23, 2004 and September 22, 2005 without changing any 
information in the application. He answered “No” to question 27, asking if he had ever 
used any controlled substance since the age of 16 or in the last seven years, whichever 
is shorter. He did not disclose his use of marijuana in early April 2004, shortly before he 
submitted his application.  
 
 In November 2004, Applicant was interviewed regarding his April 2004 
application. At this interview, he did not disclose his use of marijuana in 1997 or 2004. 
When he was interviewed again in May 2005, he disclosed the 1997 and 2004 uses of 
marijuana. (GX 12 at 1-3.) He was interviewed a third time in May 22, 2006, and he 
disclosed that he drove his motorcycle while intoxicated two days before the interview. 
He admitted during this interview that he consumed eight to ten beers at a time once 
every two weeks and that his wife complained about his drinking because it interfered 
with family time. (GX 12 at 13-14.) At the hearing, he testified that his normal 
consumption at a social occasion period such as a football game is four to six beers 
over a three-hour period. He will ask his spouse to drive after consuming one beer. (Tr. 
86-87.) 
 
Applicant was denied SCI access in November 2006, because of security 
concerns raised by his alcohol consumption, drug involvement, and personal conduct. 
The denial letter specifically mentions Applicant’s lack of candor on his application and 
during interviews. (GX 13 at 6.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he thought that the questions on the SF 86 about alcohol 
and drugs encompassed only the last five years. He admitted minimizing his marijuana 
use during his security interview in July 2003 because he was embarrassed about it. 
(Tr. 51.) He testified he did not know why he answered “No” to question 27 on his SF 86 
in 2004, because he had already disclosed his marijuana use to the investigator during 
the July 2003 interview. (Tr. 67.) He admitted that he did not disclose his April 2004 use 
of marijuana on his application for SCI because he was afraid his application would be 
denied and he probably would lose his job. (Tr. 75.) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his security clearance application in October 2008, he 
answered “Yes” to question 23d, asking if he had ever been charged with or convicted 
of any offense related to alcohol or drugs, and he disclosed his DWI charge and 
conviction of reckless driving in May 1985. He answered “Yes” to question 24a, asking if 
 
5 
 
 
he had illegally used a controlled substance during the past seven years. He answered 
“Yes to question 24b, asking if he had ever illegally used a controlled substance while 
possessing a security clearance, and he disclosed his marijuana use in April 2004. 
Finally, he answered “Yes” to question 26b, asking if he had ever had a clearance or 
access authorization denied, suspended, or revoked, and he disclosed that his 
application for SCI access was denied. (GX 1 33-35.) 
 
 An Army colonel on active duty submitted a letter on Applicant’s behalf. He has 
worked closely with Applicant, knows him on both a personal and professional level, has 
daily contact with him, and considers him a person with strong values, good character, 
and sound judgment. (AX B.) Applicant recently received a letter of appreciation from 
another Army colonel for his role in a planning conference. (AX I.) An Army lieutenant 
colonel, who has known Applicant for 15 years, describes him as loyal, determined, 
responsible, and dedicated. (AX C.) An Army major, who has known Applicant and his 
spouse for 14 years on a social as well as professional level, describes Applicant as 
upstanding, loyal, dedicated, and trustworthy. (AX D.) None of these statements 
indicate whether the declarant was aware of the allegations in the SOR 
 
Applicant’s supervisor rates him as a “top 10% performer” in his division. (AX E.) 
Applicant’s performance report for October 2008 to October 2009, recites that his 
“demonstrated abilities and leadership qualities make him a top candidate for additional 
responsibilities.” He is rated as a top performer who sets the example for his peers. (AX 
F.) His performance report for October 2007 to October 2008 rated him as a “key and 
valued member of the Army Program Team.” (AX G.) A performance report from a 
previous federal employer observed that he “fully exhibits” the required competency and 
is progressing well in his professional development. (AX H.) 
 
 An Army lieutenant colonel on active duty, who has known Applicant and his 
spouse for the past four years as a neighbor, testified that he and Applicant share a love 
of sports and spend considerable time together on weekends. He regards Applicant as 
responsible, honest, a good neighbor, and a good friend. He would not hesitate to 
recommend Applicant for a clearance. (Tr. 42-45.) The witness was not asked and did 
not say whether he was aware of Applicant’s record of misconduct and falsification. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
 
6 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s numerous acts of misconduct from 1979-2006 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.k); his falsification of security clearance applications in October 2002, 
April 2003, and April 2004 (SOR ¶¶ 1.l-1.o, 1.r, and 1.s); his false statement to a 
 
7 
 
 
security investigator in July 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.p); his use of marijuana in April 2004 while 
holding a clearance (SOR ¶ 1.q); and the denial of his application for SCI access in 
2006 (SOR ¶ 1.t). 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition for falsification of a security clearance 
application is AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire). The relevant disqualification condition 
for making false statements to a security investigator is AG ¶ 16(b) (deliberately 
providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an investigator). 
 
 Applicant denied deliberately failing to list his alcohol-related offenses on his 
October 2002 application, his April 2003 application, and his April 2004 application, but 
he admitted deliberately failing to disclose his marijuana use in 1997 on those 
applications and he admitted deliberately failing to disclose his marijuana use in April 
2004 on his 2004 application. When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this 
case, the Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does 
not prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a 
whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR 
Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 Applicant explained his failures to disclose his alcohol-related arrests by claiming 
he believed the questions encompassed only a five-year period preceding the 
applications. At the time he completed the applications, he was a well-educated, mature 
adult. The questions pertaining to alcohol- or drug-related arrests clearly ask, “Have you 
ever been charged or convicted . . . ?” He was embarrassed by his past misconduct and 
concerned that full disclosure would result in denial of his applications. I find his 
explanation for not disclosing his alcohol-related arrests and drug involvement on his 
security clearance applications implausible and not credible. See ISCR Case No. 08-
05637 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010) (an applicant’s education and experience are part of 
the entirety-of-the-record evaluation to determine whether an omission of relevant 
information on a security clearance application was deliberate). Based on Applicant’s 
admissions and all the evidence I conclude that the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.l-1.o, 1.r, 
and 1.s are supported by substantial evidence. I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is raised by 
the evidence. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant admitted that he deliberately minimized his drug involvement when he 
submitted his sworn statement to an investigator in July 2003. His admission and the 
corroborating evidence are sufficient to raise AG ¶ 16(b). 
 
 The misconduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.k and 1.q is established by Applicant’s 
admissions and the evidence outlined above. However, SOR ¶ 1.t, alleging the denial of 
SCI access by another agency, does not allege any conduct by Applicant. It alleges 
only an ancillary action by another agency. Accordingly, I resolve SOR ¶ 1.t in 
Applicant’s favor. 
 
 Applicant’s record of misconduct raises the following disqualifying conditions 
under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue 
areas that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other 
single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations; and  
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
 Since the Government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(a)-(e), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application or during a security interview may be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). Applicant’s efforts to 
 
9 
 
 
correct his omissions and misleading answers were neither prompt nor entirely in good 
faith. He did not disclose his 1997 marijuana use when he was interviewed in July 2003 
and November 2004. He did not disclose his 2004 marijuana use when he submitted his 
application for SCI access. He did not fully disclose his marijuana use until May 2005, 
more than a year after submitting his application for SCI access and almost two years 
after the July 2003 security interview.  
 
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). Many of 
Applicant’s offenses were arguably minor. His reckless driving conviction was a 
misdemeanor, but involved a fatality. He was a mature, well-educated adult when he 
used marijuana in April 2004. He was employed by a defense contractor, married to an 
Army officer, and the father of two children. He lived in a military environment and held 
a security clearance. His use of marijuana while holding a clearance and his multiple 
falsifications while applying for clearances were serious breaches of trust. His 
misconduct was frequent and did not occur under unique circumstances.  
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the evidence presented at the hearing establish that 
he last used marijuana in April 2004 and last drove a vehicle after excessive alcohol 
consumption in May 2006, raising the question whether his history of misconduct is 
mitigated by the passage of time. The second prong of AG ¶ 17(c) (“so much time has 
passed”) focuses on whether the conduct was recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for 
determining when conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the evidence. See ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 4, 2004). If the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed without 
any evidence of misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine whether that 
period of time demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a 
finding of reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.  
 
 Applicant’s testimony and the evidence submitted by several senior military 
officers who are his social friends and professional associates suggest that he has 
matured, moderated his alcohol consumption, and become a dedicated and productive 
member of the defense community. At the hearing, he was remorseful about his 
misconduct and drug involvement, but he denied intentionally concealing his relevant 
information, insisting that he did not read the questions carefully. As noted above, I 
found his explanation for omitting relevant information implausible and not credible. His 
hearing testimony demonstrated that he still does not fully appreciate the need for 
absolute candor in matters of national security.  
 
 Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered to assess an applicant=s 
credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider whether an 
applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of a whole person 
analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (citations omitted). I 
 
10 
 
 
have considered Applicant’s intentional omissions during his November 2004 interview 
for the limited purpose of evaluating the evidence of mitigation. I have considered 
Applicant’s lack of candor at the hearing for the limited purpose of determining whether 
he has “demonstrated successful rehabilitation.” I conclude that AG ¶ 17(c) is 
established for the conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.k, and 1.q, but it is not established 
for the falsifications alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l-1.p, 1.r, and 1.s.  
 
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct also may be mitigated if “the 
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(d). Applicant has acknowledged his irresponsible 
use of drugs and alcohol. He has moderated his alcohol consumption and developed a 
new circle of friends within the military community. After the denial of his application for 
SCI access, he finally realized the repercussions of his behavior. I am satisfied that his 
irresponsible acts of misconduct, except for the falsifications, are unlikely to recur. For 
these reasons, as well as the reasons set out in the above discussion of AG ¶ 17(c), I 
conclude that AG ¶ 17(d) is established for the conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.k and 
1.q, but not for the conduct alleged in SOR ¶ 1.l-1.p and 1.r-1.s. 
 
 Finally, security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “(e) the 
individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 17(e). This mitigating condition is established because 
Applicant disclosed his alcohol-related arrests and drug use in his most recent security 
clearance application and was candid about it at the hearing, thereby reducing his 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The SOR cross-alleges the falsifications alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l-1.p, 1.r, and 1.s 
as criminal conduct. The concern under this guideline is: “Criminal activity creates doubt 
about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG 
¶ 30. The relevant disqualifying conditions under this guideline include “a single serious 
crime or multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or 
convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). 
 
 It is a felony, punishable by a fine or imprisonment for not more than five years, 
or both, to knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
statement or representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of the executive branch 
of the Government of the United States. 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Security clearances are 
matters within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of the Government of the United 
States. A deliberately false answer on a security clearance application or in a statement 
to a security investigator is a serious crime within the meaning of Guideline J. 
Applicant’s intentional omissions of relevant and material information from his multiple 
 
11 
 
 
security clearance applications and in his sworn statement of July 2003 raise the 
disqualifying conditions in AG ¶ 31(a) and (c), shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “so 
much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). Security concerns 
also may be mitigated if “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive 
community involvement.” AG ¶ 32(d). For the reasons set out in the above discussion of 
AG ¶ 17(c), I conclude that AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) are not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines E and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature, well-educated, articulate adult who is carrying the burden 
of his irresponsible behavior as a teenager and young adult. During the past four years, 
he appears to have turned the corner on his personal behavior and conducted himself 
as a responsible adult. However, his long record of deception raises grave doubts about 
his trustworthiness and reliability. At the hearing, he still had not fully come to terms with 
his pattern of deception, and he continued to rationalize his falsifications and offer 
dissembling explanations for them. 
 
 
12 
 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines E and 
J, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on his personal conduct and 
criminal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l-1.p:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.q:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.r-1.s:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.t:     For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
