 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04278 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 15, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 12, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 14, 2010. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on July 13, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
August 10, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. GE 1 through 4 
 
2 
 
and 8 were received without objection. GE 5 through 7 were admitted over Applicant’s 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were 
admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. Applicant submitted documents that were marked AE H through V and 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s memorandum is marked Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 18, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has held a 
clearance from another agency. She is applying for a DoD security clearance. She 
attended a university from 1998 to 2002 but was several credits short of a degree. She 
earned the credits at a community college, and the university awarded her bachelor’s 
degree in 2004. She has never been married, and she has no children.1 
 
 Applicant worked her way through college. She also received grants and student 
loans. Her family did not provide much financial support as her mother lost her job 
during her freshman year. Her employment after college was somewhat sporadic, with 
low-paying jobs and periods of unemployment. She was engaged to be married for a 
period. Her fiancé was in law school, and they worked to pay his way through school. 
Applicant accrued a number of debts during college and shortly thereafter that became 
delinquent. She has been steadily employed since 2004, and she has worked for her 
current employer since 2006.2   
 
 Applicant had several student loans. She started paying a student loan of more 
than $20,000 in 2003. She has consistently paid the loan since then. She had an 
additional student loan of $7,500. She thought that loan was consolidated with the 
larger loan. It was not and became delinquent. She entered into a payment plan to pay 
$100 per month starting August 2010.3 
 
  The SOR alleges 18 delinquent debts, as established through credit bureau 
reports (CBR) and Applicant’s admissions. The delinquent debts raising security 
concerns in Applicant’s case are addressed in the diagram below.  
 
SOR AMOUNT STATUS EVIDENCE 
1.a. Medical 
account 
$245 Plans to pay. Tr. at 19, 46. 
1.b. Collection 
company/cable 
services 
$79 Paid July 2010.  Tr. at 19-21; 
AE E.  
 
1.c. Bank $427 
 
Settled for $278 August 2010. Tr. at 21-22; 
AE E, I.  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 39-40, 45-46; GE 1, 2; AE Q. 
 
2 Tr. at 41-44, 64; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 24-26, 47-50, 64; AE G. 
 
3 
 
1.d. Collection 
company/ 
telephone services 
$137 Disputed. Stated same debt as 
SOR 1.e.  
Tr. at 23-24; 
GE 5-7; AE A-
C, F. 
1.e. Collection 
company/ 
telephone services 
$60 Paid July 2010. Tr. at 23-24, 
46; AE E. 
1.f. Collection 
company/ 
telephone services 
$55 Paid July 2010. Tr. at 24; AE 
E.  
1.g. Student loan $7,748 Payment plan to pay $100 per 
month starting August 2010. 
Tr. at 24-26, 
47-50; AE G, 
N. 
1.h. Judgment/ 
collection 
company/bank 
$2,004 Balance of $3,810 settled for 
$2,600 July 2010. 
Tr. at 26-27, 
51-54; AE E, 
L. 
1.i. Collection 
company/ 
department store 
$684 Deleted from CBR because of age. 
Applicant admitted owing original 
creditor in 2002. 
Tr. at 27-29, 
55; GE 5-7; 
AE A-C, F, U. 
1.j. Collection 
company/ 
telephone services 
$41 Paid July 2010. Tr. at 23-24, 
29, 55; AE E. 
1.k. Insurance 
company 
$213 Plans to pay. Tr. at 29, 55. 
1.l. Collection 
company/gym  
$157 Disputed. Not listed on most recent 
CBRs. 
Tr. at 29-30, 
55-56; GE 5-7; 
AE A-C, F, V. 
1.m & 1.o. 
Collection 
company/bank 
$6,012/ 
$12,135 
Same accounts. Current balance 
$14,650. Plans to pay. 
Tr. at 30-31, 
56-61; AE H, 
K, M. 
1.n. Credit card $1,275 Settled for $382 July 2010. Tr. at 31;  
AE E. 
1.p. Apartment $2,928 Disputed. Not listed on most recent 
CBRs. 
Tr. at 31-37, 
61-63; GE 5-7; 
AE A-C, F. 
1.q. Collection 
company/bank 
$348 Disputed. Not listed on most recent 
CBRs. 
Tr. at 37-38, 
63; GE 5-7; 
AE A-C, F. 
1.r. Unnamed 
medical account 
$183 Originally disputed. Discovered it 
was a valid debt. Plans to pay. 
Tr. at 38, 63. 
 
 In summary, Applicant paid or settled seven debts; she has a payment plan for 
her student loan; she disputed five accounts including two that were duplicates of other 
debts; she has plans to pay four accounts but has not yet made any payments; and one 
account has been deleted from her credit report apparently because of age.  
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant had not received financial counseling as of the date of the hearing. She 
enrolled in a credit counseling program after the hearing. She has a stable job with a 
good salary. She paid or settled several delinquent debts that were not alleged on the 
SOR. She is not accruing new delinquent debts. Her testimony that she plans to pay her 
delinquent accounts was credible.4  
 
 Applicant submitted a number of documents attesting to her volunteer work and 
involvement in community activities. Applicant worked for a period for a member of the 
U.S. Congress. That Congresswoman wrote a letter praising Applicant’s outstanding job 
performance, stating Applicant is an “exemplary individual.”5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 64-72; AE F, H, J, O. 
 
5 AE P, T. 
 
5 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her obligations for a period. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant still has a number of delinquent debts. Her financial issues are current 
and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
 Most of Applicant’s delinquent debts were incurred while she was in college or 
shortly thereafter, while she had periods of unemployment and underemployment. Her 
employment issues could qualify as conditions that were outside her control. To be fully 
applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant has been steadily employed since 2004, and she has worked 
for her current employer since 2006. Most of her actions on her finances have come 
recently, after the issuance of the SOR. There was insufficient action prior to the 
issuance of the SOR for a finding that she has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) is partially applicable. She does not rate full mitigation under  
AG ¶ 20(d) for the same reason.  
 
 Applicant enrolled in a credit counseling program after the hearing. She paid or 
settled seven debts, and she has a payment plan for her student loan. She credibly 
testified that she plans to continue paying her debts. In ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 
(App. Bd. May 21, 2008), the Appeal Board discussed an applicant’s burden of proof 
under these mitigating factors: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 05-01920 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2007). However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-25499 at 2 
(App. Bd. Jun. 5, 2006). All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that 
plan.” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006). 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
 
7 
 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his [or her] outstanding indebtedness 
is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 06-25584 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2008). Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
I find clear indications Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved and are under 
control. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable.  
 
 Applicant disputed owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l, 1.p, and 1.q. Those 
debts have been deleted from her credit report. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to those debts. 
The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.m are duplicates of other debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is 
also applicable to those debts. Applicant admitted owing the $684 debt alleged in SOR 
¶ 1.i in 2002. That debt has been deleted from her credit report, apparently because of 
age. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable to that debt. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
8 
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. I also found Applicant to 
be honest and candid about her finances. I believe she is sincere about getting her 
finances in order. As indicated above, an applicant is not required to establish that she 
has paid every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that she has established a plan to resolve her financial problems and taken 
significant actions to implement that plan. I find that Applicant has established a plan to 
resolve her financial problems and has taken significant action to implement that plan. 
Her finances, while still far from perfect, do not constitute a security concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
