1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 09-08008
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge:
On March 29, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F
(Financial Considerations). DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG).
On April 22, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. DOHA
assigned the case to me on June 4, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on
September 5, 2010, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 14, 2010.
Department Counsel offered four exhibits, admitted without objection as Government
Exhibits (GE) 1-4. Applicant testified and did not submit any exhibits at the hearing.
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 22, 2010. Based upon a review of the
case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations except for SOR ¶¶ 1.s,
1.v, 1.x, 1.bb, and 1.jj. He neither admitted nor denied 1.r, 1.cc, 1.hh, and 1.ii. 
Applicant is a 31-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
high school in 1997. Applicant served in the United States Army from August 1998 until
August 2004. He has been with his current employer since June 2009. (GE 1)
Applicant married in April 2002 and divorced in August 2008. He has full custody
of his two children from his marriage. (Tr. 13) He and his girlfriend have one child.
Applicant supports his three children, ages six, four and one. (Tr. 15)
During his marriage Applicant’s wife handled the finances. However, she
gambled and did not use the money for household bills. She used Applicant’s ATM card
and personal checks to gain access to money. Applicant believed his wife lost $15,000
to $20,000 a year from approximately 2004 until 2007. (GE 2) Applicant explained that
his wife took money from his wallet when he was sleeping. (Tr. 17) He learned that she
wrote checks from the account and caused checks to be returned for insufficient funds.
(Tr. 17) He knew that this was happening in 2006. However, as early as 2003, Applicant
learned that his wife was arrested for fraud. (Tr. 27) He knew that she was incarcerated
for the fraudulent charges. 
Applicant’s delinquent debts largely stem from his ex-wife’s “severe gambling
addiction.” (GE 2) Sixteen medical accounts alleged were the result of his wife’s chronic
asthma condition belonging to his wife. Applicant acknowledged that he was not paying
attention to the finances and trusted his wife to take care of paying the bills. (Tr. 12) He
did not want to believe that he could not trust her.
The SOR alleges 40 delinquent debts, including two repossessed vehicles, and
delinquent credit card debt. The approximate total for Applicant’s SOR debts is $50,000.
(GE 4). 
When answering the DOHA interrogatories, Applicant explained that he cancelled
his ATM cards and destroyed checks but she continued to get his money. Many
accounts were joint accounts. (GE 2) He realizes that he is “technically” responsible for
the accounts.
The debts Applicant admitted have not been paid. He acknowledged receiving
notices for the various accounts but he has not contacted creditors. He admitted that the
debts in the SOR began in 2003 or 2004. He attempted to curtail his wife’s gambling but
he was not successful. (Tr. 28) He tried to persuade her to obtain counseling for the
gambling problems, but she refused. (Tr. 28)
Applicant denied two debts alleged in the SOR because he believed he paid
them. (SOR ¶ 1.x, 1.bb) (Tr. 35) He did not have any documentation to support his
3
assertion. He believes he paid them by phone. He acknowledged he does not have any
documentation at home because he is a bit disorganized. The remaining debts alleged
in the SOR that Applicant denied (1.s, 1,v, 1.hh, 1.ii, 1jj) are the result of his wife’s
actions. He has not officially disputed these delinquent accounts nor has he contacted
the creditors.
At the hearing, Applicant explained that he worked two jobs to support his family.
Applicant has paid other delinquent debts that are not listed on the SOR. He believes
that since January 2010 he has paid smaller accounts for a total of approximately $600.
Applicant provided documentation that he paid or settled a military account for $50 in
January 2010. He also settled a delinquent account for $224 
Applicant’s current monthly net income is approximately $2,907. Applicant’s net
monthly remainder is approximately $141. (Tr. 43) In 2008, he enrolled in online college
courses and has student loans in deferment. He is not certain of the amount of the
student loans. He has not had any financial counseling. (Tr. 47) He does not have a
payment plan for any of the debts alleged on the SOR. He intends to pay some other
bills and then “fulfill the obligation of the outstanding balances on the SOR.”
At the hearing, Applicant was forthright and candid about his financial difficulties.
He claims he was too trusting of his wife. He tried to stop her from taking his money but
he claims he could not. He separated from his wife in 2007 and borrowed money from
his father to pay for a divorce. He is repaying that amount ($7,000) in monthly payments
of $308. Applicant was sincere in his desire to become financially responsible. His
priority is his family. He intends to address the other delinquent debts when he can.
Applicant was credible in his remorse for his poor financial management.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2,
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
4
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential,
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. Applicant accumulated delinquent debts on various accounts totaling
approximately $50,000. His admissions and his credit reports confirm the debts. The
evidence is enough to raise these disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns
arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition may be
5
mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant’s wife
gambled and spent his money rather than pay bills. Applicant realized that as early as
2006. He did not assume financial responsibility when he knew that his wife was
gambling and stealing his money. He has $50,000 in unresolved delinquent debt. He
has not paid on the delinquent debts listed in the SOR. He intends to pay them at some
point in the future. However, he now has student loans in deferment. This is an
additional debt. This mitigating condition does not apply.  
Under AG & 20(b), the disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.@ Applicant’s inability to pay his delinquent debts is in part due
to his wife’s gambling addiction. He did not act responsibly under the circumstances.
This mitigating condition does not apply.
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.@ Neither of these mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has not
resolved the delinquent debts listed in the SOR. He admits that he does not have
sufficient income to pay his debts. Despite good intentions to pay his delinquent debts,
Applicant has not been able to do so. Applicant’s efforts are insufficient to carry his
burden in this case. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge must consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
6
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
I considered the potentially mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and
circumstances surrounding this case and conclude they are insufficient to overcome the
government’s case. 
Applicant is a 31-year-old high school graduate. He served in the Army from
1998 until 2004. He supports his children. His marriage ended in divorce due to his
wife’s gambling. He has been steadily employed. He even worked two jobs to financially
support his family. However, he did not manage his financial affairs in a responsible
manner after learning about his wife’s irresponsible behavior. He is credible in his
remorse for past financial irresponsibility. He intends to pay his delinquent debt when he
is able to do so.
Applicant was candid and forthright at the hearing. He admits that he has not had
any financial counseling. He has no repayment plans for any of the multitude of debts.
He enrolled in college classes, which is laudable, but now he will have to repay student
loans in addition to his $50,000 delinquent debt. Applicant has not established a
financial track record at this point in time. Under Applicant’s current circumstances, a
clearance is not warranted.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising under financial
considerations. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a:-1.pp: Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
_________________
NOREEN A. LYNCH
Administrative Judge
