KEYWORD: Guideline G; Guideline H; Guideline J
DIGEST: Applicant point to statements and questions by the Judge which were inconsistent with
the decorum normally anticipated in the courtroom.  Nonetheless, they ar insufficient to rebut the
presumption that the Judge’s ultimate decision was based on the record evidence.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 09-07395.a1
DATE: 09/14/2010
DATE: September 14, 2010
In Re:
-------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-07395
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Daniel Klein, Personal Representative
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On March 8, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
2
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption),
Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) of Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On June
22, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Carol G. Ricciardello denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge was biased against
Applicant, and whether the Judge did not consider Applicant’s work performance and did not give
adequate weight to the mitigating evidence he presented.  For the reasons discussed below, the
Board affirms the Judge’s decision.
The Judge made the following relevant findings of fact: Applicant is 48 years old.  Applicant
worked at a casino from 1996 until 2007, when he was laid off.  Although using drugs while
working at a casino was not permitted, Applicant used marijuana approximately once a month from
about 1980 until sometime in 2007.  Applicant passed a drug test in order to obtain his job at the
casino, but did not have to take another drug test during his employment there.  Applicant did not
use any other illegal drugs.  Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana in
February 2004.  Applicant pled guilty to the offense.  Applicant stated that the drugs were in his car.
Applicant’s driver’s license was suspended, and he was fined.  Applicant was charged with
possession of drug paraphernalia in September 2000, but Applicant stated that he did not remember
that incident.  Applicant was charged with possession of marijuana in March 1982.  Applicant
admitted using marijuana that day.  Applicant stated that the charge was later dropped.  
In March 1999, Applicant was charged with two felonies, unlawful possession of a weapon
and receiving stolen property.  Applicant stated that a passenger in his car put a stolen gun under the
car seat when the police stopped the car.  Applicant stated that he pled no contest and was awarded
one year of probation.  The record shows that Applicant was found guilty of possession of a hand
gun and was sentenced to four years in jail, all of which was suspended.
Applicant was arrested for Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol (DUI) in December 2006.
Applicant voluntarily attended group alcohol counseling before his court date for the arrest.  The
court date did not occur until June 2008, when Applicant was found guilty of Operating Under the
Influence of Liquor or Drugs.  Applicant’s license was suspended for two years.  Applicant
continued to drink after his prior DUI arrest and was again arrested for DUI in October 2008.
Applicant paid a fine, and his license was suspended for three years.  Applicant attended a
residential alcohol rehabilitation program; he was diagnosed as an alcoholic and advised not to drink
again.  Applicant continues to consume alcohol, his last drink being four or five days before the
hearing.  Although Applicant drinks alcohol about twice a week, he attends Alcoholics Anonymous
or Narcotics Anonymous meetings.  
Applicant alleges that he did not receive a fair hearing because the Judge was biased against
him.  Applicant points out examples in the transcript of what he considers to be the Judge’s bias
against him.  He also states that there was bias evident in the Judge’s tone of voice which does not
appear in the written record.  There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge is impartial and
1The Judge found in Applicant’s favor with regard to Guideline H.  The Judge’s findings under Guideline H
are not in issue.
3
unbiased,  and a party seeking to rebut that presumption has a heavy burden of persuasion on appeal.
The issue is not whether Applicant personally believes that the Judge was biased against him; rather,
the issue is whether the record of the proceedings below contains any indication that the Judge acted
in a manner that would lead a reasonable person to question her  fairness and impartiality.  Bias is
not demonstrated merely because the Judge made adverse findings or reached unfavorable
conclusions in a case, or because Applicant strongly disagrees with the Judge’s findings or
conclusions.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 4 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004).  In pointing out his
examples of alleged  bias, Applicant adds a significant amount of commentary and characterization
which are not reflected in the record.  Our review of the transcript leads us to conclude that, at most,
this case is comparable to ISCR Case No. 03-24632 at 2 (App. Bd. May 19, 2006), where we
concluded that “Applicant points to several examples of statements and questions by the Judge
which were inconsistent with the decorum normally anticipated in the courtroom.  While these
comments were gratuitous and at times harsh, they do not rebut the presumption that the Judge
ultimately decided the case on anything other than the record evidence.”  The examples cited by
Applicant do not rise to the level that might lead a reasonable person to question the Judge’s
impartiality.  Compare ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009), where the Board
remanded to another Judge in light of the “vigor and length” with which the Judge questioned
Applicant “ as well as her citation in the course of that questioning to matters outside the record.”
Applicant has failed to meet the heavy burden associated with a demonstration of bias on appeal.
    
Applicant maintains that the Judge did not consider his work performance. There is a
rebuttable presumption that the Judge considered all the record evidence, and there is no requirement
that the Judge mention or discuss every piece of evidence when reaching a decision.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 04-08134 at 3 (App. Bd. May 16, 2005).  It does not appear that Applicant submitted
formal work evaluations from his employer, but the record contains letters of reference from persons
who know him. While the Judge did not specifically mention Applicant’s work performance, she
stated that she considered the character reference letters which Applicant had submitted.  She found
that Applicant is “honorable, honest, and dependable” and that he is “a conscientious and
responsible employee, who is motivated and a natural leader.”  Decision at 4.  Applicant has not
demonstrated error in this regard.       
Applicant also argues that the Judge did not give adequate weight to his evidence of
mitigation.  Applicant admitted six of the SOR allegations against him.  Decision at 2.  The burden
then shifted to Applicant to extenuate or mitigate the security concerns raised by those allegations.
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The Judge concluded that Applicant did not present evidence sufficient to
overcome the security concerns raised under Guideline G and Guideline J.1  The application of
disqualifying and mitigating conditions does not turn simply on a finding that one or more of them
apply to the particular facts of a case.  Thus, the presence of some mitigating evidence does not
alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security determination.  As the trier of fact, the Judge
has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the
unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
4
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate that the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-23384 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 23,
2007).  Applicant has not demonstrated error.  
  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for her
decision,  “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Dep’t of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Accordingly, the Judge’s
adverse decision is sustainable.
Order
The Judge’s decision denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan  
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin          
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody       
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
