                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-06725 
 SSN: ----------------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 18, 2008, Applicant submitted his electronic Security Clearance 
Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On March 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on a date uncertain in 2010. He 
submitted a signed receipt dated June 25, 2010. He signed it on that date because he 
was home from overseas and had not signed the document until he returned on leave 
and obtained the receipt form from his security officer.  
 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 He attempted to answer the SOR in writing on a date unspecified in the 
document. He submitted a corrected answer admitting all SOR allegations on April 22, 
2010, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel 
was prepared to proceed on June 9, 2010, and I received the case assignment on June 
15, 2010.  
 
 DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 18, 2010, and I convened the hearing 
as scheduled on June 24, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 7, which 
were received into evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted Exhibits A through D, without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on July 7, 2010. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until 
August 2, 2010, to submit additional matters.  On July 27, 2010, he stated he would not 
submit any additional exhibits. Applicant’s declination of the opportunity to submit 
additional exhibits are contained in a series of electronic messages (emails) marked as 
Administrative Exhibit 2 (AE 2). The record closed on August 2, 2010. Based upon a 
review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
At the hearing, Applicant indicated he received the hearing notice after it was 
sent on June 18, 2010. (Tr. at 13) I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the 
Directive to 15 days notice before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 
15 days notice. (Tr. at 14; Administrative Exhibit 1 (AE 1))  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual of the SOR with 
explanations. He also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility 
for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant is 40 years old, unmarried, and has worked for a defense contractor 
since July 2007. He received a bachelor’s degree in computer science in 2004. He 
works overseas for his employer and returns to the United States every six months. He 
bought a car for $28,000 in cash in December 2009 when he last returned to the United 
States on vacation and stores it with a friend. Applicant sold some stock to obtain the 
cash with which he bought the car. (Tr. 29-31, 40, 62-67, 72; Exhibits 4, 5)  
 
Applicant worked for one company from 1998 to 2006, when he was laid off from 
that employer. He earned $42,000 annually with that employer. He was unemployed 
from January to October 2006. He used his savings account to pay his rent and credit 
cards for other expenses. He obtained new employment in October 2006 and worked 
until March 2007. He was unemployed again from March to July 2007 when he started 
working for his current employer. He lived with a friend during that time. He uses the 
 
3 
 
 
friend’s address as his United States address with his current employer. (Tr. 34-34; 
Exhibits 1, 4, 5) 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 13 delinquent debts totaling $45,820. The debts date from 
early 2006 to 2007. Applicant earns $12,000 monthly with a net income of $8,000. He 
earned this income for the past 24 months. His personal financial statement shows 
assets of $108,000. (Tr. 40; Exhibits 4, 5)  
 
Applicant paid three delinquent debts pursuant to garnishment orders served on 
his employer by creditors. The debts paid were a credit card debt for $938 (SOR Para. 
1.c), a judgment for $9,242 for a credit card debt (SOR Para. 1.g), and another credit 
card debt for $10,558 (SOR Para. 1.i). These debts total $20,738. (Tr. 26-29, 68; 
Exhibits 2, 7, A-D) 
 
Applicant has 10 unpaid delinquent debts totaling $25,082. His email of July 27, 
2010, to Department Counsel states he has not been able to locate any of those 
creditors. He admitted at the hearing that he had done nothing to resolve any of the 
delinquent accounts. Applicant also admitted that he has not obtained or examined any 
credit report about his accounts. He has not participated in credit counseling. He uses a 
debit card to pay his current debts or make purchases. (Tr. 46, 61, 68-75; Exhibits 2-7; 
AE 2)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Of these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant accumulated debts from January 2006 to the present time. They 
totaled $45,820. He has not taken any action to resolve those debts, except through 
 
5 
 
 
action by his creditors to obtain judgments and use garnishment to collect his debts. AG 
¶ 19 (a) and (c) apply. 
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. One mitigating condition may be potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
 such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
 individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and, 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Applicant’s failure to pay his delinquent debts is recent and continuous. His 
repeated failure over the past three years, and in the extra time given him after the 
hearing, to resolve these debts demonstrates a lack of reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment by Applicant. AG ¶ 20 (a) does not apply.  
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) might apply because Applicant was unemployed in 2006 and again 
in 2007 for a total of 14 months. However, since July 2007, three years ago, he has 
been gainfully employed earning $144,000 annually. That income was more than 
sufficient to repay all his debts. His lack of responsibility in these matters is shown by 
his continued failure to resolve the delinquent debts while selling stock to purchase a 
$28,000 automobile in December 2009, which he can only drive every six months when 
he returns to the United States from his overseas assignment. In considering all the 
evidence, AG ¶ 20 (b) does not apply. 
 
 
6 
 
 
There is no evidence Applicant sought or received any financial counseling on 
how to repay his delinquent debts. These financial problems are not resolved. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 20 (c) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has not done anything to repay his creditors. He has not taken any 
action to resolve these debts voluntarily. There is no action taken, good-faith or 
otherwise, to pay these debts. Therefore, AG ¶ 20 (d) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has not taken any action to dispute these debts. He did not present a 
reasonable basis to dispute their legitimacy. Therefore, AG ¶ 20 (e) does not apply. 
 
Affluence from a legal source of income is not an issue. Therefore, AG ¶ 20 (f) 
does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature and educated 
adult, who has been earning $144,000 annually since July 2007. Despite that large 
salary, he has done nothing voluntarily to resolve his delinquent debts. The three paid 
debts were resolved through garnishment procedures by his creditors. At the hearing, 
he exhibited a complete lack of responsibility toward his delinquent debts over the past 
three years and into the future. Although he was given time after the hearing to resolve 
the debts, he neglected to do so. Applicant displays a lack of good judgment that calls 
into question his reliability. If he cannot resolve these debts on the substantial income 
he earns, then how can he be trusted with classified information. None of the “whole-
person” factors can be counted in his favor.  
 
7 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.m:            Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
