                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06882 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On April 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline B. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 30, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 6, 2010. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on July 29, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 23, 
2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant did not object and they 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
were admitted. The Government requested administrative notice be taken of certain 
facts relating to Taiwan as contained in Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. I took administrative 
notice of the source documents. I did not consider for administrative notice Department 
Counsel’s brief and the facts contained in press releases submitted. These documents 
were rather considered and admitted as GE 3 and 4. Applicant and a witness testified. 
The record remained open until September 7, 2010, to allow Applicant an opportunity to 
provide additional documents, which she did. They were marked as Applicant Exhibit 
(AE) A though C. Department Counsel had no objections and they were admitted.1 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 1, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. She was born in Taiwan. She graduated from college in 
Taiwan in 1989. She then came to the United States on a student visa to study English 
for one year. She returned to Taiwan and studied in preparation for the graduate school 
entrance exam, so she could return to the United States and attend graduate school. In 
1995, she returned to the United States and earned a master’s degree in education. 
She again returned to Taiwan to teach English and history. In 1999, she returned to the 
United States and attended school to earn a second master’s degree. In 2004, she 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen. She formally renounced her Taiwanese citizenship. 
She has worked for her current employer since April 2009. She and her fiancé have 
lived together since 2005 and plan to marry next year. He is a U.S. citizen and is 
employed as an electrical engineer. He holds a security clearance. She has worked as 
an analyst for a federal contractor since April 2009.2  
 
 Applicant’s 77-year-old mother is a citizen and resident of Taiwan. They talk on 
the telephone once a week and Applicant visits her every two years. She last visited her 
in Taiwan in 2008, when her father passed away. Her father was a high school principal. 
Her mother is a homemaker. Applicant sends her monetary gifts for her birthday and 
holidays. Her mother is self-sufficient financially and does not need support from 
Applicant. She does not receive any government assistance. Her mother visited 
Applicant in the United States in 2007.3  
 
 Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of Taiwan. He is 50 years old. He 
completed his two year compulsory military service. He works in the private sector as a 
marketing manager. He and Applicant have not talked in a long time. Her brother is 
married and his wife works for a private U.S. advertising company. They have two sons, 
1 Department Counsel provided a Memorandum stating that he did not object to AE A through C. It was 
marked Hearing Exhibit II.  
 
2 Tr. 19, 22-31. 
 
3 Tr. 31-34. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
ages 19 and 16. Applicant’s last contact with her brother was at her father’s funeral. She 
intimated that they do not get along and do not maintain contact.4  
 
 Applicant’s oldest sister is 53 and is a citizen and resident of Taiwan. They talk 
on the telephone once every two to three months. She is a homemaker married to a 
doctor in private practice. They have two daughters, ages 27 and 24. The eldest works 
in a bank and the younger one works for a university as a research assistant.5  
 
 Applicant has another sister who is 48 and is a citizen and resident of the United 
States. She is a college professor for two on-line universities and also works part-time 
for a drug store. She teaches business management. She is not married and has no 
children. She and Applicant are in contact every two to three weeks. She has been a 
United States citizen since approximately 1997 or 1998.6  
 
 Applicant has no contact with any extended family members in Taiwan. She has 
no assets there. All of her assets are in the United States. She and her siblings received 
an inheritance when her father passed away, which they gave to their mother. Applicant 
does not have any friends in Taiwan with whom she maintains contact. She is not 
eligible for any pension or government benefits. She is a member of a local church 
since 2006. She does not maintain any social contacts with any Taiwanese groups in 
the United States. She and her fiancée plan on being married in the United States, 
raising a family here, and being buried here. She expects her mother, sister, and a 
niece from Taiwan to attend her wedding. Applicant votes in U.S. elections.7  
 
 Applicant’s supervisor testified on her behalf. He has known her for about 
eighteen months. She has access to the company’s propriety information. He has never 
had a reason to question her ability to follow the rules and procedures. He has no 
reason to question her reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment. He recommends 
she be granted a security clearance.8  
 
 Applicant loves her adopted country. She moved to the United States because of 
the opportunities it offered to women. She would never dishonor her family by being 
disloyal to her adopted country.9  
 
 Applicant’s college professor provided a character letter on her behalf. He has 
known her for more than eight years and she took one of his courses as part of the 
4 Tr. 35-38. 
 
5 Tr. 39-42. 
 
6 Tr. 38-40. 
 
7 Tr. 42-51. 
 
8 Tr. 52-59. 
 
9 Tr. 20-21. 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
curriculum for her master’s degree. He is also a program manager for two military 
weapons systems and is familiar with the responsibilities that go along with holding a 
security clearance. He considers Applicant to be a trustworthy person of good character 
and a loyal citizen of the United States. He recommends her without reservation for a 
security clearance.10 
 
 Another supervisor provided a character letter on her behalf. He has worked 
closely with her since April 2009. Their company’s work involves the careful handling of 
sensitive material. Applicant has demonstrated that she can be trusted to work with, 
secure, and handle sensitive material. He further commented that Applicant is 
“Americanized and continues to build her personal and professional future here in the 
United States.”11  
 
 Another supervisor provided a character letter for Applicant. She is described as 
an outstanding developer. He is completely confident in her fidelity, loyalty, and 
patriotism to the United States and their company. Her work ethic is exceptional; she 
exercises initiative and is extremely reliable.12 
 
Taiwan13 
 
 In 1949, Taiwan was populated by refugees fleeing a civil war in China. That 
same year, Communists in mainland China established the People’s Republic of China 
(PRC), and a separate, independent government was established in Taiwan. The PRC 
does not recognize Taiwan, and insists there is only “one China.” 
 
 Taiwan is a multi-part democracy. Through nearly five decades of hard work and 
sound economic management, Taiwan has transformed itself from an underdeveloped, 
agricultural island to an economic power that is a leading producer of high-technology 
goods. On January 1, 1979, the United States formally recognized the PRC as the sole 
legal government of China. The U.S. also announced that it would maintain cultural, 
commercial, and other unofficial relations with the people on Taiwan. The Taiwan 
Relations Act (TRA) signed into law on April 10, 1979, created the legal authority for the 
conduct of unofficial relations with Taiwan. The American Institute in Taiwan, a private 
nonprofit corporation with offices in Taiwan, is authorized to issue visas, accept 
passport applications, and provide assistance to U.S. citizens in Taiwan. A counterpart 
organization was established by Taiwan. It has multiple offices in the U.S. 
 
 Maintaining strong, unofficial relations with Taiwan is a major U.S. goal. The U.S. 
does not support Taiwan independence, but does support Taiwan’s membership in 
10 AE A. 
 
11 AE B. 
 
12 AE C. 
 
13 All of the information about Taiwan is contained in Hearing Exhibit I.   
 
5 
 
 
appropriate international organizations such as the World Trade Organization (WTO), 
which it joined in 2002, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum, and the 
Asian Development Bank. In addition, the U.S. supports appropriate opportunities for 
Taiwan’s voice to be heard in organizations where its membership is not possible. 
 
 The TRA enshrines the U.S. commitment to help Taiwan maintain its defensive 
capability. The U.S. continues to sell appropriate defensive military equipment to 
Taiwan, in accordance with the TRA. President Bush publicly stated in 2001 that the 
United States would do “whatever it takes” to help Taiwan’s defense and approved a 
substantial sale of U.S. weapons to Taiwan, including destroyers, anti-submarine 
aircraft, and diesel submarines. The White House also was more accommodating to 
visits from Taiwan’s officials than previous U.S. Administrations. It permitted visits from 
Taiwan’s president in 2001 and 2003, and Taiwan’s vice president and defense minister 
in 2002. 
 
 Since then, there have been changes in U.S.-Taiwan relations. Taiwan’s new 
president disavowed key concepts long embraced by the opposing party - the “status 
quo” that there is only one China and Taiwan is part of it - and instead has adopted the 
more provocative position that Taiwan already “is an independent, sovereign country,” a 
“status quo” he promises to maintain. There was also a series of recent corruption 
scandals. 
 
 In response to Taiwan’s political developments, the U.S. Administration appears 
to have dialed back its earlier enthusiasm for supporting Taiwan’s initiatives. While still 
pursuing a close relationship with Taiwan, U.S. officials now appear to be balancing 
criticisms of the PRC military buildup opposing Taiwan with periodic cautions and 
warnings to the effect that U.S. support for Taiwan is not unconditional, but has limits. In 
January 2010, the current White House Administration notified Congress of its intent to 
sell various defense weapons to Taiwan. Taiwan is known to be an active collector of 
U.S. economic intelligence.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
6 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by an applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
 
7 
 
 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
  Applicant’s mother, brother, and sister are citizens and residents of Taiwan. 
Applicant maintains regular and frequent contact with her mother and sister. I find due 
to her close connection to her sister and mother that this contact could potentially create 
a heightened risk of foreign influence. She has an estranged relationship with her 
brother and limited contact with him. I find her contact is not close and does not create a 
security concern.  
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a 
citizen and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
 
8 
 
 
compromise of classified information. Applicant’s mother, sister, and brother are citizens 
and residents of Taiwan. The United States maintains close relations with Taiwan. 
Applicant talks to her mother and sister regularly, visits with them periodically, and 
anticipates them attending her wedding in the United States. Her relatives have no ties 
to the Taiwanese government. I do not find Applicant’s relationship with her mother and 
sister and her visits to Taiwan create a heightened security risk. There is no evidence 
Taiwan pressures its citizens to obtain classified information and it is highly unlikely 
Appellant would have to choose between loyalty to her family in Taiwan and the U.S. I 
find mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(a) applies. 
  
 The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that Applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the U.S., or there is a serious problem in the 
country with crime or terrorist. Taiwan has a close and friendly relationship with the U.S. 
and the violent crime rate is low. The U.S. is the main supplier of military hardware to 
Taiwan. Taiwan is an active collector of U.S. economic intelligence. However, there is 
no indication that they target or exploit their own citizens to obtain it. It is also unlikely 
that Applicant would be forced to choose between loyalty to the U.S. and her family in 
Taiwan. Based on Taiwan’s relationship with the U.S it is very unlikely that intelligence 
officials would attempt to pressure Applicant’s mother or sister to gather valuable or 
classified information from the U.S through Applicant. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 
8(b) applies.  
 
 Applicant is a devoted American citizen. She renounced her ties with Taiwan. 
She is firmly rooted in the United States. Her fiancé is a U.S. citizen. All of her assets 
are in the United States. She votes in the United States. She has established her life in 
the United States and except for her sister and mother her ties to Taiwan are minimal. 
She can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. The 
evidence supports the application of AG ¶ 8(b).  
 
 Applicant maintains a close relationship with her mother and sister living in 
Taiwan. Her relationships are not casual and infrequent. Therefore, mitigating condition 
AG¶ 8(c) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
9 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant received some of her 
education in the United States. She adopted the United States as her country and 
embraces the opportunities it has provided to her. All of her assets are located in the 
United States and she exercises her voting rights. She plans on marrying, in the next 
year, a United States citizen and raising a family here. She has proved that she can be 
trusted with sensitive company information and is a loyal employee. Her supervisors 
trust her and are completely confident in her loyalty and fidelity to the United States. Her 
only connections with Taiwan are with her mother and sister. Considering the nature of 
that country and her limited contacts there, I do not find they rise to the level of creating 
a heightened security risk. Overall the record evidence leaves me with no questions or 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for Foreign Influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and1.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
