 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01576 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an undated 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant received the SOR on June 10, 2010. He answered the SOR on June 
22, 2010, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on July 12, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 28, 2010, 
and the hearing was convened as scheduled on August 18, 2010. The Government 
 
2 
 
offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were received without objection. Applicant 
testified, called three witnesses, and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through M, which were 
admitted without objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional 
information. Applicant submitted a letter that was marked AE N and admitted without 
objection. Department Counsel’s memorandum is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 26, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since 2007. He served in the U.S. Air Force and received an 
Honorable Discharge. He seeks to retain a security clearance that he has held for more 
than 20 years without incident. He has a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree. He 
has been married for more than ten years. He has no children.1 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is $23,053 past-due on a mortgage that has a 
balance of $99,433. It also alleges that Applicant and his wife owe approximately 
$102,557 in unsecured credit card debt. Applicant admitted the past-due mortgage 
allegation, and he denied the unsecured credit card debt allegation. He also provided 
information in support of his request for a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant started investing in real estate in about 2000. Over the next several 
years, in addition to his home, he purchased five investment properties. He is handy 
and was able to do some of the renovations of the properties himself. Two of the 
properties were adjacent with several acres of land. Applicant hoped to develop the 
adjacent properties into a single property with a commercial application. He worked with 
a developer who was also a manager of the type of commercial property that Applicant 
sought to develop. Applicant met with the zoning commission on numerous occasions 
and also had out-of-pocket expenses for the planning of the project. The developer 
dropped out of the project in 2008. Applicant has put on hold, if not cancelled, any plans 
to develop the two properties.2 
 
 Applicant funded the purchase of his properties and their renovations through 
various means. All the investment properties were essentially 100% financed through 
first and second mortgages. His credit card balances increased substantially as he was 
renovating the properties. Applicant worked for a defense contactor from 1996 until he 
was laid off in 2007 after his employer lost a contract. He was out of work for about two 
to three months before he started working for his current employer. He took out a loan 
against his 401(k) at his former job. When he was laid off, he took a distribution of about 
$75,000 from the 401(k). That distribution created a tax liability that he has since 
resolved.3 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 40, 43, 78-79; GE 1; AE K. 
 
2 Tr. at 39, 50, 58-60; GE 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 43, 51, 74-76; GE 2.  
 
3 
 
 In October 2006, Applicant took out a second mortgage of $100,000 on one of 
the properties. He used the funds he received from the second mortgage and the 401(k) 
distribution to renovate the properties and for living expenses while he was 
unemployed.4  
 
 Applicant had periods when he did not have tenants in his properties. His wife’s 
parents rented one of the properties, but they both passed away. He and his wife 
provided financial support to her parents. His wife also did not work while she was 
caring for her mother.5 
 
 Applicant had a difficult time paying all the mortgages and his credit card debt. 
When he saw that he was not going to be able to pay all his debts on time, he notified 
his supervisor so that the information could be forwarded to the Department of Defense. 
Several credit card accounts became delinquent in about 2007, and Applicant stopped 
paying the second mortgage he obtained in 2006. Applicant hoped he could sell one or 
more of his properties to satisfy his debts. Around the same time period, the housing 
market collapsed, which made it difficult to sell the properties for what was owed on the 
mortgages.6  
 
 Applicant sold two of his investment properties. He settled at least two debts. He 
has brought current all his other credit card debt. In 2009, he reported in his response to 
interrogatories that he and his wife had ten credit card accounts with balances totaling 
$102,557. That figure did not include the settled accounts. He reported at the hearing 
that the balances on the ten accounts were $86,126. He submitted account statements 
from the ten accounts. The balances from the account statements were slightly lower 
than reported by Applicant. One of the accounts was several months past-due before 
Applicant brought it current within the last month.7 
 
 Applicant’s efforts to resolve the delinquent second mortgage was hindered when 
the bank that owned the mortgage went bankrupt. He and the bank that purchased the 
second mortgage agreed to settle the $99,433 owed on the second mortgage for 
$25,000. Applicant borrowed $25,000 from his 401(k) and paid the settlement on the 
second mortgage in August 2010. He is aware that the settlement could have tax 
consequences, and he is preparing for that possibility.8 
 
 Applicant has received financial counseling from multiple sources. He completed 
formal financial counseling on August 7, 2010. Applicant believes he has weathered his 
financial difficulties. He completed a net worth statement worksheet. He estimates the 
value of his and his wife’s assets at almost $1.6 million and his liabilities at about $1.15 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 44-46. 
 
5 Tr. at 40, 60-61, 85; GE 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 45, 56-57, 73; GE 2; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 36, 41, 46, 53, 70-72; GE -5; AE M. 
 
8 Tr. at 34-36, 47, 50, 63, 80-81; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE H, N. 
 
4 
 
million, leaving an estimated net worth of more than $435,000. His assets include his 
house and six additional properties. Three of the properties are undeveloped land, with 
no mortgages. The estimated value of the three properties totals $180,000. Two of the 
properties were inherited by his wife. Applicant and his wife own a 9-year-old vehicle 
and two 15-year-old vehicles. He has renters in his three investment houses. He has 
about $6,200 in his bank account and $25,000 remaining in his 401(k) after his $25,000 
loan. He has a positive cash flow after his monthly income and liabilities are calculated. 
He still hopes to sell at least one of the investment properties. He is convinced that he 
has sufficient assets to deal with any additional contingencies such as the loss of a 
tenant.9 
 
 Applicant’s witnesses and character letters attested to his superior job 
performance, integrity, honor, dependability, dedication, leadership, judgment, ethics, 
trustworthiness, professionalism, reliability, and honesty. The character references 
recommend him for a security clearance.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 37-42, 49-54, 63-66, 77-78, 83-86; GE 2-5; AE I, J, L. 
 
10 Tr. at 15-33; AE A-G. I give little weight to the references’ recommendations about Applicant’s 
security worthiness.  
 
5 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be indicated by 
excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-
income ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
 
 Applicant purchased more properties than he had the financial resources to 
manage. He used credit cards to partially fund the renovations of the properties. At one 
 
6 
 
point, he and his wife owed more than $100,000 in unsecured credit card debt. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise all the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant only recently resolved his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(a) is not yet 
applicable.  
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were mainly related to his real estate investments. 
His investments did not go as planned. A partner in a development dropped out; he had 
properties without renters for a period; he was unemployed for several months; and the 
housing market collapsed. Some of these factors were outside his control. To be fully 
applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. All investments carry risk, some more so than others. Applicant 
essentially was leveraging his investments when he completely financed his properties. 
Housing markets have soared in the past and collapsed, and they will likely do so again. 
Because of the inherent risk in Applicant’s investment strategy, I am unable to make a 
determination that he acted completely responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 
20(b) is partially applicable.  
 
 Applicant has received financial counseling. He has sold two properties and has 
renters in his other properties. He settled or brought current all his debts, including his 
IRS debt. He has a positive cash flow and assets that can be used in the event of any 
additional contingencies. His financial situation is far from perfect because he still has a 
large amount of debt. However, he has sufficiently managed his finances to convince 
me that there are clear indications that his financial problems are being resolved and 
are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable. Applicant does not receive full mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(d) because his mortgage debt was settled after the issuance of the SOR 
for one quarter of the amount he owed.  
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. Applicant overextended 
himself when he purchased more properties than he was able to manage. His 
unsecured debt soared and he was unable to pay the second mortgage on one of the 
properties. He settled that debt and brought all his other debts current. He sold two of 
his properties and has renters in his other properties. He has a positive cash flow and 
sufficient assets to address future contingencies. His finances do not constitute a 
security risk. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs1.a-1.b:  For Applicant 
 
   
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
