KEYWORD: Guideline C; Guideline B
DIGEST: Applicant’s brief relies on an interview summary prepared by the security clearance
investigator.  The quoted language is not a judgment by the investigator, it merely summarizes
Applicant’s assertion during the interview.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 09-01793.a1
DATE: 09/28.2010
DATE: September 28, 2010
In Re:
-------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-01793
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
James R. Fleisher, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 31, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and
1The Judge found in Applicant’s favor regarding SOR ¶ 1(c), a Guideline C allegation, which stated, “You
maintain your [European country] citizenship to protect your interest in social security benefits you earned while
employed [there].”  Accordingly, this allegation is not at issue in this appeal.  
2
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On June 15, 2010, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Philip S. Howe denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether certain of the Judge’s findings of
fact were based upon substantial record evidence; whether the Judge erred in his application of the
Guideline C disqualifying conditions (FPDC) and the Guideline B disqualifying conditions (FIDC);
whether the Judge erred in his application of the pertinent mitigating conditions; whether the Judge’s
whole-person analysis was in error; and whether the Judge’s adverse security clearance decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.1  Consistent with the following discussion, we affirm the
decision of the Judge.
Facts
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is an engineer working
for a Defense contractor.  He was born in Iran, but he moved to a European country in the late 1970s
to attend college.  He received a Bachelor’s degree and a Master’s degree from universities in that
country, where he lived from the late 1970s until the late 1990s.  He became a citizen of this
European country and earned retirement benefits due to his having worked there for ten years.  
He left this country in the late 1990s and moved to the U.S.  He became a U.S. citizen in the
late 2000s.  Applicant holds citizenship in Iran, the European country, and the U.S.  He also has
passports from these three countries.  He has traveled to Iran several times after moving to the U.S.
“Applicant traveled to Iran after he received the SOR . . . knowing that his travels to Iran and
possession of the Iranian passport were a security concern to the U.S. Government.”  Decision at
3.  
His wife is an Iranian citizen living with him in the U.S.  His mother is a citizen and resident
of Iran.  Applicant speaks to her over the telephone once a month.  He also has siblings who are
citizens of Iran.  One of them has a spouse who “may work” in an Iranian military office.  Decision
at 4.  He speaks with his siblings several times a year.
Iran and the U.S. have not had diplomatic relations since 1980.  Iran supports both
international terrorism and violent opposition to the Middle-East peace process.  It has intervened
in the internal affairs of Iraq.  The U.S. has designated Iran as the most active state sponsor of
terrorism.    
Discussion
Factual Sufficiency  
2We review the Judge’s findings of facts to determine if they are supported by substantial evidence–“such
relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary
evidence in the same record.”  Directive  ¶ E3.1.32.1
3See Note 1 above.  The only Guideline C allegations at issue in this appeal are the two which alleged that
Applicant exercises dual citizenship between the U.S. and Iran and the European country respectively insofar as he
possesses current passports from those countries.  
4Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 10(a)(1): “possession of a current foreign passport[.]”
5Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 10(a)(3): “accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such
benefits from a foreign country[.]”  
3
Applicant contends that certain of the Judge’s findings of fact are not based upon substantial
record evidence.2  Specifically, he challenges the Judge’s finding that he had traveled to Iran after
having received the SOR in his case.  We can find no record evidence of Applicant’s having traveled
to that country after July 31, 2009, the date of the SOR.  Therefore, Applicant is correct that the
Judge’s finding is in error.  However, Applicant’s last trip to Iran occurred after his security
clearance interview and after receipt of DOHA interrogatories, which should have placed him on
notice of security concern arising from his use of foreign passports.  Accordingly, we conclude that
this error by the Judge is harmless.  See ISCR Case No. 09-00629 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2010).
Applicant also challenges the Judge’s finding that he had never stated that he would
renounce his foreign citizenships.  Again, Applicant is correct.  He stated during the hearing that he
would renounce his European country citizenship should that be necessary.  Tr. at 64.  He also
advised the security clearance investigator that he would be willing to renounce both citizenships
if required.  Interview Summary at 3, 8, contained in Government Exhibit 2, Interrogatories, dated
April 15, 2009.  However, in light of the totality of the record evidence, we conclude that, even if
he had not made this factual error, the Judge’s ultimate decision would have been the same.
Therefore, this error is harmless.
Judge’s Treatment of the Disqualifying Conditions
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in concluding that the record evidence establishes
security concerns under Guideline C.3  Specifically, he argues that FPDC 10(a)(1)4 is not applicable
because he does not currently possess his foreign passports.  Rather, he had turned them over to his
facility security officer (FSO) prior to the hearing.  He also argues that FPDC 10(a)(3)5 is not
applicable because he has not actually received any retirement benefits from the European country.
However, Applicant’s arguments rely on an overly technical reading of the Directive.  The
disqualifying conditions are examples of the kind of circumstances that can give rise to security
concerns.  They are not to be considered exhaustive.  See ISCR Case No. 08-11788 at 3 (App. Bd.
Jul. 28, 2010).  In this case, Applicant’s citizenship in two foreign countries; his prior holding of
6In circumstances where a passport has been surrendered to a security official, Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 11(e),
a mitigating condition, may also apply, as in this case.  See our discussion under Judge’s Treatment of the Mitigating
Conditions below.  
7Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 11(e): “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security
authority, or otherwise invalidated[.]”  
4
foreign passports;6 his renewal of his Iranian passport at each opportunity, even after obtaining U.S.
citizenship; and his apparently vested right to future social security payments from a foreign country
constitute sufficient evidence of foreign preferences for the Judge to apply disqualifying conditions
under Guideline C.  
  Applicant also challenges the Judge’s conclusion that the Government had established
Guideline B disqualifying conditions.  However, the Iranian citizenship of his wife and the Iranian
citizenship and residence of several of Applicant’s close relatives, to include in-laws, is sufficient
to raise Foreign Influence concerns.  See ISCR Case No. 01-26893 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002) (There
is a rational connection between an applicant’s family ties in a country whose interests are adverse
to the United States and the risk that the applicant might fail to protect and safeguard classified
information.)  See also ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-
11463 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (In Foreign Influence cases, the nature of the foreign
government involved, the intelligence gathering history of that government, and the presence of
terrorist activity are important considerations that provide context for the other record evidence and
must be brought to bear on the Judge’s ultimate conclusions in the case.)  Accordingly, the Judge
properly concluded that Applicant’s circumstances raised concerns under Guidelines C and B, which
placed upon Applicant the burden of persuasion as to mitigation.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
Judge’s Treatment of the Mitigating Conditions
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in his application of the pertinent mitigating
conditions.  In his argument concerning Guideline C, Applicant discusses record evidence which
appears to raise the applicability of FPMC 11(e).7  He cites to testimony in which Applicant
discussed the circumstances surrounding his decision to turn his two foreign passports over to his
FSO.  Applicant testified that he was called by a DOHA Department Counsel (not the one who
actually represented the Government in this case), who advised Applicant to give the passports to
the FSO.  Tr. at 58.  In his brief, Applicant contends that he “followed [Department Counsel’s]
instructions exactly–he gave the passports to his FSO to hold–a fact which is now being held against
him.  The Judge criticized the Applicant at the hearing for failing to destroy the passports.”
Applicant Brief at 6.  
There is no other evidence in the record regarding this alleged advice, either in rebuttal or
explanation.  Moreover, Department Counsel did not provide a reply brief.  As it stands, therefore,
the record contains uncontradicted testimony that, in turning his passports over to his FSO,
Applicant was relying upon advice from a DOHA official.  Under the circumstances, we conclude
that the Judge erred in not extending favorable application to FPMC 11(e), insofar as Applicant, in
5
apparent good faith, surrendered his passport to his employer’s security authority.  On the other
hand, we find no error in the Judge’s treatment of the mitigating conditions under Guideline B.  
Other Issues
We note Applicant’s argument, toward the beginning of his brief, in which he quotes the
interview summary prepared by the security clearance investigator.  The quoted language states,
among other things, that Applicant has no preference for any foreign country over the U.S. and that
he has received no benefits by virtue of his status as a citizen of a foreign country or by virtue of his
foreign relatives.  To the extent that Applicant’s brief assumes that the quotations reflect the
judgement of the investigator, the brief is in error.  The quoted language merely summarizes what
Applicant told the investigator, not the investigator’s personal conclusions about Applicant’s
security issues.  We conclude that the Judge’s whole person analysis complies with the requirements
of Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2, in that the Judge considered the totality of Applicant’s conduct in
reaching his decision. See ISCR Case No. 08-02464 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 16, 2009); ISCR Case No.
05-03948 at 3-4 (App. Bd. May 21, 2007).
 After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett              
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
6
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
