 
 
 
1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05109 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in the Peoples Republic of China (PRC) and is a naturalized 
U.S. citizen who has lived in the United States since 1988. Her mother is a citizen and 
resident of PRC for part of the year. Her brother is a citizen and resident of the PRC. 
Applicant’s sister is a citizen and resident of PRC.  She visited the PRC twice in 2004 
for her father’s illness and funeral. Applicant has not mitigated the government’s 
security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
 
 
 
2
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on January 25, 2010, detailing security 
concerns under foreign influence. 
 
 On February 25, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. 
On March 30, 2010, I was assigned the case. On May 13, 2010, DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing scheduling the hearing, which was held on June 23, 2010. The government 
offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified 
on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through AA, which were admitted into 
evidence. Five witnesses also testified on her behalf. The record was held open until 
July 9, 2010 for additional documents. Applicant timely submitted a duplicate of AA and 
a letter of reference admitted as BB. On June 29, 2010, the transcript (Tr.) was 
received.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to the PRC. The attached documents were not admitted into 
evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HEx) I─XIII. The facts 
administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in ¶ 1.a-f of 
the SOR. She also provided additional information to support her request for a security 
clearance.  
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old-engineer who has worked for a defense contractor 
since July 1996, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. Her supervisor has daily 
contact with Applicant and has been impressed by Applicant’s exemplary work and her 
integrity. She produces quality work without missing a deadline. (AE E) Her dedication 
to her job and her loyalty over the years is without question. (AE I) Applicant is a kind, 
intelligent person who is always willing to put forth extra efforts to ensure tasks are 
completed on time, as well as, help others with tasks when needed. (AE B) Applicant is 
a team player. She greatly contributes to the success of her company by sharing 
technical knowledge. (AE U) She is highly respected by her peers. Applicant is 
described as a reliable, skilled and honest person. (AE G) Her supervisor is confident 
that she is qualified to obtain a secret-level security clearance. He also believes that her 
loyalty is to the U.S.  
 
Applicant was born and raised in the PRC and came to the U.S. in 1988. (GE 1) 
She attended a university in China. When she came to the United States, she studied at 
an American university and received a Master of Science degree (computer science) in 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG). 
 
 
 
3
1990. (AE R) In June 1998, she married her husband in the United States. She entered 
the U.S. on a visa (education) in 1988. (Tr. 79) She and her husband have two children.  
In June 2000, Applicant became a U.S. citizen (AE Q).  
 
 Applicant’s husband was born in the United States. He is a United States citizen. 
Applicant and her husband live together with their children, ages ten and seven, in their 
U.S. home. (AE S) Applicant also cares for her mother-in-law. (AE J) 
 
Applicant’s parents were born in China. Her father is deceased. (AE M) 
Applicant’s mother is a citizen of PRC but lives six months out of the year with Applicant 
in the United States. Applicant calls her mother once per week when her mother is in 
China. (GE 3) Applicant’s mother calls China on a regular basis to speak to her other 
children. (Tr. 90) She has a permanent resident card for the U.S. (AE N) Applicant’s 
mother has an apartment in China. She is 68 years old, retired, and receives a small 
Chinese pension from her accounting job. (AE K) Applicant’s mother visits her 
grandchildren when she visits China. Her last visit was from December 2009 until May 
2010. Her mother does not plan to return to China to live but will continue to visit if her 
children and grandchildren are there. She hopes to become a U.S. citizen. (AE K) 
Applicant’s mother does not yet possess sufficient English language abilities to apply for 
U.S. citizenship. (Tr. 85) 
 
 Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of the PRC. He works for an export-
import company. Applicant does not know the name of the company. She contacts her 
brother by telephone approximately “once a couple months.” (Tr. 64)  She saw him in 
2004 when she was in China visiting her parents. He visited her in the United States 
once, but Applicant does not remember the exact time. She believes it was 2003. (Tr. 
91) Applicant has petitioned the U.S. for her brother to live in the United States. (AE O) 
Applicant has no contact with her brother’s wife (sister-in-law). (GE 3) 
 
 Applicant sister is a citizen and resident of the PRC. At the hearing, Applicant 
testified that she does not speak to her sister often. During her investigative interview in 
June 2009, Applicant reported speaking to her sister four times per year. (GE 3) She 
recalls speaking to her sister about half a year ago. (Tr. 67) Applicant also petitioned the 
United States for her sister to live in the United States. She last saw her sister in 2004 
when she was in China to see her father. (Tr. 68) Applicant has no contact with her 
sister’s husband (brother-in-law). 
 
Since coming to the United States, Applicant traveled to the PRC to visit her 
father when he was gravely ill in 2004. Applicant’s visits were approximately two or 
three weeks in length. She stayed with her parents in their apartment in 2004. (Tr. 70) 
At her father’s funeral in 2004, Applicant saw her extended family. (Tr. 88) 
 
 Applicant and her husband own a home in the U.S., which is their residence. 
They own no property outside the U.S. (Tr.62) Applicant is active in her church. (Tr. 77) 
 
 
 
 
4
 Applicant volunteers in her community at schools and hospitals. She helps with 
Sunday school classes. (AE F) She is described as a very dedicated wife and mother. 
(AE C) Applicant’s colleagues note that she is always willing to put in whatever extra 
time and effort is needed to get the job done. (AE D) Family friends note that Applicant’s 
children are “top priority” and based on Applicant’s reputation for honesty, good 
judgment, and integrity she would not jeopardize her children’s future in the United 
States. (AE E) 
 
 Applicant’s last three employment appraisals are consistent in their praise of 
Applicant’s tremendous abilities and performance on the job. She exceeds expectations 
on all levels of performance. (AE X)  Applicant is flexible and her customer relations 
skills are excellent. (AE Y) Applicant is a valued member of her team. (AE Z) 
 
China 
 
The Peoples Republic of China (the PRC) is a repressive, totalitarian government 
with foreign policy goals antithetical to the U.S. However, the PRC has cooperated with 
the U.S. in the global war on terrorism in recent years. Its authoritarian government is 
dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. The PRC possesses large and 
increasingly sophisticated military forces, which include strategic nuclear weapons and 
missiles. In foreign relations, the PRC and the U.S. have been rivals since the Cold 
War, with particular disagreement on the status of Taiwan. The PRC continues to resist 
what it considers U.S. superpower dominance, despite improving economic relations. 
 
 The PRC has an active, effective intelligence service that targets U.S. 
intelligence and economic information, and operates against its citizens in the U.S. The 
PRC obtains access to restricted technology through industrial espionage and the PRC 
operates an aggressive clandestine effort to acquire additional technologies.  
 
China actively collects military, economic, and proprietary, industrial information 
about the United States for the following reasons: (1) its position as a global power; (2) 
its military, political, and economic investments in the Pacific Rim and Asia; and (3) its 
leading role in the development of advanced technology that China desires for 
economic growth. China’s active intelligence gathering programs focus on sensitive and 
protected U.S. technologies. The United States is its second most targeted intelligence 
source. There is evidence that enterprise-directed espionage may be growing in 
importance and taking on less random and more targeted form.  
 
The PRC has a poor record with respect to human rights, suppresses political 
dissent, and its practices include arbitrary arrest and detention, forced confessions, 
torture, and mistreatment of prisoners. PRC authorities monitor telephone 
conversations, e-mail, text messaging, and Internet communication, open and censor 
mail, monitor and enter residences and offices to gain access to computers, telephones, 
and fax machines. All hotels have a sizable internal security presence and hotel 
guestrooms are sometimes bugged and searched for sensitive or proprietary material. 
 
 
 
 
5
 Under PRC law, citizens who become naturalized citizens of other countries lose 
their PRC citizenship. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
 
 
6
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 AG & 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual=s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual=s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(c) counterintelligence information, that may be classified, indicates that 
the individual=s access to protected information may involve unacceptable 
risk to national security; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of their 
citizenship status, if the potential for adverse foreign influence or duress 
exists; 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation;   
 
 
 
 
7
(f) failure to report, when required, association with foreign national; 
 
(g) unauthorized association with a suspected or known agent, associate, 
or employee of a foreign intelligence service; 
 
(h) indications that representatives or nations from a foreign country are 
acting to increase the vulnerability of the individual to possible future 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; [and] 
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling outside the U.S., which may make 
the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion by a foreign 
person, group, government, or country.  
 
 Applicant’s mother, brother, sister and their spouses are citizens and residents of 
the PRC.  Applicant maintains contact with her brother by telephone usually once every 
month. Although, she acknowledged that it could be less. Her brother visited Applicant 
in the United States in 2003. She also maintains contact with her sister by phone 
perhaps four times a year. Applicant went to China twice in 2004 when her father was 
gravely ill. She stayed in her family’s apartment. Applicant’s mother lives with Applicant 
approximately six months out of a year. Her mother has a permanent resident card for 
the United States and hopes to become a U.S. citizen. Her mother lives in China when 
she is not living with Applicant. 
 
 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an Applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that relative, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States.  
 
However, the complicated, competitive relationship of the PRC with the United 
States places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to 
demonstrate that her relationship with her relatives living in the PRC and her relatives in 
the U.S. with close relationships to family members living in the PRC does not pose a 
security risk and she is not in a position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the 
United States and her family living in the PRC.2 With its mixed human rights record, and 
                                                          
2 The Appeal Board has articulated a “heightened risk” or “very heavy burden” in People’s 
Republic of China (PRC) cases because of that country’s relationship to the United States and aggressive 
intelligence collection efforts. See ISCR Case No. 06-24575 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007) (articulating 
 
 
 
8
political, economic and military rivalry with the United States, it is conceivable that the 
PRC would target any PRC citizen or former citizen living in the United States in an 
attempt to gather valuable information from the United States. 
 
China is a country whose human rights record is dismal and the potential for 
abuse is high. Applicant’s familial relationship with citizens and residents of China 
creates a heightened risk of potential exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure 
or coercion. There is evidence that the PRC intelligence operatives seek classified or 
economic information from U.S. businesses and/or government agencies. Applicant’s 
connections to her family members create a potential conflict of interest because these 
relationships are sufficiently close to raise a possible security concern about her desire 
to help these relatives living in the PRC by providing classified information.  
 
Applicant has travelled to the PRC on two occasions in 2004 to visit her gravely 
ill father who is now deceased. She has not visited since that time.  
 
 Having considered all of the Foreign Influence disqualifying conditions, applicable 
conditions that could raise a security concern, AG && 7(a), 7(b) and 7(d) apply.  
 
AG & 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual=s sense of 
loyalty or obligations to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority;  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
“very heavy burden” standard and reversing grant of clearance in case involving family members living in 
the PRC); ISCR Case No. 07-02485 at 4-5 (App. Bd. May 9, 2008); ISCR Case No. 07-02485 at 4-5 
(App. Bd. May 9, 2008). 
 
 
 
9
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; [and] 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
 AG & 8(a) and (c) do not apply to Applicant’s mother and brother. Applicant has a 
close relationship with her mother and brother. She maintains phone contact with her 
sister at least four times a year and telephone contact with her brother about six times 
per year. She has travelled to China on three occasions since coming to the U.S. in 
1988. Her most recent visit was in 2004. Applicant has a husband and two young 
children in the United States. but has an emotional bond with her family in China. 
Applicant is a naturalized citizen; however, there is a heightened risk due to her family 
ties to China. Unfortunately, China is a country that causes concern in the area of 
potential exploitation and coercion which makes Applicant vulnerable. Her contact with 
her family cannot be construed as minimal. This creates a potential conflict of interest.    
 Applicant’s relationship with her mother, brother, and sister, and the nature of the 
PRC Government and its complicated and sometimes contentious relationship to the 
United States, all weigh against mitigating security concerns. See ADP Case No. 05-
17812 at 2, 3 n.2 (App. Bd. Jun. 11, 2007) (finding contacts with siblings in PRC “once 
every two or three months” not to be casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-12500 
at 2, 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s parents and sisters a 
total of about 20 times per year not casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 
2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings once every four 
or five months not casual and infrequent). Here, Applicant’s contact with her family, 
especially her mother when she is in China, is not casual or infrequent. 
 Applicant’s close relationship with her husband and two children and her strong 
connections to the United States partially mitigate foreign interest security concerns 
under 8(b). Her children are U.S. citizens who reside in the U.S. Her husband is a U.S. 
citizen. She and her husband have lived in the U.S. since 1988. Applicant has worked 
for her government contractor with dedication and distinction. She has substantial 
property and investments in the United States. She has no desire to return to live in the 
PRC. She is a loyal, dedicated U.S. citizen. Although Applicant has “such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., [she] can be expected to resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest” the foreign influence concern related 
to PRC is too great under all the facts and circumstances.   
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Protection of our national security is of paramount concern. Security clearance 
decisions are not intended to assign guilt or to impose further punishment for past 
transgressions. Rather, the objective of the adjudicative process is the fair-minded, 
 
 
 
10
commonsense assessment of a person=s trustworthiness and fitness for access to 
classified information. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole-person 
concept in evaluating applicant=s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national 
interests. I considered the totality of applicant’s family ties to the PRC and the heavy 
burden an Applicant carries when she has family members in a foreign country.  
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning the PRC must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in the PRC. The PRC has a mixed to poor human rights record. 
The PRC is one of the most aggressive nations in the collection of U.S. intelligence and 
sensitive economic information.  
 
Applicant has lived in the United States since 1988. She became a U.S. citizen in 
2000. Her husband and her two children live with her in the U.S. She has worked for a 
defense contractor for a number of years. She is described as reliable and honest. She 
performs her job in an exemplary manner. She has substantial property and 
connections to the U.S. She was candid and credible in describing a loyalty to the U.S. 
Her employer highly recommends the approval of her security clearance. She is a kind 
and caring wife, daughter, and mother.   
 
Unfortunately, the totality of the circumstances in this case does not weigh in 
favor of Applicant. Given Applicant’s family ties to her mother and her brother in the 
PRC, and the frequency of her contacts with her mother, I cannot find that there is not a 
heightened risk with respect to the PRC. Applicant presents a difficult position given the 
fact that her family is in the PRC. 
 
After carefully weighing the evidence of her connections to PRC, and to the 
United States, I conclude Applicant has not carried her burden of fully mitigating the 
foreign influence security concerns. I take this position based on the law, as set forth in 
 
 
 
11
Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
whole-person factors”3 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude she is not eligible for access to classified 
information. 
 
I have carefully weighed the evidence in favor of Applicant against the 
government=s concerns about Applicant=s ability to protect classified information. I find 
that there is potential for Applicant to be pressured, coerced, or exploited because her 
mother, brother and sister live in the PRC. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the foreign influence 
security concerns. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________ 
NOREEN A. LYNCH 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
3See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
