 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08489 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 15, 2010 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
  
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a long history of financial indebtedness. She currently has 27 
delinquent debts, and has failed to submit proof that any of them are satisfied. In 
addition, she falsified information on her Security Clearance Application. She has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 5, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
F, Financial Considerations; and E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 8, 2010, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s written case on May 20, 2010. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was received by Applicant on June 4, 2010. She was afforded a 30-
day opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the security concerns. As of July 4, 2010, she had not responded. The case was 
assigned to me on August 19, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is a high-school 
graduate and has worked as a contractor since July 2009. She was married in 
September 1988, but divorced in June 2005. She did not list any children on her 
Security Clearance Application (SCA) dated July 31, 2009. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges 27 delinquent debts totaling $87,168, all of which were 
substantiated by the credit reports in the record. Applicant admitted 21 debts alleged in 
SOR totaling $77,302. Applicant’s debts are as follows: 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.a., to a creditor on a judgment filed 
against her in the approximate amount of $873. Applicant admits this debt in her answer 
to the SOR. This debt is substantiated in a credit report dated August 26, 2009, and 
Applicant’s answers to the Interrogatories. (Item 6; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.b., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $199. Applicant denies this debt, without explanation, in her 
answer to the SOR. This debt is substantiated in the credit reports dated February 13, 
2010, and August 26, 2009. (Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.c., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $4,547. Applicant admits this debt in her answer to the SOR. 
This debt is substantiated in the credit reports dated February 13, 2010, and August 26, 
2009. (Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.d., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $5,707. Applicant admits this debt in her answer to the SOR. 
This debt is substantiated in the credit reports dated February 13, 2010, and August 26, 
2009. (Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.e., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $1,233. Applicant admits this debt in her answer to the SOR. 
This debt is substantiated in the credit reports dated February 13, 2010, and August 26, 
2009. (Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.f., on an account that has been 
charged off in the approximate amount of $6,779. Applicant admits this debt in her 
answer to the SOR. This debt is substantiated in the credit reports dated February 13, 
2010, and August 26, 2009. (Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.g., on an account that has been 
charged off in the approximate amount of $2,166. Applicant admits this debt in her 
answer to the SOR. This debt is substantiated in the credit report dated August 26, 
2009. (Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.h., on an account that has been 
charged off in the approximate amount of $4,711. Applicant admits this debt in her 
answer to the SOR. This debt is substantiated in the credit report dated August 26, 
2009. (Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.i., on an account that has been 
charged off in the approximate amount of $376. Applicant admits this debt in her answer 
to the SOR. This debt is substantiated in the credit reports dated February 13, 2010, 
and August 26, 2009. (Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.j., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $5,175. Applicant admits this debt in her answer to the SOR. 
This debt is substantiated in the credit reports dated February 13, 2010, and August 26, 
2009. (Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.k., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $1,071. Applicant admits this debt in her answer to the SOR. 
This debt is substantiated in the credit reports dated February 13, 2010, and August 26, 
2009. (Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.l., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $815. Applicant admits this debt in her answer to the SOR. This 
debt is substantiated in the credit reports dated February 13, 2010, and August 26, 
2009. (Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.m., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $881. Applicant admits this debt in her answer to the SOR. This 
debt is substantiated in the credit reports dated February 13, 2010, and August 26, 
2009. (Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.n., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $923. Applicant admits this debt in her answer to the SOR. This 
debt is substantiated in the credit reports dated February 13, 2010, and August 26, 
2009. (Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.o., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $3,185. Applicant admits this debt in her answer to the SOR. 
 
4 
 
This debt is substantiated in the credit reports dated February 13, 2010, and August 26, 
2009. (Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.p., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $3,266. Applicant denies this debt, without explanation, in her 
answer to the SOR. This debt is substantiated in the credit reports dated February 13, 
2010, and August 26, 2009. (Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.q., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $306. Applicant neither admits nor denies this debt in her 
answer to the SOR. This debt is substantiated in the credit reports dated February 13, 
2010, and August 26, 2009. (Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.r., on a mortgage account that was 
past due in the approximate amount of $1,424. Applicant admits this debt in her answer 
to the SOR. This debt is substantiated in the credit reports dated February 13, 2010, 
and August 26, 2009. (Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.s., on an account that has been 
charged off in the approximate amount of $5,945. Applicant admits this debt in her 
answer to the SOR. This debt is substantiated in the credit reports dated February 13, 
2010, and August 26, 2009. (Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.t., on an account that has been 
charged off in the approximate amount of $6,320. Applicant admits this debt in her 
answer to the SOR. This debt is substantiated in the credit report dated August 26, 
2009. (Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.u., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $67. Applicant denies this debt, without explanation, in her 
answer to the SOR. This debt is substantiated in the credit report dated August 26, 
2009. (Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.v., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $12,141. Applicant admits this debt in her answer to the SOR. 
This debt is substantiated in the credit report dated August 26, 2009. (Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.w., on a delinquent student loan 
account in the approximate amount of $6,234. Applicant denies this debt, without 
explanation, in her answer to the SOR. This debt is substantiated in the credit report 
dated August 26, 2009. (Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.x., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $3,472. Applicant admits this debt in her answer to the SOR. 
This debt is substantiated in the credit report dated August 26, 2009. (Item 8.) 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.y., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $7,405. Applicant admits this debt in her answer to the SOR. 
This debt is substantiated in the credit report dated August 26, 2009. (Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.z., on a collections account in the 
approximate amount of $1,857. Applicant admits this debt in her answer to the SOR. 
This debt is substantiated in the credit report dated August 26, 2009. (Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant is indebted, as stated in allegation 1.a.a., on a collections account in 
the approximate amount of $100. Applicant denies this debt, without explanation, in her 
answer to the SOR. This debt is substantiated in the credit report dated August 26, 
2009. (Item 8.) 
 
 Applicant’s personal financial statement indicates she has a negative balance of  
-$132.53 after her monthly expenses have been met. She blames her financial 
problems on her period of unemployment from March 2006 through July 2006. In her 
Answers to the Interrogatories the Government sent her she indicated “I have finally 
found employment to cover my expenses and will [not legible] to back up in good 
standing.” She failed to present any evidence that she has followed through on this 
promise. (Item 6.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 On July 31, 2009, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA). 
On that Application, she was asked: “Section 22. Police Record e. Have you EVER 
been charged with any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?” Applicant answered this 
question “No.” However, the record shows that on or about September 24, 2000, 
Applicant was charged with Possession of a Controlled Substance. She admitted that 
she was charged with this offense in her Answers to the Interrogatories when she stated 
“No, that charge was dismissed because the medication belong [sic] to my husband.” 
She explained that on this occasion, there was an argument that broke out in an 
apartment she was visiting. The police were called. The police asked to look in 
Applicant’s purse and found prescription drugs. She was taken to jail, but eventually the 
charges were dropped. (Item 1; Item 6.) 
 
 Applicant was also asked: “Section 26: Financial Record e. Have you had a 
judgment entered against you? f. Have you defaulted on any type of loan? g. Have you 
had bills turned over to a collection agency? h. Have you had any account or credit card 
suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed? m. Have you been 
over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)? n. Are you currently over 90 days delinquent 
on any debt(s)?”Applicant answered all of the financial questions “No.” Clearly, the 
answers to these questions should have been “Yes,” as she has numerous delinquent 
accounts and the judgment, set out above under Financial Considerations. (Item 1; Item 
6; Item 7; Item 8.) 
 
 
6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines. (AG.) In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has accumulated a number of delinquent debts and is unable or 
unwilling to pay her obligations. Her financial problems have been ongoing since 2006, 
without resolution. To date, Applicant has been unable to satisfy any of her past-due 
accounts. The evidence supports application of disqualifying conditions AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c). 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
8 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debts are current and on-going, as evidenced by the credit reports. 
She has not presented evidence that she has taken any actions on her outstanding 
debt. Her failure to address her debts fails to show good judgment. While her debts may 
be attributable to a period of unemployment in March through July of 2006, she has not 
addressed her debts in a responsible manner since finding a new job. She has not 
received counseling for her financial problems and she does not appear to have her 
financial delinquencies under control. Finally, Applicant has not contested her 
outstanding debts. None of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for the Personal Conduct guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 Applicant failed to list her debts and her drug related charges on her 2009 SCA in 
Sections 22 and 26. She clearly knew she had debts that had not been resolved. Yet, 
she chose not to include the debts on the SCA. Further, she was aware that she had 
been arrested on a drug charge, but that the charge was later dismissed. However, she 
failed to disclose her arrest. This behavior indicates questionable judgment and 
untrustworthiness. 
  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
 
9 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 After considering the mitigating conditions outlined above in AG ¶ 17, it is 
apparent that none of them apply. Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to 
correct her falsification or concealment. She provided no information that indicates she 
was ill-advised in completing her SF 86. Falsifying information is a serious offense and 
Applicant has done nothing to show that similar lapses in judgment are unlikely to recur. 
Further, she fails to take responsibility for her actions. She has not provided information 
in this record to show that she has met her burden of proof for her personal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
10 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but warrant additional comment. I 
considered Applicant’s job loss in 2006, and her divorce. However, Applicant is 55 years 
old. She is clearly aware of the need to be financially responsible. She accumulated 
substantial debts and has not shown that she has a plan to resolve her financial 
situation. An applicant is not required to be debt-free, or establish that she paid every 
debt. But she must demonstrate that she has established a plan to resolve her debts 
and that she is taking action to implement that plan. Here, Applicant has not established 
such a plan, and remains indebted for $87,168. In addition, she has not been forthright 
with the Government on her SCA.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g:   Against Applicant  
Subparagraphs 1.h:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.m:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.n:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.o:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.p:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.q:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.r:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.s:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.t:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.u:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.v:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.w:   Against Applicant 
 
11 
 
Subparagraphs 1.x:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.y:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.z:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a.:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.b:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
