 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-04509 
  ) 
 SSN: )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco J. Mendez, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
J, Criminal Conduct and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 16, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 3, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 17, 2010. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on May 19, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
June 16, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, which were 
admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified but did not offer any exhibits. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 22, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she admitted ¶ 1.a and denied ¶¶ 1.b and 2.a -
2.e. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34 years old. She is has been married for nine years and has one 
child. Since 2008, she has worked as program support specialist for a defense 
contractor. From 2008 until February 2009, she also worked part-time at a delivery 
company as a shift supervisor. She has an associate’s degree. She served on active 
duty in the Army as an enlisted member from 1995 until 2001. She was discharged with 
an honorable discharge at the pay grade of E-4. She has held a secret clearance since 
2008.1   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) being arrested, charged and 
pleading guilty to a felony count of embezzlement in February 2009 (admitted); (2) 
making false statements in violation of 18 United States Code § 1001 to Office of 
Personal Management (OPM) investigators about her involvement with thefts from the 
delivery company where she worked and about her being fired from the company 
(denied); (3) being fired from the delivery company because of her involvement with the 
thefts of electronics from the delivery company where she worked (denied); and, (4) 
making false statements to OPM investigators about whether she was fired or resigned 
from the delivery company, whether she participated in the electronics thefts in question 
(two different statements), and whether she failed to report her Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
filing and resulting discharge in November 2009 to her defense contractor employer 
(denied). 
  
 In December 2008, the delivery company where Applicant worked part-time was 
experiencing internal thefts of certain electronic devices. The losses were over $50,000. 
All the thefts were occurring at one particular warehouse. The company’s loss 
prevention investigator called upon local law enforcement to assist with the 
investigation. Law enforcement was able to contact several purchasers of the stolen 
electronics (through registration information from the products manufacturer) nine of 
whom revealed that they bought their items from the same seller on the same internet-
based shopping network. The seller in each case was the Applicant. The investigators 
also discovered that the Applicant worked as a part-time supervisor at the warehouse 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6, 43-45. 
 
 
3 
 
 
where the electronic devices were stolen, and she was working at the time all but one 
theft took place. With this information, Applicant was confronted on February 3, 2009, 
by the company’s loss prevention investigator and she admitted to being involved with 
the theft of five electronic devices from her employer’s facility. She was allowed to 
resign her position for “personal reasons”. She wrote out one statement describing her 
actions related to the thefts and a second statement tendering her resignation.2  
 
 On February 20, 2009, Applicant was arrested and charged with five felony 
counts of embezzlement of the electronic devices from her former employer. She 
entered a plea agreement where she would plead guilty to one count of embezzlement 
and the other four counts would not be pursued by the prosecution. The plea was 
accepted and on November 5, 2009, she was sentenced to 12 months incarceration 
(suspended); two years supervised probation requiring her good behavior; and payment 
of $5,000 in restitution.3 Applicant has paid a portion of her restitution and remains on 
probation.4  
 
 Applicant met twice with OPM investigators. The first time was on May 14, 2009, 
and in an interview that was summarized in writing and later attested to as accurate, 
Applicant denied being involved in any way with the thefts of the five electronic devices. 
She also stated she was asked to resign her position at the shipping company.5 On 
November 18, 2009, Applicant signed a sworn affidavit stating that she pled guilty to the 
one count of embezzlement because of her attorney’s advice. She continued to deny 
participating in the actual thefts or even having knowledge of them.6 She maintained 
this position during her testimony at the hearing.7  
 
 Applicant’s credit report reveals that she filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy action in 
July 2009 and her debts were discharged in November 2009.8 Applicant testified that 
she notified her facility security officer (FSO) about the bankruptcy action.9 There is no 
evidence in the record contradicting this assertion by the Applicant.10  
                                                          
2 GE 2, pp. 2-3, GE 10. 
 
3 GE 3-5. 
 
4 Tr. at 72. 
 
5 GE 6. 
 
6 GE 7. 
 
7 Tr. at 71. 
 
8 GE 8. 
 
9 Tr. at 64-68. 
 
10 There was no security clearance application (SF-86 or e-QIP) offered by the Government; See Tr. at 
83-84. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
Applicant pled guilty to a felony count of embezzlement from her employer and 
she remains on probation for that crime. Additionally, Applicant gave false information to 
government investigators about the extent of her involvement with the thefts at issue. 
For a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 to occur, the false statement to the Government 
must be material. The Supreme Court defined “materiality” in United States v. Gaudin, 
515 U.S. 506, 512 (1995), as a statement having a “natural tendency to influence, or 
[be] capable of influencing, the decision making body to which it is addressed.” See also 
United States v. McLaughlin, 386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d Cir. 2004). Making a false 
statement under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious crime, a felony (the maximum potential 
sentence includes confinement for five years and a fine). I find that the above 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for Criminal Conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
   
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
 
6 
 
 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 Applicant’s criminal conduct was recent and happened under such 
circumstances that show she violated her employer’s trust by stealing electronic items 
she was entrusted with protecting. Applicant’s behavior casts doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply. Although Applicant 
minimized her involvement in the thefts (by saying she was not involved with the thefts 
and knew nothing about them) when she gave statements to OPM, her voluntary and 
knowing guilty plea to embezzling the electronic items establishes that she committed 
the crime. AG ¶ 32(c) does not apply. Sufficient time has not passed to determine 
whether Applicant’s rehabilitation has been successful particularly since she is still on 
probation. AG ¶ 32(d) does not apply. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and  
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information: 
 
7 
 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace;  
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and, 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources 
Applicant was allowed to resign her position (as opposed to being fired as the 
language of SOR ¶ 2.a states) once it was learned that she was involved with the thefts 
of merchandise. Her actions demonstrate dishonesty toward her employer and 
questionable judgment. AG ¶ 16(d) applies to SOR ¶ 2.a. 
SOR ¶ 2.b (alleging Applicant made a false statement to investigators by stating 
she resigned from her job rather than telling the investigator she was fired) is not 
factually supported by the evidence. The delivery company’s own document supports 
the characterization that Applicant was allowed to resign. Although Applicant’s thefts 
prompted management to seek her resignation and it is most probable had she not 
resigned she would have been fired, nevertheless her description to the OPM 
investigators that she resigned her position was factually accurate. AG ¶ 16(b) does not 
apply to SOR ¶ 2.b. 
Applicant’s initial admissions to the loss prevention investigator and her 
subsequent guilty plea to embezzling the electronic devices directly contradict her two 
statements to the OPM investigator who queried her on her involvement with the thefts. 
AG ¶ 16(b) applies to SOR ¶¶ 2.c and 2.d. 
Applicant testified that she informed her FSO about her 2009 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy action. There is no other evidence in the record either supporting or 
contradicting Applicant. AG ¶ 16(b) does not apply to SOR ¶ 2.e. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 Applicant’s thefts against her former employer and her false statements to 
investigators were multiple, recent, and involve the element of dishonesty. Her actions 
cast doubt on her overall reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) 
does not apply.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered Applicant’s 
current position, her honorable service in the Army, and her partial payment of 
restitution. However, I also considered that Applicant’s actions involved aspects of 
dishonesty (embezzlement and false statements). Applicant was in a position of trust 
with her former employer and abused that trust. Someone who abuses an employer’s 
trust is not the type of person who can be trusted with classified information. Applicant 
failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline J, 
Criminal Conduct and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
