 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-08490 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on July 23, 2009. On April 6, 
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 12, 2010; answered it on April 26, 2010; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
 
2 
 
 
April 28, 2010. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 5, 2010, and the 
case was assigned to me on May 11, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 
24, 2010, scheduling the hearing for June 25, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through G, which 
were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until July 23, 2010, to enable 
Applicant to submit additional evidence. He did not submit any additional evidence. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on July 7, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges 26 delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.z). It also alleges Applicant 
failed to file state income tax returns for tax years 2004-2007 (SOR ¶ 1.aa), and he 
received a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in February 1997 (SOR ¶ 1.ab). In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.h-1.m, 1.p-1.s, 1.v, 
1.w, 1.z, and 1.ab. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in 
my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old reproduction clerk employed by a defense contractor 
since May 2009. He does not have a security clearance.  
 
Applicant filed a Chapter 7 petition for bankruptcy in October 1996 and received 
a discharge in February 1997. The record does not reflect the nature or amount of debts 
that were discharged. (GX 4.) 
 
Applicant has never married, but he has three children by two different women. 
Until recently, he was obligated to pay $461 per month for two children, but he is no 
longer required to pay child support for these two children because they are over the 
age of 18. However, he owes an arrearage for these two children. He is obligated to pay 
$426 per month for the third child, and he is in arrears on these payments. (AX A; Tr. 
62). His child support arrearages for all three children total about $12,712. (AX B; AX 
C.) The child-support judgments and liens alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.p-1.s, and 1.z 
are for the arrearages. (GX 3 at 1-3, 6-8.) His current child-support obligation and 
payments on the arrearage are being automatically withheld from his pay. (Answer to 
SOR; AX D.) 
 
Applicant lived in an apartment from September 2003 to March 2007. His lease 
renewed automatically on a year-to-year basis unless he gave one month’s notice of 
intent to vacate. Applicant misunderstood the lease terms, thinking the lease became a 
month-to-month lease after the first year. He decided to live with his father after his 
father had a heart attack. (Tr. 36.) He gave less than a month’s notice to the landlord, 
moved out, and agreed to pay the remainder of the month’s rent. The landlord obtained 
the judgments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.g, 1.t, and 1.u for the rent due for each month 
remaining on the lease. (Answer to SOR; GX 3 at 9-17.) The judgments are unsatisfied. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant testified that his landlord orally told him that he would have no further 
obligation if he paid the current month’s rent in full. Applicant found out about the 
judgments when he saw them on his credit report. He called his former landlord and 
was met with a “whole different attitude,” holding him responsible for breaking his lease. 
(Tr. 38-39.) Applicant believes the judgments are unfair, but he has not taken any action 
to contest or resolve them. (Tr. 47.) 
 
The delinquent medical bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j and the cable service bills 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 1.v, and 1.w are unpaid. Applicant testified that he cannot pay 
these bills until his federal tax debt and child-support arrearages are resolved. (Tr. 34-
36.) His take-home pay is about $280 per week. His monthly expenses usually exceed 
his income by $175-200 per month. (Tr. 64; GX 2 at 4.)  
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement dated March 1, 2010 reflects rent 
payments of $450 per month, even though he lives with his father. He testified his rent 
payments are not consistent, because he sometimes pays the rent on his father’s 
apartment, and sometimes pays part of the utility bill when his father’s income falls 
short. (Tr. 76.) 
 
Applicant’s federal tax refund for tax year 2009 was applied to taxes owed for tax 
years 2005 and 2007. His debt for 2007 is now satisfied, but he still owes $158.65 for 
2005. (AX F.) His federal income tax debt is not alleged in the SOR. 
 
Applicant incurred the student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m by attending 
a technical college at night for about eight months. He dropped out when his driver’s 
license was suspended because of the child-support arrearages. The student loans 
have not been resolved. (GX 1 at 12; Tr. 39-42.) 
 
 Applicant testified the telephone bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.n was an account that his 
girlfriend opened in his name. He acknowledged at the hearing that he is obligated to 
pay it, but this debt is not resolved. (Tr. 47-48.) 
 
 The delinquent car loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.o and the judgment in SOR ¶ 1.y 
appear to be related to the same debt. Applicant provided evidence that the debt was 
paid, and the car title was released to him. (Answer to SOR; AX E; Tr. 53-55.)  
 
 The bank overdraft alleged in SOR ¶ 1.x occurred when Applicant lost his bank 
card, someone else withdrew all the funds from his account without his knowledge, and 
he was charged an overdraft fee for a check he wrote on the overdrawn account. He 
has not paid the debt because he believes the bank was at fault for allowing the 
fraudulent withdrawals from his account. He testified he disputed the debt, but he 
submitted no documentation of the dispute. (Tr. 50-51.) 
 
 The summary of Applicant’s interview with a security investigator in October 2009 
indicates that he told the investigator he was making payments on a federal tax debt for 
tax years 2004-2007, but that, “After subject finishes paying his federal tax debt, subject 
 
4 
 
 
will have to file his [redacted] state taxes for the same years and may owe state tax as 
well.” (GX 2 at 7.) At the hearing, Applicant admitted he had been “kind of negligent with 
filing” his tax returns. (Tr. 40.) However, he recanted his admission to the investigator 
and denied the allegation (SOR ¶ 1.aa) that he failed to file state income tax returns for 
tax years 2004-2007. He testified that he had copies of his returns at home and would 
provide them. (Tr. 57, 77.) However, he did not submit any evidence during the period 
that the record remained open. 
 
 Applicant testified that he has not sought consumer credit counseling because he 
has little spare time after working at his job, caring for his father, and making sure his 
children are cared for. (Tr. 69.) He made a few calls to creditors but has not negotiated 
any payment arrangements. (Tr. 70.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in 
conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The evidence raises the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”), AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not 
meeting financial obligations”), AG ¶ 19(e) (“consistent spending beyond one=s means, 
which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis”), and AG ¶ 19(g) (“failure to file 
annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of 
the same”). Since the Government produced substantial evidence to raise these 
disqualifying conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
 
6 
 
 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing, 
numerous, and did not occur under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. This mitigating condition is not 
established because Applicant’s financial problems are the result of his voluntary 
decisions to father three children and break his lease. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not met because Applicant has not sought or received financial 
counseling since his bankruptcy discharge in February 1997. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). Applicant is making regular payments, 
albeit through an involuntary deduction from his pay, on his child-support arrearage that 
is the basis for SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, and 1.p-1.s, and 1.z. He resolved the car loan 
underlying the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.o and 1.y. Although he recanted his admission 
to a security investigator that he had not filed state income taxes and promised to 
provide copies of his tax returns, he failed to submit any evidence regarding his state 
taxes. I conclude this mitigating condition is applicable for the delinquent debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.o-1.s, 1.y, and 1.z, but not for the remaining debts alleged in the 
SOR. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. 
 
 To his credit, Applicant resolved the delinquent car loan and is slowly making 
progress in discharging the child-support arrearage and the federal income tax debt, but 
he has no viable plan to resolve his remaining delinquent debts. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating all the 
evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I conclude he has not 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.j-1.n:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.o-1.s:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.t-1.x:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.y-1.z:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.aa-1.ab:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
