1
 
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-04651
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On November 2, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In a response dated December 2, 2009, Applicant admitted all 32 allegations
raised under Guideline F without elaboration and requested an administrative
determination. On December 30, 2009, Department Counsel submitted a File of
Relevant Material (FORM), which included nine attached items. Applicant timely
responded to the FORM by submitting a letter dated February 10, 2010. The case was
assigned to another DOHA administrative judge on March 12, 2010, then reassigned to
me September 7, 2010. Based on a review of the case file, submissions, and exhibits, I
 FORM at 3.      1
 Response to FORM, dated Feb. 10, 2010, at 2.      2
 Id.      3
2
find Applicant failed to meet his burden regarding the security concerns raised. Security
clearance denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 51-year-old aircraft mechanic who has worked for his present
employer, a government contractor, since January 2009. He served in the military from
1976 until 1980. During that time, he attended a school of aerospace sciences, from
which he received a certificate of training. He is committed to continuing his service to
the country through his work as a contractor. Applicant is divorced and has three
children. In requesting an administrative determination, he offered scant facts regarding
his personal life, family, or his current financial situation. 
From January 2001 through September 2001, Applicant was an inspector for a
utility company. He was then unemployed until about March 2003, when he accepted a
position as a stocker at a supermarket. He was then unemployed from May 2003 until
August 2003, when he was hired as a jet engine mechanic. He remained at that
position until April 2004, when he became unemployed before finding similar work in
October 2004. In February 2005, he took a position as an inspector for a paint
company. In July 2007, Applicant became disabled for an unspecified medical
condition. He was placed on short term disability status. After a June 2008 surgery, he
was converted to long term disability. Although he was able to pay his rent and utility
bills, his disabled status impacted his ability to stay current on his credit card balances
and other debts. In November 2008, he returned to work at a new and better paying
position as an aircraft engine mechanic. To accept the job, he was required to move to
another state. He acquired debt making the move. When he arrived at his new position,
he discovered the project for which he was hired would not be a long term project. He
stayed with that position until at least the time he accepted his present employment,
which also required him to relocate.
Applicant does not dispute any of the debts cited in SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a
through 1.ff. Those debts amount to about $17,000, although the debts cited in SOR
allegations ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e, may represent the same obligation.  If so, the balance1
owed could be about $14,000. There is no evidence indicating Applicant has any child
support arrearages. He consulted two different attorneys regarding the efficacy of filing
for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. One firm told him it would cost about $1,500 and take several
months. Another firm advised him to seek Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection instead,
which would also cost about $1,500.  He has since concluded that “[b]ankruptcy is no2
longer an option for me.”  He has, however, recently “begun the enrollment process in a3
 Id.      4
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      5
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
3
program” offering credit card relief in an effort to show his “willingness to resolve [his]
financial distress.”  4
As of late 2009, Applicant was earning a gross monthly salary of approximately
$4,289. After expenses, he has a net monthly remainder of about $148. There is no
evidence of other sources of income or assets. He shares expenses with a roommate.
When he completed his security clearance application, he identified some of his
delinquent debts in response to Section 28 (Your Financial Delinquencies).
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. The AG lists potentially disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied in
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG
¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The United States Government (Government) must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is5
something less than a preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion
is on the applicant.  6
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
 See also EO 12968, § 3.1(b)  and EO 10865 § 7.      7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      8
 Id.      9
 AG ¶ 18.      10
 Id.      11
 The delinquent debts cited range from $21 to $1,772. Most are either charged-off or in collection. Nine      12
of those debts (SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.m, 1.n, 1.o, 1.p, 1.s, 1.t, 1.u) are clearly identified as being
related to medical accounts and amount to approximately $1,097 of delinquent debt.
4
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance7
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt8
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  A security clearance denial does not9
necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is merely an indication that the
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
In this case, Guideline F is the appropriate guideline for consideration. Under
that guideline, “failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”  It also states10
that “an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal
acts to generate funds.”  Here, Applicant admits he has 32 delinquent debts,11
amounting to a total obligation of $14,000 to $17,000.  Therefore, Financial12
Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts) and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations)
apply. With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against
him and mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant’s delinquent debts remain delinquent, thus representing a continuing
course of conduct. He experienced multiple periods of unemployment in the past
decade, but he only offered information regarding his period of disability, which lasted
from approximately July 2007 until November 2008. The nature of the disability is not
identified, so it cannot be discerned whether it may recur. He has deemed bankruptcy
as being “no longer an option.” As of last year, his net monthly remainder was
 The debts noted in SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.m, 1.n, 1.o, 1.p, 1.s, 1.t, 1.u are noted as being for      13
medical accounts, but there is no specific indication that they were related to Applicant’s disability.
5
approximately $148. He provided no evidence of any additional income or a strategy to
address the debt at issue. Consequently,  Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition
(FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. 
Applicant’s periods of unemployment and his disability, however, do raise
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in
the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation)
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances) to some extent, although
Applicant failed to show which debts arose due to these periods.13
Without evidence or an indication that Applicant has received or is receiving
financial counseling, FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control) does not apply. Moreover, the record lacks documentary
evidence showing that Applicant has worked with his creditors. While many of the debts
cited are small, the evidence reflects that Applicant does not presently have the
monthly net income to make payments toward his delinquent debts, obviating
application of FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts).
In declining a hearing and relying on the written record, Applicant limited his
ability to address the issues raised in the SOR. The burden for such mitigation in these
proceedings is placed squarely on Applicant. Lacking evidence of any effort to resolve
the allegations set forth in the SOR, and absent evidence that he has the ability to
make some progress in resolving his debts, Applicant failed to mitigate financial
considerations security concerns. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. As noted above, the ultimate burden of persuasion is on the
applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
 Examination of the “whole-person” in this matter is limited due to Applicant’s reliance on the written record      14
and his failure to supplement the record with more personal information.
6
factors.  Applicant served this country in the military from 1977 until 1980. He is the14
father of three children. There is no indication that he owes any child support
arrearages. He was willing to relocate on more than one occasion to find employment
and now shares expenses with a roommate. He returned to full-time employment after
suffering from an unidentified disability. In completing his security clearance application,
Applicant detailed some of his delinquent debts, thus giving notice that his finances
were an issue. He considered bankruptcy as a method to address his delinquent debts.
Based on the scant evidence available, Applicant does not presently have the
financial income, resources, or strategy to address his delinquent debt. While
bankruptcy may be a valid avenue for addressing his debt, Applicant concluded it is not
a current option. He did not state what led him to this conclusion. It may be assumed
that the $1,500 filing fee was an important consideration, given his current net monthly
remainder of only about $148. While Applicant’s military service and his continued
support of this country are highly appreciated, the clearly consistent standard indicates
that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.
As noted above, any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed
access to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information.
With his delinquent debts yet unaddressed, and with no evidence that his financial
situation may soon be remedied, security concerns remain unmitigated. Clearance
denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.ff Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified
information. Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
