                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-02127
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: B. Daniel Lynch, Esquire
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
to access classified information is granted.
Statement of the Case
On September 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant,
which detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether her clearance should be granted, continued,
denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on October 9, 2009, and requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to me on January 21, 2010, and was scheduled for hearing on
February 23, 2010. A hearing was held on the scheduled date. At the hearing, the
2
Government's case consisted of four exhibits. Applicant relied on six witnesses (including
herself) and two exhibits.  The transcript (Tr.) was received on March 5, 2010. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline C, Applicant is alleged to have exercised dual citizenship with the
U.S. and Taiwan by virtue of (1) applying for and receiving a Taiwanese passport in
about July 2007; although she was a naturalized United States (U.S.) citizen since 1979;
(2) using her Taiwanese passport for travel to Taiwan in July 2007 and March 2008, in
lieu of her U.S. passport, and after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1979; (3)
travelling  to Taiwan so she could vote in the 2008 Taiwan presidential election; and (4)
possessing a Taiwanese passport that will not expire until July 2017. 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the allegations.  She denied
only her current possession of a Taiwanese passport, having destroyed the passport by
tearing it in pieces, and then surrendering it to the cognizant security authority, namely
her Facility Security Officer (FSO). 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 62-year old senior vice president for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant was born in the People’s Republic of China (PRC).  In 1949, while she
was only a few months old, she and her family relocated to Taiwan to escape
Communist rule that came to dominate the PRC following World War II. (Tr. 58-59, 95.)
Applicant received her secondary and college training in Taiwan and  immigrated to the
U.S. in November 1973 to further her college education. (See GE 1; Tr. 113.)  Her
parents immigrated to the U.S. in 1986 following her father’s retirement and resided in
the U.S. until their deaths in 2006 and 2007, respectively. Both of her parents became
naturalized citizens.  (See GE 1; Tr. 113-17.) 
Applicant entered the U.S. with a Taiwanese passport and became a naturalized
U.S. citizen in May 1979.  (See GE 1; Tr. 96-97, 115.)  Her Taiwanese passport expired
in the 1980s, and she did not renew it after she became a U.S. citizen. (See GE 4, Tr.
105, 116.) She earned a masters in business adminoin MBA from a respected U.S.
university in 1976. (Tr. 96.)  Before assuming her current position, she held project
manager positions with various federal agencies, and has held security clearances with
these assignments. (Tr.100.)
Applicant married a U.S. citizen in December 1974. (See GE 1; Tr. 96.)  She has
three children from this marriage. (See GE 4.)  All of her children are U.S. citizens by
birth, and do not exercise dual citizenship with any country. Applicant and her husband
1
  Department Counsel provided a copy of an administrative notice and supporting documents concerning
Taiwan, and referenced them in his opening statement.  However, he did not request  official notice be taken
of the administrative notice and supporting documents, and they were never formally received in the record.
No foreign influence allegations are included in the SOR, and Applicant has no identified family members
residing in Taiwan, except for her distant brother.   
3
separated in 1989 and divorced in 1995.  (GE. 1; Tr. 96-97.)  She relocated to her
current state of residency in 1992. (Tr. 98.)
In July 2007, Applicant and her two sisters and brother renewed their Taiwan
passports and travelled to Taiwan to register to vote in the scheduled 2008 Taiwan
presidential election. (Tr. 70-78, 101-02.) They did so to honor her father’s dying wish
(viz., for Applicant, himself, and her siblings to vote in the 2008 Taiwan presidential
election). (See GE 4; Tr. 57-70, 87-88,102.) Her father passed away before the March
2008 election. (GE 4.)  Before he passed away, though, he impressed upon Applicant
and her siblings his deep interest in voting in the scheduled March 2008 Taiwan
presidential election, and voting for Ma Ying-jeou: the challenger seeking to replace
Taiwan’s president at the time, Chen Shui-bian.  (Tr. 67-74.)  
In honor of her father’s wishes, Applicant, travelled to Taiwan in March 2008 with
one of her sisters and brother to vote in the scheduled March 2008 Taiwan presidential
election.  (Tr. 68-76, 87-90, 102.) Applicant’s other sister travelled separately with her
husband to vote in the 2008 election. Tr. 77-81. Ma was successful in defeating Chen.
(Tr. 74.)  After she voted, she and her siblings did some sight seeing in Taiwan before
returning to the U.S.
Applicant never used her Taiwan passport after she returned from Taiwan in
March 2008. She has since destroyed the passport and surrendered it to her FSO. She
documents her FSO’s receipt of the destroyed Taiwan passport.  (See AE B; Tr. 107.)
Since becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant has used her U.S. passport almost
exclusively to travel outside of the U.S.  She has resided with the chief executive officer
of the financial planning firm who has employed her for over ten years.  Her residential
partner is, like herself, a CPA and a financial planner, and they have taken trips together
to Taiwan in 1998, 2000, and 2005. They  returned to Taiwan with her parents in 2006
for a two-week vacation. (Tr. 28-31, 34-35, 107-10.) On each trip, they used their U.S.
passports exclusively. (Tr. 28-29.)  The only time she used a Taiwan passport was when
she travelled to Taiwan in 2008 to vote in the Taiwan presidential election.  (See GE 4.)  
Applicant has only one living family member in Taiwan: an older brother who did
not accompany her and her parents to Taiwan. (Tr. 112.)   She met him once in 20011
and does not maintain any contact with him in Taiwan. Tr. 112.  Nor has Applicant had
any contact with Taiwan nationals since becoming a U.S. citizen.  (GE 4.)  However, she
does maintain relatively frequent contact with her extended family members residing in
the U.S.  (Tr. 30-31.)
4
Applicant considers herself a loyal U.S. citizen with no ties or allegiances to
Taiwan.  She has not returned to Taiwan since March 2008, and has no intention of
doing so in the foreseeable future.  (Tr. 104-05.)  Her parents are deceased, but resided
in the U.S. continuously before their passing. (Tr. 28, 87.) They were avid sports fans
who supported U.S. professional teams in their state. (Tr. 30, 82.)  She and her two
sisters and brother also reside in the U.S.  (See GE 1; Tr. 27, 7082.)  
Applicant expressed a willingness to renounce her Taiwanese citizenship. (Tr.
107.)  Since becoming a U.S. citizen, she has voted regularly in U.S. and local elections.
(Tr. 124-25.)  She is currently a registered voter in her county of residence (Tr. 125-26.),
and expressed a clear preference for the U.S. over Taiwan.   
Endorsements
Applicant is highly regarded by her current and former colleagues. Her current
residential partner (a U.S. citizen by birth and current holder of a top secret clearance) is
very familiar with the judgment and trustworthiness she has displayed at work, and in her
personal life.  He credits her with being honest and a loyal U.S. citizen who is very active
with her local church and community. (Tr. 32-33.) 
Applicant also draws strong endorsement support from neighbors, CPA clients of
hers, and attorneys who have referred clients to her. (See AE A; Tr. 40-41.) They
characterize  her as intelligent, honest, and a role model who possesses excellent moral
character. (Tr. 41-42.) Former colleagues describe Applicant as honest, reliable and
trustworthy.  (See AE A; Tr.  51-52.)
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and all of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns,” if any. These guidelines must be considered
before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or
denied.  However, the guidelines do not require judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. 
In addition to the relevant AGs, judges must take into account the pertinent
considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in 2(a) of the AGs,
which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial, commonsense
decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the context
of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period
5
of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the
applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct: (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent herein:
      Foreign Preference
The Concern: When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate  preference  
for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.  See
AG, ¶ 9.
   Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the Directive, a decision to grant or continue 
and Applicant's request for security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a common sense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. As with all adversary proceedings, the Judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
fact[s] alleged in the Statement of Reasons, and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
6
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case.
Analysis
Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen who immigrated to the U.S. from Taiwan in
1973 to pursue higher education goals.  Security concerns focus on foreign preference
issues related to Applicant’s active exercise of dual Taiwan citizenship, which includes
her acquiring and using her Taiwan passport to travel to Taiwan in March 2008 to vote in
the Taiwan presidential election. She has since destroyed her Taiwan passport and
expressed a willingness to renounce her Taiwanese citizenship. 
Dual citizenship concerns necessarily entail allegiance assessments and invite
critical considerations over acts indicating a preference or not for the interests of the
foreign country over the interests of the U.S.  The issues, as such, raise concerns over
Applicant’s  preference for a foreign country over the U.S.
By virtue of her birth to parents of Chinese ancestry, and Taiwanese residency
and citizenship, Applicant acquired Taiwan citizenship and a Taiwan passport, which she
permitted to expire after she  became a U.S. citizen in 1979.  She married a U.S. citizen
and exercised only U.S. citizenship rights and privileges between 1979 and 2007.  In
honor of her dying father’s wishes, she and her two siblings applied for and obtained
Taiwan passports in 2007 and used them to travel to Taiwan in March 2008 to vote in the
Taiwan presidential election. (See GE 4) Since returning to the U.S., she has
consistently voted in U.S. and local elections and exercised only the rights and privileges
of U.S. citizenship. She documents her destruction of her Taiwan passport in October
2008, and has expressed her willingness to renounce her Taiwanese citizenship.  (See
AE B.)
Applicant retains no other Taiwan privileges, and has never (save for her
application for, possession, and use of her Taiwan passport to honor her father’s wishes)
performed or attempted to perform duties, or otherwise acted so as to serve the interests
of Taiwan or the PRC in preference to the interests of the U.S., since becoming a U.S.
citizen. But because Applicant applied for and obtained a Taiwan passport to use in
travelling to Taiwan in 2007 and 2008 to register to vote and later vote in the 2008
Taiwan presidential election, several disqualifying conditions under the foreign
preference guideline apply.  Specifically, the Government may apply DC ¶ 10(a) of AG ¶
9, “exercise of any right, privilege or obligations of foreign citizenship after becoming a
U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  This includes but is
not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
7
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such           
           benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another     
           country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and
(7) voting in a foreign election.
 While Applicant voted in Taiwan’s 2008 presidential election, she did so only to
honor the wishes of her dying father, and not to express her preference for Taiwan over
the interests and values of the U.S.  And she has since destroyed her Taiwan passport
and expressed her willingness to renounce her Taiwan citizenship. Under these
circumstances, Applicant may claim the mitigation benefits of MC ¶ 11(b), “the individual
has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship,” and (c)“the passport has been
destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated.”
Failure to satisfy a mitigating condition may be taken into account when assessing
an applicant’s overall claim of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances, but
may not be turned into a disqualifying condition.  See ISCR Case No. 01-02270 (App.
Bd. Aug. 29, 2003).  So, even though there is no express mitigating condition to mitigate
Applicant’s voting in Taiwan’s 2008 presidential election, this does not preclude her from
mitigating the government’s overall preference concerns by demonstrating her exercise
of dual citizenship was attributable to extenuating circumstances, and her overall
preference is to the U.S. Applicant is able to mitigate the Government’s security
concerns through her credible showing that her acquiring a Taiwan passport and using it
to travel to Taiwan it to vote in Taiwan’s 2008 presidential election were isolated acts
undertaken to honor her father’s dying wishes. Her actions, as such, are not indicative of
any preference for Taiwan over the U.S.
Whole person precepts enable Applicant to surmount the Government’s
preference concerns herein. Her many years of devoted public and private service in the
U.S.,  her destruction of her Taiwan passport, and her expressed willingness to renounce
her Taiwan citizenship all factor in her favor. She has strong support from neighbors,
colleagues, and clients, who know her and trust her, and she manifested a clear
preference for the interests and values of the U.S. over Taiwan. And she has shown her
support for U.S. institutions and values by voting regularly in U.S. national and local
elections since becoming a U.S. citizen in 1979.
Overall, Applicant establishes that her preference is with the U.S.  She  meets her
proof burden in an important way: isolated exercise of privileges associated with her
Taiwan citizenship and passport after her naturalization as a U.S. citizen in 1979.
Applicant absolves herself of foreign preference concerns and carries her evidentiary
8
burden on the presented issue of whether her preference lies with her adopted country
(U.S.) or the country (Taiwan) where she was raised as a minor through her parents’
Taiwan citizenship. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by subparagraph 1.a of Guideline C. 
In reaching my recommended decision, I have considered the evidence as a
whole, including each of the factors and conditions enumerated in AG ¶ 2(a) of the
Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following formal
findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE C (FOREIGN PREFERENCE): FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph. 1.a: For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security clearance. 
Clearance is granted.
-------------------------------
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
9
