                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-01043 
SSN: ----------------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 15, 2008, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On April 23, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 11, 2010. Applicant requested his 
case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On July 1, 2010, Department Counsel submitted DOHA=s written case. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the Applicant. He 
 
 
 
 
 
2
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, and mitigation. Applicant received the file on July 12, 2010. Applicant filed 
a timely Response to the FORM on July 27, 2010. I received the case assignment on 
August 6, 2010. Applicant continued to submit exhibits on August 26, 2010, September 
1, 2010, and September 8, 2010. Department Counsel had no objection to the response 
or the additional submissions. I marked all documents as Exhibits 1 to 21. The record 
closed on September 8, 2010. Based upon a review of the complete case file, 
pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all allegations in the SOR. He provided additional information 
in support of his application for a security clearance. (Items 2 and 5)  
 
 Applicant is 40 years old, married, and has one child. He works for a defense 
contractor. Applicant’s family lives in another country and he sends his wife $1,000 
monthly to support them. (Items 4, 5) 
 
 Applicant has nine delinquent debts totaling $37,758. These debts started to 
accumulate in 2001. The latest debt became delinquent in 2009. He has paid seven 
debts by settlements, payment in full, or installment payment agreements. The 
remaining two debts need to be resolved, but Applicant has made efforts to contact the 
creditors and arrange installment payment agreements. (Items 3-9, Exhibits 1-21) 
 
 The current status of each debt as documented in the record is as follows: 
 
  1. Applicant owes $15,204 (SOR Para. 1.a) to a loan company for 
      the balance on a repossessed car. He contacted the lender but  
      has not yet resolved the account. (Items 5-9, Exhibits 2, 5, 
      Response)  
 
  2. Applicant owes $7,185 to a collector for a credit card debt (SOR 
      Para. 1.b). He contacted the creditor and arranged a settlement 
      amount of $2,500 payable in $100 monthly installments. He paid 
      two installments to date. This debt is being resolved. (Items 5-9,            
      Exhibits 11, 21, Response) 
 
  3. Applicant owes another collector $3,889 for a credit card debt  
     (SOR Para. 1.c). This debt is not resolved. Applicant  
     contacted the creditor. (Items 5-9, Exhibit 2) 
 
  4. Applicant owes $2,676 to a credit card company (SOR Para.1.d). 
      He has an installment payment arrangement with the creditor to 
      pay $150 monthly and started doing so in August 2010. This debt 
      is being resolved. (Items 5-9, Exhibits 16, 19) 
 
 
 
 
 
3
 
  5. Applicant owes a collector $60 for a phonograph record company 
      membership fee (SOR Para. 1.e). Applicant claims he paid this  
      debt in May 2010. He has no document to show the debt was paid. 
      Applicant’s volume of debt makes it unlikely he would falsify this  
      miniscule debt. The debt is resolved and will show on his credit report  
      after it is updated. (Items 5-9, Exhibit 2) 
 
  6. Applicant owes a collector $251 for a telephone bill (SOR Para. 1.f).  
      This debt was resolved by payment on August 2, 2010. The creditor    
       submitted written verification of payment. (Items 5-9, Exhibits 2, 
       4, 5, 11, 20) 
   
  7.  Applicant owes the military credit card $3,958 (SOR Para. 1.g). 
       He paid this debt. The creditor submitted written verification the 
       debt is resolved. (Items 5-9, Exhibits 6, 10) 
 
  8. Applicant owes another debt to the credit card issuer listed 
      in SOR Para. 1.d. This debt is for $3,958. The debt is being resolved 
      by an installment agreement. (Items 5-9, Exhibits 2, 12, 19) 
 
  9. Applicant owes a debt collector $822 for two debts owed to a  
      department store. These debts were paid in a settlement agreement 
      in April 2009. The amounts paid were $640.79 and $363.99. These 
      debts are resolved. (Items 5-9, Exhibits 2, 3, 5,17, 18)  
 
 Applicant submitted his telephone records for July and August 2010, to show his 
efforts made in contacting his creditors to resolve these debts. He did make several 
telephone calls to the creditors in that monthly billing period. (Exhibit 7)  
 
 Applicant submitted four character statements. They are all favorable. Applicant 
has worked for his employer since September 2004. His character references regard 
him as honest and trustworthy. Applicant is also considered to have high moral 
standards and dedicated to his job and family. (Exhibits 8, 13-15) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
 
 
 
 
 
4
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
 
 
 
 
5
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
Of these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2001 to 2009, Applicant accumulated nine delinquent debts, totaling 
$37,758 that remained unpaid or unresolved. These two disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
financial difficulties. Two mitigating conditions may be potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
 such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
 individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and, 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Applicant’s failure to pay his delinquent debts is recent and continuous. His 
repeated failure over the past three years, and in the extra time given him after the 
hearing, to resolve these debts demonstrates a lack of reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment by Applicant. AG ¶ 20 (a) does not apply.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
AG ¶ 20 (b) does not apply because Applicant introduced no evidence to support 
the conditions in this mitigating condition. 
 
There is no evidence Applicant sought or received any financial counseling on 
how to repay his delinquent debts. However, he undertook his repayment efforts on his 
own initiative. There are clear indications the problem is being resolved or is under 
control. Therefore, AG ¶ 20 (c) applies. 
 
Applicant worked since April 2010, to repay his creditors. He took multiple 
actions to resolve these debts voluntarily. Applicant resolved by payment or installment 
payment agreements about $20,000 of his debts. $19,093 of debt remains and 
Applicant is working on those two remaining debts now. Therefore, AG ¶ 20 (d) applies. 
 
Applicant initially disputed one $251 debt. Recently, he withdrew the dispute and 
paid the debt. Therefore, AG ¶ 20 (e) does not apply. 
 
Affluence from a legal source of income is not an issue. Therefore, AG ¶ 20 (f) 
does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He took action to resolve his delinquent debts. He is not vulnerable 
to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on his current actions involving the 
resolution of seven delinquent debts. Applicant displayed a lack of good judgment 
incurring the debts but has now rectified the situation by making a concentrated effort to 
 
 
 
 
 
7
resolve them as quickly as he can afford the payments. Resolving about $20,000 worth 
of debt in five months is good work. However, he should not have allowed the debts to 
accumulate to such an amount. He now understands the need to pay his debts in a 
timely manner. There is little likelihood Applicant will repeat this type of conduct based 
on his current experiences.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubt as to 
Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” analysis for Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
