 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07172 
                                                            )                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations.  Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on June 25, 2009. On March 31, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
  
 
2 
 
 
 On April 28, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 4, 2010. 
On June 30, 2010, a Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling Applicant’s hearing for 
July 14, 2010. On that date, I convened a hearing to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. 
 
The Government called no witnesses and introduced six exhibits, which were 
marked Ex. 1 through 6 and admitted to the record without objection. Applicant testified 
and introduced ten exhibits, which were marked as Ex. A through Ex. J. Applicant’s Ex. 
A, B, C, D, E, F (pages 1 and 3), G, H, I (page 12), and J were admitted to the record 
without objection. Applicant’s Ex. F (page 2) and Ex. I (pages 1, 2, 3, 4-7, 10, and 11) 
were admitted without objection but were given limited weight. Applicant’s Ex. I (pages 8 
and 9) were not admitted because they were written in a foreign language which was 
not translated into English. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on July 22, 
2010. 
                                        Procedural Matters 
 
The Government offered a June 29, 2010 e-mail in which Department Counsel 
reported a telephone conversation with Applicant on June 29, 2010, in which he 
informed her of her right to at least 15 days written notice before her hearing, as 
provided by subparagraph E3.1.8. of Enclosure 3 of the Directive. Applicant agreed to a 
hearing date of July 14, 2010, even though her written notice of hearing was sent to her 
only 14 days before the date of her hearing. At her hearing, Applicant confirmed her 
intent to waive her right to 15 days written notice. I discussed with her the 
consequences of the waiver if she were to appeal her decision. She affirmed her 
intention to waive the 15-day rule. (Tr. 12-14.)  I marked Department Counsel’s e-mail 
as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 and included it in the record of the case. 
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains five allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.) In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted two allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.), and she denied the allegations at ¶¶ 
1.c., 1.d., and 1.e. The Government conceded that Applicant had provided 
documentation in her Answer to the SOR establishing that the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 
1.c, 1.d. and 1.e. had been resolved. Accordingly, SOR allegations 1.c., 1.d., and 1.e. 
are concluded for Applicant. Applicant’s admissions are included as findings of fact. (Ex. 
B; Ex. C; Ex. D; Tr. 17.) 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. She was born in a South American country. She came 
to the United States with her family in 1977, when she was 13 years old.  She became a 
U.S. citizen in 1985. She has not returned to her country of birth. She has not previously 
held a security clearance. (Ex. 1; Tr. 76, 79.) 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant was married for the first time in 1984. She and her first husband 
divorced in 1994. Applicant has two sons, now 24 years old and 21 years old, from her 
first marriage. Applicant’s first husband and her 24-year-old son hold security 
clearances. Applicant married for the second time in 2004. She and her second 
husband divorced in 2009. Applicant has a four-year-old son from her second marriage.  
(Ex. 1; Tr. 89-90, 96-97, 100.) 
 
 Applicant attended college for two years. From 1994 until 2003, she was an 
assistant and manager in an orthodontic dental practice. In 2003, she earned a realtor’s 
license. In 2008, she acquired a license as a private investigator. Since 2007, she has 
worked part-time for the government contractor which is sponsoring her for a security 
clearance. She also does part-time work for organizations and individuals as a private 
investigator. (Ex. 1; Ex. 4 at 13-16; Ex. E; Tr. 33-32, 73, 79, 81, 83-85.)  
 
 Applicant met the man who became her second husband in February 2004, 
when they were both working as real estate agents.1 They married in May 2004. In June 
2005, Applicant’s husband transferred ownership of a property he owned to Applicant. 
His extended family members lived in the house. He told Applicant that he was 
transferring the property to her because he wanted to purchase more properties, but he 
did not want his Social Security number on the property. Even though Applicant was the 
owner of record of the property, her husband assured her that he and his family 
members would make monthly mortgage payments directly to the lender. (Ex. 3 at 5, 
13, 17-18; Ex. J; Tr. 112-113.) 
 
 Applicant did not know that her husband was an illegal resident of the United 
States. She later learned that he married her in order to acquire permanent resident 
status (Green Card). (Ex. J; Tr. 67-68.) 
 
 In September 2005, Applicant learned that she was pregnant. Her husband did 
not want the child and pressured her to have an abortion. She refused to have an 
abortion. She continued to sponsor her husband for a Green Card, which he received in 
November 2005. Soon thereafter, he told Applicant that he no longer wanted to live with 
her, and he left. In December 2005, she informed her husband that she wanted a 
separation. (Ex. J.) 
 
 Applicant and her husband reconciled several times, but his actions toward her 
remained hostile. He was involved in relationships with several other women. Their child 
was born in April 2006. Applicant’s husband took little positive interest in the child. He 
was physically and mentally abusive to Applicant.  In 2008, Applicant filed for divorce. In 
July 2008, Applicant’s husband was arrested and detained for three months as an illegal 
alien. In 2009, the stress of her difficult marital relationship caused Applicant to have an 
 
1 Applicant explained that she has a realtor’s license, but, because of the decline in the real estate 
market, she only accepts referrals. She does not actively participate in business with a real estate firm. 
(Tr. 84-85.)  
 
4 
 
 
                                           
aneurysm which required emergency medical treatment. (Ex. 4 at 52-53; Ex. J; Tr. 112-
114.) 
 
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. arose after Applicant’s husband and his family 
stopped paying the mortgage on the house he had deeded to her. The mortgage lender 
turned to Applicant, as the owner of record, for payment. Applicant brought an action to 
evict her husband’s family from the house. In September 2008, the family members 
vacated the house. In July 2009, Applicant sold the property at a short sale. On July 23, 
2009, the lender issued Applicant a Form 1099-C showing a debt cancellation of 
approximately $89,467.2 In April 2010, the lender notified Applicant that she owed an 
additional balance of approximately $67,283 after the short sale. Applicant settled the 
debt for $12,000. Applicant’s documentation established that the lender consider the 
debt satisfied in full. (Ex. 3 at 10, 12, 16- 17, 19-21; Ex. A; Ex. H; Tr. 114-121.)  
 
 Applicant’s 24-year-old son wired the $12,000 settlement to the lender to settle 
the account. At her hearing, Applicant identified the source for the funds as “money . . . 
collected by working little by little and also from my son and my first ex-husband helping 
me out.” Later at her hearing, Applicant testified that the funds she paid to resolve the 
debt came from her earnings placed in a family account. She stated that her oldest son, 
who remitted the money from an account belonging to him, helps her to manage her 
money. (Ex. H; Tr. 69, 90-93.) 
 
 The debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. arose from the foreclosure of a property 
Applicant purchased on her own as an investment in July 2007. Applicant paid 
$230,000 for the property, which was her first attempt to purchase real estate for 
investment purposes. She put no money down and purchased the property by taking 
out two mortgages. Her monthly payments on the mortgages totaled $1,900. Applicant 
found tenants and rented the house for approximately $1,400 a month. In July 2008, 
Applicant’s tenants moved out. She tried renting the property again and also tried to sell 
it by short sale. Applicant’s attempts to rent the property or to sell it by short sale were 
unsuccessful. She stopped making mortgage payments on the property in 2008. In 
January 2010, the lender foreclosed on the property, which had a value of $140,000. 
(Ex. G; Tr. 123-132, 136.) 
 
 After the foreclosure, the lender issued Applicant a Form 1099-A: Acquisition or 
Abandonment of Secured Property. The Form 1099-A showed a balance of principal 
outstanding of $183,927. The fair market value of the property was $140,250. (Ex. G at 
7.) 
 
 The Form 1099-A informs a borrower that information on the form is furnished to 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and provides the following notice: “If you are 
required to file a return, a negligence penalty or other sanction may be imposed on you 
 
2 Form 1099-C advises that, unless some exception applies, the recipient of the Form 1099-C must report 
all cancelled amounts on the “Other Income“ line of IRS Form 1040. (Ex. H at 5.)  
 
5 
 
 
if taxable income results from this transaction and the IRS determines that it has not 
been reported. (Ex. G at 7.) 
 
 The Form 1099-A also contains instructions for the borrower, which read, in 
pertinent part, as follows: 
 
Certain lenders who acquire an interest in property that was security for a 
loan or who have reason to know that such property has been abandoned 
must provide you with this statement. You may have reportable income or 
loss because of such acquisition or abandonment. Gain or loss from an 
acquisition generally is measured by the difference between your adjusted 
basis in the property and the amount of your debt cancelled in exchange 
for the property, or, if greater, the sale proceeds. If you abandoned the 
property, you may have income from the discharge of indebtedness in the 
amount of the unpaid balance of your cancelled debt. You may also have 
a loss from abandonment up to the adjusted basis of the property at the 
time of abandonment. Losses on acquisitions or abandonments of 
property held for personal use are not deductible. 
 
(Ex. G at 7.) 
 
 At her hearing, Applicant acknowledged that she did not know how much she 
owed in income tax on the debt represented by the first mortgage on the property. She 
also acknowledged a second mortgage debt of $49,839 on the property. This debt is 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. At her hearing, Applicant stated that she had not contacted the 
creditor to seek a settlement, and the debt remains unresolved. She estimated that the 
creditor would settle for about $12,000, and she stated she was trying to save that 
amount before contacting the creditor to discuss settlement. (Tr. 134-137.) 
 
 Applicant has not paid her 2008 federal and state income taxes. She sought an 
extension in paying the 2008 taxes, but the extension expired in October 2009, and as 
of the date of her hearing, she had not requested a further extension or paid the 2008 
taxes. She had not filed her 2009 income tax returns, but had filed for an extension, 
which was in effect at the time of her hearing. Applicant explained that she was trying to 
save the money required to pay her 2008 and 2009 federal and state income taxes. She 
estimated that she owed about $3,000 in 2008 federal income taxes. (Tr. 165-170.)  
 
 Applicant was the owner of a home where she and her youngest son lived. She 
was responsible for paying two mortgages on the house. In 2009, Applicant’s first ex-
husband retired from the U.S. military. She invited her first ex-husband to share living 
space in her home with their two sons and her son from her second marriage. The first 
ex-husband and Applicant’s sons did not know about Applicant’s financial difficulties. 
When they learned of her financial situation, they arranged to help by sharing living 
expenses and assisting her with saving her money in order to pay her debts. Applicant 
would like to sell the house and use the proceeds to pay her debts. However, her first 
ex-husband does not want her to sell the house. (Tr. 93-95, 139-140.) 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant shares her household with her first ex-husband, their two adult sons, 
and her four-year-old son from her second marriage. Her first ex-husband pays the first 
mortgage on the residence and other household expenses. She did not have any 
information about the yearly earnings of her first ex-husband or her 24-year-old son. 
She provided the following information about her income and expenses. She earns 
$1,000 a month, before taxes, from her work as a private investigator. She nets 
between $500 and $600 each month from her work as a government contractor. She 
receives $65 a month in child support. (Tr. 144-145.) 
 
   She identified her monthly expenses as follows: $230 on a home equity second 
mortgage3 on her residence; $50 on a credit card debt of $1,700; $100 a month on a 
credit card debt of $2,000; $150 on a credit card debt of $700; and $800 a month for 
groceries. Applicant has a net monthly remainder of approximately $335. (Tr. 146-154.) 
 
 Applicant purchased an automobile for $17,000 in 2006 and financed the 
$10,000 down payment with proceeds from the second mortgage home equity loan on 
her residence. She has since paid the car debt in full. (Tr. 154-158.) 
 
 Applicant estimated that she had $800 in her checking account at the time of her 
hearing. She estimated that her son’s account, to which she contributed her earnings, 
held approximately $8,000. (Tr. 161-162.) 
 
 In 2008, Applicant had some credit counseling over the telephone before 
attempting to sell one of her houses in a short sale. Also in about 2008, she received 
some credit counseling when she was considering filing for bankruptcy. She did not 
provide documentation to support her claims of credit counseling. (Tr. 140-141.) 
 
 Applicant’s first ex-husband provided a letter of character reference. He stated 
that Applicant was a loving and caring mother who dedicated herself to bringing up their 
two sons. He recounted how she carried out all obligations she assumed when they 
were divorced and maintained with him a “relationship of trust, friendship, and common 
purpose for the well-being of our two children.”  (Ex. F at 2.)  
  
                                                 Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
 
3 Applicant stated that the second mortgage debt is $60,000. 
 
7 
 
 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
8 
 
 
                                               Analysis 
 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns.   
 
As the result of her real estate investments and obligations, Applicant 
accumulated substantial delinquent debt. She was unwilling or unable to satisfy her 
creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. If the 
financially delinquent behavior “happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” then AG ¶ 20(a) might 
apply.  If “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances,” then AG ¶ 20(b) might apply.  If “the person has received or 
is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved or is under control,” then AG ¶ 20(c) might apply.  If “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts,” then AG ¶ 20(d) might apply.  Finally, if “the individual has a reasonable basis to 
dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence 
of actions to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply. 
 
The record shows that Applicant’s financial delinquencies resulted in part from 
the downturn of the real estate market, which began in 2007, in part from her difficult 
marriage to a fellow realtor who was an illegal resident of the United States, and in part 
 
9 
 
 
by her own choice. Despite assistance from her first ex-husband and her oldest son, her 
financial delinquencies continue. Applicant’s current financial delinquencies involve 
substantial sums of money, occurred under circumstances that are likely to recur, and 
cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
The record does not establish that Applicant’s unfortunate second marriage and 
the downturn of the real estate markets in 2007 fully explain her failure over a period of 
years to meet her financial obligations. To her credit, Applicant provided documentation 
to show that she had settled or otherwise satisfied four of the debts alleged on the SOR. 
However, one debt, totaling over $49,839 and alleged on the SOR, remains unresolved. 
Although the debt arose from Applicant’s individual business venture in 2007, she has 
not sought out the creditor to discuss forbearance, resolution or satisfaction, suggesting 
that she has not acted responsibly under the circumstances. Despite the support and 
financial assistance of her first ex-husband, it is not clear that she has a plan in place to 
avoid financial overextension in the future. Applicant’s intention to satisfy her creditors is 
laudable, but she has failed to demonstrate a track record of financial responsibility. She 
has not yet demonstrated priorities that emphasize paying her existing debts and 
avoiding additional financial delinquencies in the future. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(a) does 
not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. I further conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 
20(d) have some applicability to the facts in this case, but do not fully apply. AG ¶ 20(e) 
is not raised by the facts of Applicant’s case.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s first ex-husband 
praised her reliability and steadfastness as a parent. Applicant’s work record suggests 
 
10 
 
 
she has sought additional training and certification to respond to changing times. She 
has been employed, on a part-time basis, with her current employer since 2007. 
  
At her hearing, Applicant acknowledged that she had not filed her 2008 federal 
and state income tax returns. The SOR did not allege under AG ¶ 19(g) of Guideline F   
that Applicant had failed to file federal, state, or local income tax returns as required. 
Applicant was not on notice that this could be a Guideline F security concern. 
 
In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board 
listed the following five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be 
considered: 
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to 
consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; 
(d) to decide whether a particular provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines 
is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person analysis under 
Directive Section 6.3. 
 
I have considered Applicant’s acknowledgment that she had not filed her 2008 federal 
and state income tax returns for the purpose of (e) and not for any other purpose.  
 
Applicant’s financial problems began when she was a mature adult. She is 
responsible for approximately $49,839 in delinquent debt arising from the foreclosure of 
a property she owned. She is a trained real estate professional who is aware, or should 
be aware, of the tax consequences of short sales and foreclosures. She has not 
contacted the creditor to discuss a payment plan for the debt. Despite receiving notice 
from lenders of the tax consequences of a short sale and a foreclosure, she has not 
sought further information on her tax responsibilities.  
 
Although Applicant had a distressing second marriage, she has been in a stable 
family situation with her first ex-husband and her three children since 2009. Her first ex-
husband and her oldest son have provided financial support to Applicant, putting her in 
a position to resolve some of her current and longstanding financial responsibilities. 
While she provided documentation to show that four of the five debts alleged on the 
SOR have been settled or otherwise satisfied, she has failed to demonstrate that she 
has developed a long-term plan to satisfy her creditors and understands how to avoid 
excessive debt in the future.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Accordingly, I 
conclude, after a careful review of the facts of her case, the Financial Considerations 
adjudicative guideline, and the whole-person analysis, that Applicant failed to mitigate 
the security concerns arising from her financial delinquencies. If she wishes, and if her 
employer supports reapplication, Applicant can reapply for a security clearance one 
 
11 
 
 
year after the date that this decision becomes final. At that time, she can produce new 
evidence that addresses the Government’s current security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
            Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:                         For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:              Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c. - 1.e.:                        For Applicant 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
