 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-01818 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
September 30, 2010 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Criminal Conduct, Financial Considerations, and 
Personal Conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 12, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct; Guideline F, Financial Considerations; and Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases dated after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 8, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 15, 2010. DOHA 
 
2 
 
issued a notice of hearing on June 21, 2010.  The hearing was scheduled for August 2, 
2010. Applicant requested a continuance, which was granted. The hearing was 
rescheduled and convened on August 17, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 
1 through 18. All of them were admitted without objection, except GE 5 which was 
admitted over Applicant’s objection. The Government also presented GE 19, a 
Memorandum of Law, post-hearing. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through WW, 
called two witnesses, and testified on his own behalf. All were admitted without 
objection, except AE B, C, D, H, I, and K, which were admitted over the Government’s 
objection. The record was left open for the receipt of additional documents. The 
Government offered GE 19, which was admitted. Applicant presented AE XX through 
KKK on August 13, 2010. The Government had no objection to AE XX through JJJ, and 
they were admitted. The admissibility of AE KKK is addressed below. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on August 27, 2010.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
The Government objects to AE KKK, Applicant’s final post-hearing exhibit. The 
Government’s initial objection was based upon the Doctrine of Completeness, Federal 
Rules of Evidence (FRE) 106, as Applicant did not present the full document. Applicant 
then presented a copy of the 10-page pre-sentence report, with portions that were 
redacted. The Government again objected, based upon FRE 106. It should be noted 
that the Government did not object to AE LL, which also contains portions of the same 
pre-sentence report. Applicant appears to be introducing KKK to provide information on 
his “Other Criminal Conduct” addressed in the pre-sentence report. This information 
does not appear elsewhere in the record. 
 
DoD Directive ¶E3.1.19 provides that the Federal Rules of Evidence shall serve 
as a Guide. However, it permits the technical rules of evidence to be relaxed to permit 
the development of a full and complete record. The DOHA process encourages Judges 
to err on the side of admitting evidence into the record and then to consider a party’s 
objections when deciding what, if any, weight to give to that evidence.1 AE KKK is 
admitted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c., 1.d., 2.b., 2.c., 2.d., and 
2.e. He denied SOR ¶¶ 2.a., 2.f, 3.a. and 3.b. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He served in the U.S. Army from 1986 through 1991. 
He was discharged under other than honorable conditions, as set forth below. He 
reenlisted in October 1998 through October 2004. The Government presented 
documents that questioned the validity of the re-enlistment noting that some of the 
documentation was forged; however this was not alleged in the SOR. Applicant 
received an honorable discharge from the Army Reserve in 2004. He is divorced and 
                                                          
1 See, ISCR Case No. 04-11571 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2007). 
 
 
3 
 
has two adult children that reside with Applicant. (GE 1; GE 5; GE 6; GE 9; GE 18; AE 
Z; AE KK; AE MM; AE VV; Tr. 162-166, 180-182, 228.) 
 
 On November 25, 1984, Applicant was arrested for Carrying a Firearm in a 
Vehicle. He was approximately 21-years old at the time. He had been shooting at a 
range earlier that day. After finishing target practice, he wrapped the unloaded gun up in 
a towel and placed it in the glove box of his car, since he did not have a case for it. In 
his haste to get ready for a date that evening, he forgot to remove the gun. After 
dropping his date off for the evening, he was pulled over by the police for a tail light 
infraction. He reached in his glove box to get his registration and the handle of the gun 
was visible to the police officer. Applicant was arrested. He was later found guilty and 
sentenced to four days in jail and one-year probation. The gun was confiscated. (GE 7; 
GE 9; Tr. 166-172.)  
 
 On March 21, 1991, Applicant was charged with violation of the Uniform Code of 
Military Justice (UCMJ) Article 92 for Failure to Obey Lawful Order or General 
Regulation; Article 103, Captured or Abandoned Property; and Article 121, Larceny. 
While serving in the Army in Iraq, Applicant acquired three pistols and one submachine 
gun, captured enemy property, given to him by co-workers who were Kuwaiti nationals. 
He was aware that it was against orders and regulations to keep these weapons. He 
retained the guns, hoping the regulations would change. They did not and when it came 
time for Applicant to return to the U.S., he attempted to smuggle the weapons into the 
U.S. in a sniper rifle case that was in the armory. He planned to retrieve the guns from 
the armory when he returned back to the U.S. He was smuggling the guns for both 
personal use and for possible resale. He included a personally owned weapon in the 
rifle case, which was also prohibited by regulation. He hid the weapons in the rifle case, 
after signing a document acknowledging that he was aware of the regulations 
prohibiting these actions. Applicant acknowledged that he made a poor decision in this 
instance. He blames his bad judgment on the death of his father and the birth of his son, 
two events he was absent for, due to his service in Iraq. As a result of his actions, 
Applicant was administratively separated in lieu of court-martial and received an other 
than honorable discharge. (GE 2; GE 5; AE N; AE O; Tr. 172-180, 281-288.) 
 
 On July 2, 1996, Applicant was charged with Failure to Appear and Contempt of 
Court. Applicant claims the charge was resolved when he paid an $81 fine. Applicant 
entered a diversion program for twelve months, without entering a plea to these 
charges. The case was dismissed on June 17, 1997 when the diversion program was 
terminated. (GE 7; AE P; AE KKK; Tr. 185-188.) 
 
 On December 11, 2003, Applicant was charged with Impersonating Authorized 
U.S. Military Personnel, Making False Writings, and Theft of Government Property. On 
May 9, 2005, he pled guilty to 18 USC § 701, Unlawful Manufacture or Possession of 
Official Insignia. He was found guilty and sentenced to a fine of $5,000 and two-years 
probation. In mid-to-late 1997 through his re-enlistment in October 1998 Applicant 
became associated with a reserve unit. He wanted to obtain a waiver and re-enlist in the 
Army. Prior to actually joining the unit or being granted a waiver on the bar to re-
enlistment, he “volunteered” his services with the unit and became the individual 
 
4 
 
responsible for obtaining supplies for training purposes. This volunteer service is not 
permitted by law. As a volunteer, he created a document, which authorized him to 
obtain Defense Reutilization and Marketing Office (DRMO) items for the unit, by copying 
a pre-existing supply memorandum on Department of Defense letterhead and adding 
his name. Applicant claims he created this memo at the direction of his commander. I 
did not find his testimony credible. He denies that he impersonated U.S. Military 
Personnel and used the supply memorandum to obtain military items that were then 
leased privately to the motion picture industry, as well as the other criminal allegations 
made against him by the Federal Bureau of Investigations. (GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; 
GE 9; GE 18; AE Q; AE R; AE S; AE LL; AE MM; AE NN; AE OO; AE PP; AE QQ; AE 
RR; AE WW; Tr. 79, 91, 109, 182-224, 228.)  
 
 A tax lien was filed against Applicant in November 2009 in the amount of $77. 
Applicant provided copies of two checks that he claimed satisfied this tax obligation. 
Neither of the checks had been canceled. Applicant provided copies of releases on 
several tax liens, none of the releases correspond to this lien. (GE 14; AE U; AE JJJ; Tr. 
138-139, 230-238.) 
 
 Two tax liens (SOR ¶¶ 2.b and 2.c) were filed against Applicant by a county tax 
collector in December 2004 and November 2005, for approximately $104 and $100, 
respectively. Applicant explained that these liens were for property taxes on jet skis that 
he had sold prior to the liens. The individuals who purchased the jet skis failed to 
register the transfer of the titles. Applicant produced documentation showing these liens 
were released and he is no longer liable for these amounts. (GE 8; GE 10; GE 11; GE 
12; GE 15; GE 17; AE JJJ; Tr. 230-238.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 2.d and 2.f., allege the same collection account owed to a collections 
agent for a bank, in the approximate amount of $260. Applicant incurred this debt when 
he failed to close his banking account after switching to another bank. Applicant claims 
he has disputed this debt, but failed to provide documentation of the dispute. (GE 10; 
GE 11; GE 12; GE 15; GE 17; Tr. 229, 260.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 2.e. is a credit card debt in the approximate amount of $953. In August 
2010, Applicant paid this creditor $800 to settle the account. He provided a copy of the 
canceled check as proof of payment. (GE 8; GE 15; GE 17; AE T; Tr. 136-137.) 
 
 Applicant also presented documentation to show that he settled an additional 
debt, not listed on the SOR. He claims that he has no other past due accounts and 
presented an August 2010 credit report to substantiate this claim. He blames his 
financial delinquencies on a trade union strike that took place a few years ago. 
Applicant failed to introduce evidence, other than his testimony, to support his claim of a 
strike. Due to the nature of Applicant’s current profession, he works for short periods of 
time on many different projects. Thus, he does not have a stable income. He presented 
pay stubs from several different employers to substantiate this claim. (AE T; AE V; AE 
W; AE X; AE HHH; Tr. 229.) 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant executed his e-QIP on August 6, 2008. The e-QIP asked: “Section 27: 
Your Financial Record c. In the last 7 years, have you had a lien placed against your 
property for failing to pay taxes or other debts?” Applicant indicated “No.” In doing so, 
he failed to disclose the two tax liens filed against him in December 2004 and 
November 2005, for approximately $104 and $100, respectively, as set out in SOR ¶¶ 
2.b. and 2.c. Applicant contends that his omission was not deliberate. He claimed at the 
hearing that he was not aware of the liens. However, when he was asked about the 
liens during his October 2008 subject interview, Applicant acknowledged that he was 
aware of seven small tax liens around the $100 range, but did not list them on his e-QIP 
due to oversight. (GE 6; GE 9; GE 12; Tr. 242-260.) 
 
 Applicant’s good character was attested to by his two witnesses and through 13 
letters from personal and professional colleagues. He has been active in the Boy Scout 
“exploring program” for a number of years. He has also participated in other volunteer 
activities. He presented evaluation reports to show he met the Army’s standards and 
values, while in the Army. His waiver packet for his re-enlistment in the Army also 
contained numerous letters of recommendation, letters of commendation, and award 
certificates. (AE A; AE B; AE C; AE D; AE E; AE F; AE G; AE H; AE I; AE J; AE K; AE L; 
AE M; AE Y; AE Z; AE XX; AE YY; AE ZZ; AE AAA; AE BBB; AE CCC; AE DDD; AE 
EEE; AE FFF; AE GGG; Tr. 57-67, 74-75, 78-108, 223-224.)  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
6 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant has a long criminal history from 1984, through his most recent 
conviction in 2005. Over this 21-year time span, he had four criminal incidents, three of 
which were serious offenses. The above disqualifying conditions have been established.  
 
Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
 
7 
 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal conduct involves extremely poor judgment. While a number 
of years have passed since his last criminal act and subsequent conviction, the passing 
of time does not mitigate his lack of judgment. He was a mature adult at the time of his 
last criminal act. His 21-year history of criminal conduct reflects a disregard for following 
rules and regulations and not only cast doubt on his judgment, but also his reliability and 
trustworthiness. Based on his long history of criminal conduct I cannot find that future 
criminal conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 32(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant presented numerous letters of recommendation, work performance 
appraisals, certificates, evidence of volunteer work, and other character evidence. 
However, these alone are not enough to mitigate his criminal activity. Applicant 
displayed little remorse for his most recent criminal actions. He did not recognize that 
any of his actions were wrong. I find at this juncture there is insufficient evidence to 
show successful rehabilitation. AG ¶ 32(d) does not apply. 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has demonstrated an unwillingness or inability to satisfy his debts. He 
has failed to closely monitor his finances since 2004. AG ¶ 19(a) and 19(c) are 
disqualifying. 
  
 
8 
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant has satisfied three of his debts, but two debts remain unpaid. Applicant 
believes he paid the remaining tax obligation (SOR ¶ 2.a.) and is disputing the bank 
collection (SOR ¶¶ 2.d and 2.f.). However, he has not provided any documentation that 
supports his claims. The lack of documentation indicates that the financial problems are 
recent and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant blames his recent financial delinquencies on a union strike. However, 
he failed to show that he has been acting responsibly under the circumstances with 
respect to his remaining debts. While an applicant is not required to be debt free, nor is 
he required to develop a plan for paying all debts immediately or simultaneously, “an 
applicant must act responsibly given his circumstances and develop a reasonable plan 
for repayment, accompanied by ‘concomitant conduct’.”2 He did not demonstrate any 
type of plan for handling his remaining debts. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant failed to present evidence that he had received any financial 
counseling. Further, he failed to show that his financial problems are under control. AG 
¶ 20(c) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant has satisfied three of five of his delinquent debts. He claims that SOR ¶ 
2.a. is satisfied, but failed to present documentation to support his claim. There is no 
                                                          
2 ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. October 29, 2009.) 
 
9 
 
evidence he has initiated a good-faith effort to repay his remaining overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts with respect to SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.d. (duplicated in SOR ¶ 2.f.). 
AG ¶ 20(d) is only partially applicable. 
 
 Applicant contests that he owes any amount to the creditor listed in SOR ¶ 2.d. 
(duplicated in 2.f.). However, he admits that he incurred the debt when he failed to close 
a bank account. He failed to produce any documentation of the steps that he has taken 
to dispute this debt or other documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 I find Applicant was not credible when he testified he was unaware of the tax 
liens when he completed his e-QIP. When he was asked about the liens during his 
October 2008 subject interview, Applicant acknowledged that he was aware of seven 
small tax liens around the $100 range. I find he deliberately omitted or concealed the 
liens from his e-QIP.  
 
 Applicant is clearly embarrassed by his criminal history and he is vulnerable to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress. His conduct from 1984 through 1998 is sufficient 
to raise concerns under AG ¶ 16(e). 
 
 
10 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to or by improper or inadequate advice 
of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant’s failure to list his tax liens on his e-QIP was deliberate. He did not 
correct his omission prior to being confronted in the subject interview about the liens. 
Further, there is no evidence of improper or inadequate advice with respect to this 
omission. Applicant’s omission casts doubt on his personal judgment.  
 
 Applicant’s criminal conduct raises questions about his trustworthiness, judgment 
and reliability. He has demonstrated that even when given a second chance, when he 
was “volunteering” for the reserve unit, he willingly broke rules and failed to abide by the 
regulations. Applicant failed to acknowledge his behavior and demonstrate a change in 
his behavior. He failed to show remorse for his most recent criminal conduct. Applicant 
has a long history of poor judgment and making poor choices and has failed to 
demonstrate positive steps to convince me that future inappropriate behavior is unlikely 
to recur. I find none of the above mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
11 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J, F, and E in my whole-person analysis. 
 
I have considered Applicant’s character, as attested to by his two witnesses and 
through the 13 letters from personal and professional colleagues; his volunteer work 
with the Boy Scouts and other organizations; his evaluation reports; letters of 
commendation; and award certificates. However, the serious nature of his criminal 
conduct, especially his 1991 UCMJ violations and his 2005 conviction, lead me to 
conclude he does not demonstrate the good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness 
required of one who has access to classified information. He was a mature adult when 
he committed these offenses. Applicant has failed to demonstrate genuine rehabilitation 
or remorse for his actions.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Criminal Conduct, Financial Considerations, 
and Personal Conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINSTAPPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
12 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.c.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.d.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.f.:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
