1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-06862
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On April 13, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign
Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In an April 28, 2010, response, Applicant admitted the two allegations raised
under Guideline C regarding her Iranian passport. She also admitted the four
allegations raised concerning her family members in Iran and her frequent visits to that
country. She also requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was
ultimately assigned to me on August 3, 2010. Department Counsel and Applicant
agreed to an August 25, 2010, hearing date. A Notice of Hearing was issued by DOHA
on August 6, 2010, setting the hearing for that date.
 The Governments request for administrative notice of certain facts with respect to Iran is prefaced by a six-1
page summary and index of materials. See AN 1.
 AN 4 (The W hite House, Office of The Press Secretary, Notice: Continuation of the National Emergency With2
Respect to Iran, dated Nov. 12, 2009).
 AN 5 (U.S. State Department, State Sponsors of Terrorism , dated Nov. 13, 2009).3
 See, e.g., AN 9 (U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Pennsylvania Company4
Fined for Export Violations Involving Iran, UAE, and Syria, dated Dec. 7, 2007).
 AN 3 (U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Iran, dated Sep. 30, 2009).5
 AN 12 (U.S. Department of State, 2009 Human Rights Report: Iran, dated Mar. 11, 2010). See also AN 146
(U.S. Department of State, Press Release, UN Calls on Iran to Address Serious Human Rights Violations,
dated Nov. 20, 2009).
 Id.7
2
The hearing took place as scheduled. Department Counsel submitted three
documents which were accepted into the record as exhibits (Exs.) 1-3 without objection.
She also presented documents marked I7 administrative notice documents (AN)
marked as AN 1-17 without objection. Applicant gave testimony and presented no
documents.  Applicant was given until September 3, 2010, to submit any additional
materials. The transcript (Tr.) was received on September 1, 2010. No additional
documents were received from Applicant and the record was closed on September 3,
2010. Based upon a review of the case file, exhibits, and testimony, security clearance
is denied.
Administrative Notice
The Government requested administrative notice of certain facts related to Iran,
as represented in documents accepted into the record as AN 1-17.  Iran is an Islamic1
Republic where ultimate authority is vested in a religious scholar, the Supreme Leader.
The United States (U.S.) has not had diplomatic or consular relations with Iran since
1979, when the U.S. Embassy was seized by students. In 2006, the November 14,
1979, declaration of a National Emergency with Respect to Iran was continued due to
Iran’s “extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy” of the
U.S.  Iran has challenged the U.S. in Iraq and Afghanistan in order to pursue its2
objective of becoming a regional power. It has sought to make the U.S. suffer political,
economic, and human costs. It has also been designated as a State Sponsor of
Terrorism since 1984.  Iran is currently seeking to acquire nuclear weapons and other3
weapons of mass destruction, and to illegally obtain U.S. military equipment and other
sensitive technology.  The United States objects to Iran’s sponsorship of terrorism, its4
nuclear weapons ambitions, and its violations of human rights.5
The Iranian government has a poor human rights record.  Its abuses include6
politically motivated abductions, torture and severe punishment, arbitrary arrest and
detention, lack of fair trials, and restrictions on civil liberties.  It has been known to both7
 Id.8
 AN 2 (U.S. Department of State, Iran – Country Specific Information, dated Oct. 30, 2009, at 1) and AN 179
(Travel Warning: Iran, dated Apr. 20, 2010)..
 AN 15 (U.S. Department of State, Press Release, Secretary Clinton and Foreign Minister Cannon Express10
Concern Over Continued Detention of U.S. and Canadian Nationals in Iran, dated Sep. 25, 2009). Specifically
noted in the request are Iranian-American and Iranian-Canadian journalists, scholars, a retiree, and American
hikers.
 Tr. 23, 25.11
 Tr. 27-28; Ex. 1 (Security Clearance Application, dated Mar. 4, 2009). Elsewhere, she stated that she has12
only been married for “over 11 years.” Tr. 22. Applicant’s husband is a U.S. citizen, works for a local county
government, and has no immediate relatives still residing in Iran.
 Response to the SOR, dated Apr. 28, 2010.13
3
monitor and conduct surveillance on its citizens, including interception of telephonic and
internet communication.  The government does not recognize dual nationality and will8
treat U.S.-Iranian dual nationals solely as Iranian citizens. It has prevented a number of
Iranian-American citizens who traveled to Iran for personal reasons from leaving, and in
some instances, detained and imprisoned them.  Iranian security personnel may put9
visitors under surveillance and search hotel rooms. The United States recently
requested “the safe and rapid return of all detained and missing citizens in Iran to their
respective countries so that they might be reunited with their families,” including U.S.
and Canadian citizens and those who are dual-nationals with Iran.  10
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 43-year-old senior software developer who has worked for the
same employer, a U.S. government contractor, for over a year. She has earned a
bachelor’s degree in computer science and a master’s degree in telecommunications
information systems from major U.S. universities. She is married and has no children. 
Applicant was born in Iran. Around 1989, she came to the United States to
further her education.  After she completed her undergraduate work, she took some11
time off before beginning work on a master’s degree at another U.S. university. During
her graduate program, Applicant visited her family in Iran and her father visited her in
the United States. She completed her education in about 1993 and decided to remain
in the United States. From 1994 until 1997, she was briefly married to her first husband.
By 2000, she was working for a local county in her state of residence as a information
technology contractor/software developer. In May 2001, Applicant married a fellow
emigre from Iran, whom she met in the United States through family connections.  He12
is a dual-national of Iran and the United States.  In 2005, she became a U.S. citizen. In13
2008, she worked for a private tutoring agency before beginning her current work in
early 2009.
 Tr. 30.14
 Tr. 31.15
 Tr. 32.16
 Tr. 35.17
 Id.18
 Applicant visited Iran annually between 2006 and 2008, and plans on visiting in 2010 “if something comes19
up.” See Tr. 36. She has used her Iranian passport to facilitate her passage into and out of Iran since
becoming a U.S. citizen. 
 Tr. 36. Applicant tries to help share with the responsibilities related to her father.20
4
Remaining in Iran are Applicant’s father and three siblings. Her father is retired.
A former merchant in the private sector, he is currently 74 years old. Applicant calls him
daily to check on his well-being.  He has had a heart attack and prostate cancer, and is14
possibly experiencing early symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease. Due to his health and
age, he can no longer visit Applicant in the United States alone, and Applicant’s sister,
who helps care for him, cannot obtain a visa to visit the United States.15
Applicant’s sister is a homemaker in Iran. She has three children and is about 38
years old. Her husband is a self-employed businessman. She has been denied a visa
to visit the United States five times.  16
Applicant has two brothers also living in Iran. One brother is about 45 years old
and is a construction contractor. He owns his own company. He is not married. He has
been able to obtain a visa to visit the United States, which he did about five or six years
ago. Applicant’s other brother is about 28 years old. He is a self-employed tea
merchant. He is also single. He has been unable to obtain a visa to visit the United
States. 
Because Applicant calls her father daily, she speaks with various siblings
whenever one is visiting their father. If she cannot reach her father by telephone, she
will call her siblings to check on his well-being.   Otherwise, her contact with her17
siblings varies.  Their contact is usually by telephone or in person when Applicant visits18
Iran. Applicant has visited Iran regularly since about 2002. Except for 2009, she has
made annual trips to Iran since 2006.  Her visits range from three to five weeks in19
length. Applicant will visit her family in Iran more than once a year depending on the
circumstances, such as problems with her father.   When there, she sometimes visits20
 Tr. 39.21
 Tr. 37.22
 Tr. 36.23
 Id.24
 Tr. 38.25
 Tr. 12.26
 See, e.g., Tr. 11-13, 40.27
 Tr. 40.28
 Tr. 40-46.29
5
her aunts, uncles, and cousins.  In 2009, she forewent her annual trip to Iran. Instead,21
she met her father and her sister in Europe.  22
In order to facilitate her visits to Iran, Applicant applied for and received a new
Iranian passport in 2006, a year after she became a naturalized U.S. citizen. She did so
because Iranian law will not let her enter or exit the country without it because she is
still considered an Iranian citizen.  She noted that “if they found out that you have given23
up your Iranian passport, they will very harshly retaliate on you. Especially now. They
possibly . . . imprison you and, you know, they danger your family’s life and your own
life. . . .”  Despite these concerns, Applicant continues to visit her family in Iran. She24
has never encountered any problems traveling in and out of Iran on her Iranian
passport. Her family is not political.  Applicant has never voted in an Iranian election.25 26
Applicant understands the security concerns posed by her use of her Iranian
passport.  She is very willing to inform the Government of her travels abroad.  She27 28
emphasizes that she has a “clear background,” but is concerned her situation and her
desire to continue using her Iranian passport could prevent her from obtaining a
security clearance.  29
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions, which are required in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to
classified information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead,
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).30
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).31
 Id.32
 Id.33
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.34
6
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a30
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  31
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access32
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.   The decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily33
a determination as to the loyalty of an applicant.  It is merely an indication that the34
 AG ¶ 9.35
 AG ¶ 10(a). 36
7
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
have established for issuing a clearance.
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find Guideline B (Foreign Contacts)
to be the most pertinent to the case. Conditions pertaining to this adjudicative guideline
that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which
would mitigate such concerns, are discussed below.
Analysis
Guideline C – Foreign Preference
The concern regarding foreign preference is that when an individual acts in such
a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the U.S., then he or she
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests
of the U.S.  Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying35
include exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  36
The SOR contains two allegations concerning Applicant’s exercise of dual
citizenship with Iran and the United States. First, that she renewed her Iranian passport
after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen. Second, that she has used that Iranian
passport to make annual visits to Iran since becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen. She
admitted both  allegations, raising Foreign Preference Disqualifying Condition AG ¶
10(a) (exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming
a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes, but is
not limited to (1) possession of a current foreign passport. . . ). With a foreign
preference disqualifying condition raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate
security concerns.
Before becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2005, Applicant emigrated from
Iran, the country of her birth. Consequently, Foreign Preference Mitigating Condition
(FP MC) AG ¶ 11(a) (dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a
foreign country) applies. 
Applicant has not expressed either a willingness or an objection to formally
renouncing her Iranian citizenship, per se. However, she has expressed her personal
desire  to retain her Iranian passport, which is recognized as a benefit of Iranian
citizenship, and her reluctance to relinquish it. Therefore, FP MC AG ¶ 11(b) (the
individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship) does not apply. 
8
Applicant actively renewed her Iranian passport in 2006, after becoming a
naturalized U.S. citizen in 2005. Such facts obviate application of FP MC AG ¶ 11(c)
(exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship occurred before
the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor).  
There is no evidence that Applicant’s use of an Iranian passport is approved by
the cognizant security authority or that it has been destroyed, surrendered to the
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated. Consequently, neither FP MC AG
¶ 11(d) (use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security authority) nor
FP  MC AG ¶ 11(e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant
security authority, or otherwise invalidated) applies. Applicant has never voted in a
foreign election. Therefore, FP MC AG ¶ 11(f) (the vote in a foreign election was
encouraged by the United States Government) is inapplicable. 
Although Applicant is an Iranian by birth, she became a naturalized U.S. citizen
in 2006. Since then, she reaffirmed her rights of Iranian citizenship by renewing her
Iranian passport. Administrative notice is taken of the difficulties and dangers inherent
in travel to and from Iran without an Iranian passport, especially by those deemed by
Iranian authorities to be Iranian citizens. It is partially because of those dangers, as well
as issues of accountability, that foreign travel on an Iranian passport poses grave
security concerns. Applicant is committed to using her Iranian passport for regular
passage into and from Iran, rather than again meet family members in another country
or have her 45-year-old brother, who has been able to get a visa to visit the United
States, accompany their father to the United States. Given these facts, foreign
preference security concerns remain unmitigated.
Guideline B – Foreign Influence
The concern under Guideline B is that foreign contacts and interests may be a
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any
foreign interest. The adjudication can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target U.S.
citizens to obtain protected information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
Conditions pertaining to this adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate security concerns, are
set forth and discussed in the conclusions below.
The country at issue is Iran. Since 1979, with the ouster of the Shah and the
occupation of the U.S. Embassy in Tehran, the U.S. has had no diplomatic or consular
relations with Iran.  For over 30 years, it has been cited as an “extraordinary threat to
the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the U.S.” It has sought to make the
U.S. suffer political, economic, and human costs. Iran has been designated as a State
9
Sponsor of Terrorism, and courts anti-U.S. governments in the Western Hemisphere.
Iran seeks to acquire nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction, as well as
U.S. military equipment and other sensitive technology. Its human rights abuses are
numerous, including the surveillance and arbitrary treatment of its citizens. Its pursuit of
U.S. technology and its sponsorship of terrorism demand that considerations under this
guideline be conducted with the highest scrutiny. 
The SOR contains four allegations under this guideline. First, that Applicant’s
husband is a dual-national of Iran and the United States; second, that her father is a
citizen and resident of Iran; third, that her siblings are citizens and residents of Iran; and
fourth, that she has made regular visits to Iran since about 2002. 
Applicant admitted that her husband is a dual-national of Iran and the United
States, although he no longer has immediate family in Iran. She also admitted that her
father and siblings are citizens and residents of Iran, and that she has traveled regularly
to visit them. Since renewing her Iranian passport, she has visited Iran annually
between 2006 and 2008. She may again travel there this year on that passport. In light
of these considerations, Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 7(a) (contact
with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other
person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion) and
AG ¶ 7(b) (connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a
potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive
information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information)  apply.
Iran’s current regime has expressed intentions and purposes antithetical to the
U.S. and its citizens. Despite the age and infirmity of her father, Applicant’s testimony
demonstrated that she is a loving daughter who shares responsibility for his well-being.
She speaks with him by telephone on a daily basis. She visits him and her siblings at
least once a year, depending on the circumstances, although she has thus far not
visited Iran since 2008. During her visits, she sometimes also visits other relations living
in Iran. Applicant demonstrated that she understands the security concerns related to
her relatives and her visits to Iran, as well as the potential dangers to both her family
and herself in her travels. Given her continued travels to visit her family in Iran, as well
as her relationships and contacts with her father and siblings there, neither Foreign
Influence Mitigating Conditions (FI MC) AG ¶ 8(a) (the nature of the relationships with
foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the positions or
activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual,
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.) nor FI MC AG ¶ 8(c)
(contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is
little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation) applies. 
10
Applicant is plainly a loving daughter and sister who cares for the well-being of
her foreign relatives. While there is no suggestion that Applicant is not loyal to the U.S.,
countries like Iran invoke heightened scrutiny. Applicant and the documents submitted
for administrative notice all mention the travails of travel within Iran by Americans. If
Applicant is discovered to be a U.S. citizen traveling on an Iranian passport only as a
matter of convenience, adverse repercussions could be directed at either her, her
family, or both. Given these concerns and risks, FI MC AG ¶ 8(b) (there is no conflict of
interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign
person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest) does not apply.
Given these security concerns, arising as they do in the context of Iranian contacts,
foreign influence security concerns remain unmitigated.  
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct;
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant is a highly credible and mature woman. She is well educated. She
came to the United States to seek higher education around 1989, and ultimately
became a U.S. citizen in 2005. For several years, she worked for a county government
in her chosen field. She is married and comfortably settled in the United States. While
her husband is a dual-national of Iran and the United States, he no longer has any
immediate family in Iran and there are no other extraneous concerns noted regarding
him, his loyalties, or risks related to him.
11
Applicant is clearly attached to her father. While his health has been challenged,
he is only 74 years old and apparently capable of accompanied travel abroad. She
shares responsibility for his well-being with her three siblings, who are residents and
citizens of Iran. She speaks to her father by telephone daily, and her telephonic contact
with her siblings appears to be regular. Rather than make alternative arrangements,
she visits her family in Iran regularly. She does so believing her safety is maximized by
her use of her Iranian passport. While one brother appears capable of accompanying
their father to the United States, and while she has met with her father and sister in
Europe, a trip that would not necessitate use of an Iranian passport, Applicant is
adamant in maintaining her Iranian passport and continuing her travels to Iran. Both the
Government and Applicant appreciate the difficult position of those desiring  travel to
and from Iran. They also appreciate the risks and the genuine security concerns posed
by such travel at this time. Given those risks and concerns, security concerns regarding
foreign influence and foreign preference remain unmitigated. 
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
