 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03490 
 SSN: )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco J. Mendez, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Riley C. Porter, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct and Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 3, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct and Guideline M, Use of Information Technology 
Systems. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 6, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On April 1, 2010, Department Counsel issued an 
amended SOR and served it on the Applicant. The amended SOR withdrew, 
renumbered, and added allegations.1  Applicant answered the amended SOR on April 
19, 2010. The case was assigned to me on June 15, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on June 16, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on July 14, 
2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted without 
objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
Applicant testified and presented one witness, but did not offer any exhibits. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 26, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted ¶ 1.b and denied ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 
2.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make 
the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 22 years old. He is single and has never been married. Since 2008, 
he has worked as an information systems security engineer for a defense contractor. He 
received a bachelor’s degree in information assurance in December 2009. He also 
holds an associate’s degree in network technology that he received in May 2007. He 
has no military experience. He sought a security clearance from another government 
agency in 2007, but was denied.2   
  
 Applicant’s conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) gaining access to another 
person’s computer system (computer hacking) and manipulating information or software 
on that system on several occasions between 2005 and 2007 (Applicant admits one 
instance in 2005, but denies the rest); (2) gaining unauthorized access to a local traffic 
signal’s computer controls and subsequently altering an electronic traffic warning signal 
on more than one occasion (admitted); and, (3) making false statements to investigators 
on July 25, 2007 by failing to disclose his computer hacking activities (denied). The 
conduct alleged in (1) and (2) above was cross alleged as security concerns under both 
Guideline E (personal conduct) and Guideline M (use of information technology 
systems). 
  
 Since December 2005, when Applicant was 17 years old, he has engaged in 
basic computer hacking attacks. Applicant understands hacking as gaining 
unauthorized access to computer systems/networks. Although he claims never to have 
hacked into any government systems or networks, he developed his skills by targeting 
his friends systems and engaging in denial of service attacks on their computers. These 
attacks are accomplished by flooding a victim’s computer system or network with 
                                                          
1 Original SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.h and 1.j – 1.o were withdrawn; a new SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c were added; original 
SOR ¶ 1.i was renumbered as SOR ¶1.b; original SOR ¶ 2.a was changed. 
 
2 Tr. at 27-28; GE 1, 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
electronic information to boot the system offline. Additionally, he used another type of 
attack to gain access to user names and passwords. Applicant believes his friends 
consented to these attacks so they all could develop their hacking skills. He also 
believes no laws were broken, but he may have violated the terms of use established by 
the affected internet service provider.3 
 
 During 2005, Applicant also engaged in “social engineering” attacks. He 
understands that term to mean manipulating people to get personal information that you 
want and gaining unauthorized access to information by using computers, personal 
information, and services. One social engineering attack was against an unknowing 
neighbor. Using his computer skills he gained access to her personal email account. He 
accomplished this by intercepting electronic data from the wireless network containing 
her email address. Armed with her email account information, Applicant then visited the 
internet service provider’s (ISP) website and attempted to login to view her account. 
When he could not guess the neighbor’s password, he executed the “forgot password” 
function and wrote down the basic security challenge questions. In an attempt to learn 
the neighbor’s maiden name (to answer the security challenge question), Applicant 
called the neighbor and fraudulently represented that he was planning a high school 
reunion for her grandparents. During the conversation he learned the neighbor’s maiden 
name. He then again went to the ISP website and attempted to gain access to the 
neighbor’s email account. Once more, he was denied access even though he could 
answer the challenge question. Undeterred, Applicant continued this social engineering 
attack by calling the ISP’s customer service center and fraudulently representing to 
them that he was the neighbor’s husband and he demanded access to the account. He 
was given access after giving the service representative the correct challenge question 
answer.4 
 
 With access to the neighbor’s account, Applicant was able to view her email at 
will. He viewed her personal emails, address book, and accessed her monthly billing 
statements for her phone and internet use. Additionally, he changed the welcome 
header on her email account by stating that she had been hacked. He also sent out a 
false mass email to her friends and family describing a personal situation. On another 
occasion he hacked into the neighbor’s computer hard drive and imbedded an 
inappropriate picture into her start up folder. The result of his action caused the picture 
to load anytime she started her computer. He attempted to access her email account 
about two weeks later, but was denied access because the password was changed. 
Applicant then went to the neighbor’s house in person offering his services as a 
computer technician who could run a diagnostic test on her computer and troubleshoot 
any problems she was experiencing. She declined his services. At that time, Applicant 
did not tell her that he had hacked her system, nor has he ever disclosed that 
                                                          
3 GE 3; Tr. at 29-30, 33-35, 44-48. 
 
4 GE 3; Tr. at 39-42. 
 
 
4 
 
 
information to her because he feared the legal repercussions that could follow. 
Applicant admitted to these actions.5  
 
 Also in 2005, Applicant hacked into a state Department of Transportation 
electronic road sign. The road sign is used to warn approaching motorists of upcoming 
hazards and display messages on the sign such as “warning road work ahead”. 
Applicant was able to access the message codes on the sign by calling the sign’s 
manufacturer and falsely representing that he was a construction worker who needed 
the codes. He was provided this information and used it to access the sign’s computer. 
He then changed the sign’s message on several occasions. One of the messages he 
put on the sign was “police ahead” to warn motorists of police cars using radar for 
speed enforcement. He put this message up several times. He also put joke messages 
on the sign. He admitted to these actions. He did this because it was challenging and he 
thought it was amusing to change the sign.6  
 
 Applicant met with government investigators on September 27, 2007 and 
February 3, 2009. During these interviews he disclosed his hacking activities. There is 
no evidence in the record about any investigative interview conducted on July 25, 2007, 
as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. The government also agreed that no evidence was present.7  
 
 Applicant testified that he had matured since his hacking activities. He pointed 
out that he was young when they occurred. He also pointed out that in his current 
position he is trusted by the company to indentify computer vulnerabilities for their 
clients and has not violated that trust. A coworker, who possesses a security clearance, 
testified for the Applicant. The coworker has known Applicant for three years and sees 
him at work on a daily basis. He believes Applicant engages in only the highest of 
conduct, believes he is reliable, and trusts him completely.8  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
                                                          
5 GE 3, Tr. at 29-30, 33-35, 44-48. 
 
6 GE 2, 3; Tr. at 32-33. 
 
7 GE 2, 3; Tr. at 67-69. 
 
8 Tr. at 24-25, 58-63. 
 
 
5 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and  
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group.  
Applicant’s admitted hacking activities, including his premeditated acts of gaining 
access to his neighbor’s private email communications and his deliberate actions to 
interfere with state highway safety signs, are cause for concern. Even though he 
ultimately disclosed this conduct to investigators, his actions created vulnerabilities that 
affected his personal standing. AG ¶ 16(e) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1a. - 1.b. 
SOR ¶ 1.c (alleging Applicant made a false statement to investigators on July 25, 
2007) is not factually supported by the evidence. There is no evidence in the record of 
there even being an interview on the date alleged. Moreover, in the two interviews that 
are in evidence, the Applicant did disclose his hacking activities affecting the neighbor 
and the road sign. AG ¶ 16(b) does not apply to SOR ¶ 1.c. 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress. 
 Applicant’s hacking and social engineering attacks on his neighbor and on public 
safety are not minor events. These were serious acts that violated a person’s privacy 
and affected public safety. Although Applicant’s actions took place five years ago, given 
the deliberate and premeditative nature of his actions, I cannot conclude that the 
passage of time overcomes what he did. Applicant did not convince me that these types 
 
7 
 
 
of action will not recur. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply. Applicant was forthcoming in 
disclosing his actions to investigators thereby reducing his vulnerability to exploitation. 
However, he has never disclosed his hacking activities to the neighbor-victim because 
he still fears legal consequences. AG ¶ 17(e) does not apply. 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern pertaining to use of information 
technology systems: 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or 
component thereof; 
(b) illegal or unauthorized modification, destruction, manipulation or denial 
of access to information, software, firmware, or hardware in an information 
technology system; and 
(c) use of any information technology system to gain unauthorized access 
to another system or to a compartmented area within the same system. 
 Applicant’s hacking activities in 2005, as fully described under Guideline E 
above, fall under the three disqualifying conditions above. AG ¶¶ 40(a) – (c) apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 41 and especially considered the following: 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
 
8 
 
 
 For the same reasons that AG ¶ 17(c) did not apply to Applicant’s conduct under 
Guideline E, nor does AG ¶ 40(a) apply under this guideline.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered Applicant’s age at 
the time he engaged in the hacking conduct and the passage of time since the acts.  
Additionally, I have considered his current work environment and the strong 
recommendation he received from a coworker regarding Applicant’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. However, I also considered Applicant’s deliberate and premeditated 
actions, including falsely representing himself as someone else on more than one 
occasion, using his computer skills to violate a person’s privacy, and interfering with 
public safety. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security 
concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct  and Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  
 
 
9 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline M:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
