The Government submitted nine items in support of its case.      1
1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-06531
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: John C. Heath, Esquire
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A. Administrative Judge:
On, March 24, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
On May 13, 2010, in a notarized response, Applicant requested an administrative
determination, and in his answer to the SOR, admitted to each of the allegations under
the Financial Guideline, in SOR ¶ 1 except for three debts (¶¶ 1.c, 1.e and 1.j).
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated August 7,
2010.  Applicant received the FORM on August 16, 2010. He submitted additional1
information on August 17, 2010. On August 30, 2010, the Director, DOHA, forwarded
Applicant stated in his August 2010 response to the FORM that this is “no longer owed” and not on his      2
credit report. He reiterates this claim of resolution of his debts for the other alleged debts that are unpaid.
(SOR 1.b, 1.g, 1.h and 1.i)
2
the case for assignment to an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on
August 31, 2010. Based on a review of the case file, submissions, and exhibits, I find
Applicant failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security concern raised. Security
clearance is denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. Applicant served in
the United States Army from November 2000 until September 2004 and from June
2005 until May 2008. (Item 1) While serving in the military, Applicant held a security
clearance. Applicant noted approximately one month of unemployment in 2008. He has
worked for his current employer since July 2008. (Item 4)
Applicant married in September 2005. He and his spouse separated in
November 2007. At that time, Applicant learned that his “wife” was still legally married
to someone else. He consulted an attorney in 2009 and intends to obtain an annulment.
(Response to FORM )
The SOR alleged ten delinquent debts for unpaid accounts totaling $21,455 and
also alleged Applicant failed to file his 2007 and 2008 tax returns. (Item 8) Applicant
disclosed his delinquent accounts on his April 2009 security clearance application. In
his answer to the SOR, he admitted $19,097 in delinquent debt, and that he did not file
the 2007 and 2008 tax returns. 
The status of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR is as follows:
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a for a cell phone account in the amount of $1,259
is unpaid.   Applicant listed this debt on his personal financial statement, noting that he2
has not paid it. (Item 5)
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b for another phone account in the amount of
$1,405 is unpaid. Applicant listed this debt on his personal financial statement, noting
that he has not paid it. (Item 5)
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c for a credit card account in the amount of $801
was settled for $250. Applicant submitted documentation that the account was paid.
(Item 3)
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d for an automobile repossession in the amount of
$14,356 is unpaid. Applicant purchased the auto in 2004 and in 2005, when he was
deployed to Korea, he did a voluntary repossession. (Item 6) Applicant admitted he
defaulted on the loan. He initially admitted the debt in his answer to SOR, but he now
claims that he is disputing the amount. (Item 7)
3
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is for a medical account in the amount of $204
and is disputed. The dispute is confirmed on a recent credit report.
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f for a charged-off account in the amount of $330 is
unpaid. Although Applicant initially admitted owing the debt, when he responded to the
FORM, he stated he is disputing the debt.
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g for a utility bill in collection in the amount of $113.
This debt is unpaid.
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is for a mobile cell phone in the amount of
$1,212. This debt is unpaid.
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is for a collection account in the amount of $422.
This debt is unpaid.
The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j is for a collection account in the amount of $1,353.
This debt is paid. Applicant submitted a receipt for payment in full. (Answer to FORM).
SOR ¶ 1.k alleged Applicant “failed to file taxes for 2007 and 2008.” Applicant
explained that he separated from his wife in November 2007 and did not file “because
he thought they would be reconciled.” (Item 6) In 2008, he learned that he was not
legally married to his wife because she was still married to someone else. He did not
file because he wanted to get legal advice. In August 2010, Applicant filed his state tax
returns for 2008 and 2009. He also provided a copy of postal money orders for state tax
payments of $267 and $88. The record is not clear as to the status of the state 2007 tax
filing. 
Applicant’s federal tax returns for 2007, 2008, and 2009 were filed in August
2010, but it is not clear from the record if the full tax amounts were paid. Applicant
noted that he “needed to set up a payment plan for a federal 2007 tax period.” (Item 3)
He attached a copy of a $25 money order payable to the IRS. The total amount of tax
owed appears to be $1,070. 
When Applicant responded to the FORM, he submitted an IRS notice (reminder)
dated July 19, 2010 that he owes $1,317.51 from 2009 tax year. He also submitted a
copy of a postal money order payable to the United States Treasury for $650 for federal
taxes. The money order is dated August 12, 2010. He noted that he now owes only
$667 in back taxes to the IRS. 
Applicant consulted an attorney in July 2010 to investigate his delinquent
accounts because he believed that some accounts on his credit report were inaccurate,
invalid, or unverifiable. (Response to FORM) He explained that some accounts are no
longer listed on a credit report from Equifax. (July 2010) 
Applicant noted in his response to the FORM that he continues to pay off his
delinquent debt and “back taxes.” He believes his debt is reduced from approximately
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      3
4
$21,000 to $2,000. He noted that he is working very hard to achieve a zero balance so
that he may obtain a clearance. He believes his efforts should be taken into
consideration and that his case remain open. These statements appear inconsistent
with his disputes and claims that he “no longer owes” any accounts that do not appear
on his credit report.
Applicant submitted receipts for some debts that were not alleged on the SOR.
His credit reports do reflect some accounts that are “closed as a paid account.” The fact
that Applicant’s responses to the allegations changed several times creates some
confusion as to his intention to either pay his delinquent debt or to not pay the debt if it
is no longer on a credit report.
Applicant’s monthly net income is $2,352. His monthly expenses are $1,528. He
has a net remainder of $724. Applicant’s personal financial statement listed two debts
that are in an unpaid status, with no scheduled monthly payment. (Item 5) The two
delinquent accounts listed correspond with SOR ¶ 1.a, and 1.b. He listed no assets.
Applicant did not report any financial counseling.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The United States Government (Government) must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      4
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      6
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      7
 Id.      8
5
something less than a preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion4
is on the applicant.  5
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance6
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt7
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a8
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules
and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.” It also states that “an individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in
illegal acts to generate funds. 
6
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG ¶ 19(c), a “history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise
security concerns. Finally, AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local
income tax returns as required or the fraudulent filing of the same” is disqualifying.
Applicant admitted that he has approximately $19,000 in delinquent debt. In addition,
he has unresolved tax issues that stem from a 2007 tax period. Consequently, Financial
Considerations Mitigating Condition (FCMC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment) does not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies in part. As noted, Applicant’s 2007
marital separation impacted his decision to file his taxes. However, he did not act
responsibly in the situation. He waited until 2010 to file and pay his state taxes for 2008
and 2009. He is making payments on his federal tax for the 2007 tax year. Applicant
noted unemployment for approximately one month in 2008. He has been employed
since July 2008 and did not explain why he did not make greater progress on his SOR
debts, especially in light of his net remainder of $724 as shown on his PFS. He began
to pay the majority of his debts after he received the SOR. 
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies in part. Applicant has been steadily
employed since 2008. He paid two delinquent debts. He did not file or pay taxes for
several years, and did not do so until 2010. There is no indication the financial
problems will not recur. FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control) does not apply.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(e), (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of
actions to resolve the issue) partially applies. Applicant provided documentation that the
debts alleged in 1.e and 1.h are disputed.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2)
the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
7
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency
of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the
time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant served in the military for a period of time. He and his wife separated
in 2007 and later he learned that she was still married to another person. He did not file
federal or state income tax for tax years 2007 and 2008. He believed he needed time to
obtain legal advice based on his marital situation. However, he did not attempt to
resolve the issue until late 2009 or 2010. He admitted that he had approximately
$20,000 in delinquent debt but now claims that he is disputing the majority of the debt.
He points to the fact that several accounts are no longer on a recent credit report. He
has just filed his federal and state taxes for the years in question. Despite his steady
employment since July 2008, Applicant did not address his delinquent debts until 2010.
It is too soon to show a demonstrated track record of debt repayment or that his
financial problems are resolved or under control. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.I: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k: Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
