KEYWORD: Guideline B, Guideline F
DIGEST: The record contains no documentary evidence which would corroborate Applicant
claim that he had erected a corporate structure which shielded from liability for the debts. 
Furthermore,   Applicant’s witness (who was not a lawyer) was not definitive on this point.  The
Judge was obliged to consider Applicant’s assertions, but he was not required to accept them. 
Adverse decision affirmed
CASENO: 09-02220.a2
DATE: 09/28/2010
DATE: September 28, 2010
In Re:
------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-02220
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.
1The Judge made formal findings in favor of Applicant under Guideline B.  Those favorable finding are not at
issue on appeal.
 
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On November 5, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992,
as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On June 11, 2010, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Matthew E. Malone denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  In response, the Board
remanded the case to the Judge because of an incomplete record.  That matter has been corrected
and the case is again before the Board.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board
affirms the Judge’s unfavorable decision.1 
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: In 1997 Applicant entered into a
long term lease of a gas station from an oil distribution company.  Between 1997 and 2002,
Applicant operated this and two other gas stations as a Subchapter S corporation.  By doing business
this way, Applicant limited his personal liability and obtained a tax advantage through the way his
income was reported.  It was also possible for him to limit his debt liability to the amount he
invested in the company.  However, to do so, he would have had to properly structure his finances
to comply with IRS requirements.  Applicant did not present any information that showed he had
done so.  To incorporate his business, Applicant used the services of a person whose business it was
to file the appropriate paperwork with the state.  Applicant claimed that he thought this person was
also responsible for handling his debts, but he failed to establish that this was, in fact, part of this
person’s duties.  In February 2002, Applicant drafted an agreement wherein he, in essence, sublet
his position with his business lessor to another company.  This company agreed to run the gas station
business,  to pay Applicant a monthly amount for a sublease, and to make required payments to third
parties such as tax authorities, insurance companies and so on.  Applicant claimed that the 2002
agreement was, in fact, a sale of his interest in the gas station, but it is clear from a reading of the
agreement that Applicant intended to retain an interest in the business.  The business was
repossessed by the oil company in May 2005 because either Applicant or the company he leased the
business to had stopped making the necessary payments on oil and gas inventories.  Applicant
claimed that $167,000 in unpaid state taxes were due for periods after he “sold” the business and as
such, were the responsibility of the company with whom he made the 2002 agreement.  Applicant
has tried to no avail to negotiate this debt with the state tax authorities.  The credit reports obtained
during his background investigation revealed 27 other debts attributable to Applicant totaling
approximately $158,016.  Applicant identified these debts as corporate accounts he opened to pay
expenses of his business.  He claimed that these debts should have been paid by the other company
after 2002.   However, each of the credit reports in evidence lists these debts as either individual
accounts or joint accounts.  Additionally, several of the accounts were opened after Applicant
3
executed the 2002 agreement.  Applicant has made no payments on any of the debts listed in the
SOR. 
The Judge concluded that Applicant did not present sufficient information to support his
claims that all but two of the debts should not be attributed to him because they are related to his
business, and that business’s status as a Subchapter S corporation protected him from liability for
the debts alleged.  The credit reports shows the debts alleged are individual or joint accounts, and
not corporate accounts, and that many of them were opened after Applicant claimed he had sold his
business.  Available information shows that Applicant did not and could not sell the business, but
instead he subleased the business and tried to retain a level of income from it.  The fact that the
business ultimately failed did not relieve Applicant of his responsibilities as the primary lessor from
the oil distribution company.  Applicant did not establish the nature of the taxes owed nor did he
provide any support for his claims that the other company should have paid them.  Applicant has not
established that he has paid or otherwise resolved any of his debts.  Applicant did not present any
information that would show his finances will not continue to be a security concern in the future.
In light of this, none of the Guideline F mitigating conditions apply.  On balance, he has failed to
carry his burden of persuasion to mitigate, refute, or extenuate the security concerns raised by his
financial problems.      
Applicant argues that he demonstrated that he is a reliable and trustworthy individual who
suffered financial problems arising from one transaction, the sale of his business.  He claims that the
Judge’s decision is arbitrary and capricious because it does not take into consideration the evidence
presented, namely evidence Applicant alleges establishes that he is not responsible for the debts
listed in the SOR, but rather the debts are the responsibility of the corporation and/or the company
that took over the business in 2002.  Applicant also argues that even assuming the debts incurred by
the corporation are Applicant’s responsibility, the accumulation of debt was largely out of his
control.  He states that he intended to set up the corporation so that there was no personal liability
and he continues to believe that there was a sale of the corporation in 2002 and that all debt incurred
after that time is not his responsibility.  Lastly, Applicant asserts that the case against him is
mitigated since the debts were incurred under circumstances unlikely to occur again and which were
largely beyond his control.  Applicant’s arguments do not establish error on the part of the Judge.
There is a rebuttable presumption that the Judge has considered all the record evidence.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-18303 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 13, 2008).  Applicant has not overcome that
presumption in this case.  The Judge’s basic conclusion that the evidence did not support Applicant’s
theory that the debts were not his responsibility is sustainable.  Regarding Applicant’s basic premise
that he had successfully erected a corporate structure that shielded him from debt, the Board notes
that the record does not contain any documentary evidence on point, such as articles of
incorporation, that would explain the legal status of the business. Thus, there was no meaningful
way for the Judge to evaluate the accuracy of Applicant’s claims.  Also, the testimony of the witness
who filed incorporation papers for Applicant (who was not a lawyer) was less than definitive on the
issues of whether the corporation was, in fact, a Subchapter S corporation, on what liability for debts
exists under a Subchapter S corporation, and on what the status of Applicant’s debts are in this
2See Transcript, pp. 46-55.
 
3Applicant’s continued insistence that he sold the business in 2002 (or at least that he thought at the time that
he had sold the business) despite clear evidence to the contrary raises questions concerning how well he understands his
business dealings and the state of his finances.
  
4
particular case.2  The evidence that Applicant is not liable for the debts of his business comes
exclusively from Applicant’s written responses and his hearing testimony.  While Applicant’s
assertions are evidence that the Judge was required to consider, the Judge was not obligated to
accept such assertions.  The Judge discussed in detail evidence that contravenes Applicant’s
assertions, including the fact that the debts are listed as Applicant’s personal debts on various credit
reports, the fact that Applicant retained an interest in the business after 2002, and the fact that a
number of the debts listed on the credit reports post date the 2002 agreement wherein Applicant
transferred the authority to operate the business to a third party.3  The Judge also noted that
Applicant’s debts remain, for the most part, outstanding and Applicant has not addressed them other
than to make preliminary consultations with tax advisors and bankruptcy attorneys.  He concluded
that Applicant did not present any information that would show his finances will not continue to be
a security concern in the future.  The numerous debts listed on the credit reports suffice in this case
to establish the Government’s case.  The burden thus shifted to Applicant to establish matters in
mitigation.  The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant did not establish a case in mitigation is
sustainable on this record
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
Applicant’s appeal arguments are essentially objections to the Judge’s rejection of his theory that
a corporate mechanism shielded him from liability regarding his substantial business debt. These
objections do not establish error.
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant
conditions and factors.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited
by Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record,
the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory
explanation for his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the
choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co.,
463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with
5
the interests of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).
Therefore, the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jmaes E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
