KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: When an applicant admits the SOR allegations against him or the Government presents
substantial evidence for the allegations, the burden shifts to the applicant to provide evidence in
mitigation.  Accordingly, the Judge did not err in his treatment of the burden of persuasion.
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 09-03760.a2
DATE: 09/21/2010
DATE: September 21, 2010
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-03760
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Barry W. Rorex, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On November 3, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On May 18, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Robert Robinson
1The Judge found that Applicant had another tax lien, for $1,588, which was not alleged in the SOR.  This
evidence was relevant to an understanding of, among other things, the nature, extent, and seriousness of Applicant’s
financial problems; the circumstances underlying those problems; the frequency and recency of those problems, and the
presence of rehabilitation.  See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(a).
Gales denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive
¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  By decision dated July 16, 2010, we remanded the case to the Judge for
him to reconstruct evidence missing from the file.  On August 16, 2010, the Judge issued a remand
decision that incorporated his previous decision.  
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge failed to consider all of
the record evidence; whether the Judge mis-weighed the record evidence; whether the Judge mis-
applied the burden of persuasion; and whether the Judge failed properly to apply the pertinent
mitigating conditions.  Consistent with the following discussion, we affirm the decision of the Judge.
 
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is a supply technician for
a Defense contractor.  He served in the U.S. Army for twenty years.  Following his retirement, he
held a number of jobs and also experienced periods of unemployment.  
Applicant and his wife filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy, which was subsequently converted
to Chapter 7.  Applicant was discharged in bankruptcy in 1997.  In 2000, they filed again for Chapter
13 bankruptcy protection.  The petition was eventually dismissed.  In April, 2010, Applicant and his
wife again filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection.
Applicant had numerous delinquent debts alleged in his SOR, for such things as a state
income tax lien, credit cards, etc.1  Although the Judge found in his favor regarding some of the
alleged debts, for others he concluded that Applicant had failed to demonstrate payment or any
mitigating factor.  The Judge gave him credit for circumstances beyond his control that affected his
financial situation, such as his periods of unemployment, family health problems, and loss of a
granddaughter.  However, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s financial problems were primarily
his own responsibility.  He noted that, during 2007 and 2008, Applicant received a substantial
salary, virtually tax free, while working in a war zone, and that he has received a pension since his
retirement from the Army.  The Judge concluded that these emoluments should have permitted
greater efforts at debt reduction than Applicant demonstrated in his case for mitigation.  
Applicant contends that the Judge failed to consider record evidence favorable to him.  For
example, he contends that the official who performed Applicant’s personal interview found
Applicant to be free of security concerns.  He quotes the official as follows: “There is nothing in the
subject’s background or lifestyle . . . that leaves him susceptible to blackmail or coercion.”
Summary of Interview, contained in Government Exhibit 2, Interrogatories, dated June 8, 2009.
However, the quoted language is merely the interviewer’s summary of Applicant’s answers during
the interview.  These words do not constitute an opinion by the interviewer concerning Applicant’s
eligibility for a security clearance.  
2See Note 1 above. 
 
Applicant also argues that the Judge failed to consider evidence that necessary expenses such
as transportation costs diminished the amount of disposable income available to Applicant for debt
repayment.  Moreover, he argues that the Judge failed properly to weigh the record evidence, for
example, his efforts to pay off his debts, the age of his debts, and the effect of unemployment on his
financial situation.  However, a Judge is presumed to have considered all of the record evidence.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-11645 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 8, 2010).  Applicant’s presentation on appeal
is not sufficient to demonstrate that the Judge failed to consider the entire record.  Neither is it
sufficient to demonstrate that he weighed the evidence in an arbitrary or capricious manner.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-21819 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 13, 2009).
Applicant notes the Judge’s statements to the effect that Applicant had not corroborated his
claims to have paid off his tax liens.2  “Applicant believes that this incorrectly places the burden on
him to prove the debt has been paid rather than on the government to prove that it has not been
paid.”  Applicant Brief at 6.  However, once an applicant admits the SOR allegations against him,
or the Government produces substantial evidence of controverted allegations, the burden shifts to
Applicant to present evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate” the security concerns raised
by the admissions and/or evidence.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  In this case Applicant admitted the one
tax lien alleged in the SOR.  Furthermore, the Government, in its case-in-chief, presented substantial
evidence of Guideline F security concerns.  Accordingly, Applicant bore the burden of persuasion
as to mitigation. The Judge properly evaluated Applicant’s case in light of that burden of persuasion.
The challenged statements are not erroneous.   
After reviewing the record, we conclude that the Judge examined the relevant data and
articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the
facts found and the choice made’” both as to the mitigating conditions and the whole person factors.
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The
Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody              
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
