1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-04394
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On February 25, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns
arising under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended, Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).
In an undated answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted three of the seven
allegations set forth under Guideline F and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on April 16, 2010. The parties
proposed a hearing date of May 26, 2010. A notice setting that date for the hearing was
issued on May 6, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Applicant gave testimony
and either presented or referenced six documents, which were noted as received as
exhibits (Exs.) A-F without objection. Department Counsel offered six documents, which
were admitted without objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-6. Applicant was given until June
11, 2010, to submit any additional materials. DOHA received the  transcript (Tr.) of the
proceeding on June 4, 2010. On June 21, 2010, Department Counsel forwarded seven
 Tr. 19.      1
 Tr. 22.      2
 Tr. 60.      3
 Tr. 23.      4
 Tr. 23, 78.      5
 Tr. 24 regarding SOR allegation ¶ 1.e.      6
2
documents received from Applicant between June 4, 2010, and June 10, 2010. They
were accepted into the record as Exs. G-M without objection and the record was
closed. Based on a review of the testimony, submissions, and exhibits, I find Applicant
met his burden in mitigating security concerns. Clearance is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 45-year-old equipment sub-custodian working for an established
defense contractor. He has worked for the same company since 2009. He earned a
high school diploma and an associate’s degree in logistics. Applicant retired from the
United States military after 22 years of service. He is married and has seven children.  
Applicant served in the United States Air Force from 1983 until he was honorably
discharged in June 2005. He relocated to accept a civil service position in his current
region of residence, which has been adversely impacted by recent economic
conditions. He made an offer on a house. The anticipated position was eliminated by a
financial cut back, impeding his hope of buying a home.  He could not find another1
logistics-related position, so he looked for any available positions. In order to meet
expenses after two months of unemployment and a delay in receiving his military
retirement and disability payments, he found work in August 2005 as a convenience
store manager. In about February of 2006, he endured a month of unemployment
before finding a better paying job.  2
In March 2006, Applicant accepted a night shift position at a discount chain store
franchise.  In November 2008, he was let go for failing to meet production goals while3
the company faced a period of financial cutbacks.  Applicant was unable to find another4
job until March 2009. While unemployed, he struggled to provide for his wife and
children through the winter. During this time, his financial resources were depleted and
there was a delay in his receipt of unemployment compensation. The winter weather in
his region caused him to incur unusually high utility bills.   Applicant worked with his5
utility providers to maintain electricity throughout the winter. Some relief arrived with his
receipt of unemployment compensation in early 2009. Around the same time, one of his
creditors contacted him about his account. He worked out a repayment plan that
incorporated a delay in repayment until he was re-employed.  In mid-March 2009, he6
 Tr. 25. Regarding the debt noted as SOR allegation ¶ 1.e.      7
 Tr. 26-27.      8
 Ex. M (Letter, dated Jun. 8, 2010).      9
 Tr. 33.      10
 Exs. C-E (References).      11
 Tr. 52.      12
 Ex. A (Credit union documents)      13
 Ex. K (Notation of payment, dated Jun. 3, 2010).      14
3
accepted his current position as an equipment custodian. Soon thereafter, he started
making payments to the creditor.7
Once again employed, Applicant moved his family into a house under a rent-to-
own plan. The house, however, had many problems. Applicant incurred related
expenses in managing those problems, along with the expense of supporting his wife
and seven children.  By the autumn of 2009, he was also incurring significantly high8
utility bills during a notably bitter winter. 
Applicant pursued financial planning assistance, but is unable to pursue the
program offered.  He has not received financial counseling.  At work, he is well-9 10
regarded for his performance and trustworthiness.  Five of his children are home-11
schooled in order to reserve funds. The oldest child attends a local parochial school at
an annual cost of about $2,500.  The youngest child is not school age. Applicant’s wife12
is currently the homeschool provider, but she is pursuing certification in editing to
prepare her for the workplace.
At issue in the SOR are the following debts, representing allegations ¶¶ 1.a-1.f.
Applicant admitted allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, and 1.f in his response to the SOR, and
denied the remaining debts.
1.a – Judgment for $2,102 – In repayment. Applicant recently proposed a repayment
plan that was accepted by the creditor to satisfy a 2007 judgment. He paid $400 in May
2010, and is scheduled to then pay $100 per month for nine months, followed by
monthly payments of $225 until the balance is satisfied. Applicant submitted evidence
of both the plan and the initial $400 payment.  He also submitted a receipt indicating13
payment of $100 in June 2010.14
 Tr. 38-41; Original Case File, Attachment to response to SOR.      15
 Tr. 41.      16
 Ex. B (Receipt).      17
 Tr. 42.      18
 Tr. 24-25, 46; Ex. I (Banking statement, Jun. 2009 to May 2010).      19
 Tr. 49-51; Ex. H (Transaction history).      20
4
1.b, 1.c, and 1.g – Medical account balances of $29, $15, $380  – Paid. Applicant
provided evidence that these hospital bills from 2007 were recently paid.  The15
Government indicated its satisfaction these debts are paid.16
1.d – Charged-off account for $7,306. – Settled. The date of last activity on this account
is shown as 2005. Applicant was offered a settlement opportunity to resolve the matter
on payment of $2,923, which was negotiated for settlement by payment of $2,500.
Applicant recently paid the agreed upon sum.  The Government indicated its17
satisfaction that this matter has been settled.  18
1.e – Collection account balance of $9,326 – In repayment. Applicant provided
evidence that he resumed repayment on this debt after he started his current position
last year, as described above.  19
1.f – Collection account balance for $100 – Paid. On March 29, 2010, this account was
satisfied by telephonic payment to a third party collection entity, identified at Tr. 50.20
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      21
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      22
 Id.      23
 Id.      24
 AG ¶ 18.      25
5
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a21
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  22
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified
information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access23
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.24
Based upon consideration of the evidence, Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) is pertinent to this case. Conditions pertaining to this AG that could
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would
mitigate such concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
Analysis
Under Guideline F, “failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
an unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.”  The guideline sets out several potentially disqualifying conditions. Here,25
6
Applicant had several delinquent debts, some of which still retain unpaid balances.
Such facts are sufficient to raise Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC
DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC AG ¶ 9(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations). With such conditions raised, the burden
shifts to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant’s income since he was discharged from the military has varied, mostly
due to a position eliminated after he relocated to accept the job, multiple periods of
unemployment, difficulty in finding employment opportunities, and a delay in receiving
unemployment compensation. During this time, he accepted mostly low paying retail
positions that did not utilize his logistics experience. As a result of these circumstances,
bills were neglected. He is now employed by a stable employer in an industry that is
less vulnerable to local economics. He has tried to minimize expenses, resorting to a
relocation to accept a job and homeschooling for most of his children. Some of the
debts, since paid, were incurred for hospital services. While most of the debts at issue
are older, he was recently able to pay or enter into repayment on all the accounts at
issue. Such conditions, as well as his recent ameliorative actions, are sufficient to raise
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment) and FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted
in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation)
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances) apply. 
Applicant pursued financial planning, but he was rebuffed in his efforts for lack of
sufficient investment funds. There is no evidence he has pursued financial counseling.
Consequently,  FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for
the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control) does not apply.
While his debts are older and his response to meeting his obligations delayed,
six of the debts at issue were addressed this year, while one has been in repayment
since last year. With all the seven debts at issue suitably addressed, FC MC ¶ 20(d)
(the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts) applies.
Given the efforts and circumstances described above, the current status of the
debts at issue, and Applicant’s demonstrated willingness and ability to persevere on his
two remaining debts, financial considerations security concerns are mitigated.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
7
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant is a credible and mature man who honorably served in the U.S.
armed forces. He is a devoted husband and father. He moved his family to a new
region in search of stable employment. When he arrived, he found that the offered job
was not as described. He found it difficult to find stable employment in the region,
incurring delinquent debt in pursuit of any viable job offers. In doing so, he accepted
those positions he could find, rather than continuing his work in logistics or holding out
for higher paid positions. The jobs he found were modest positions. His expenses were
impacted by unusually high utility bills in the last two winters. 
While there was significant delay in finally addressing some of the debts at issue,
Applicant’s credible testimony reflects that he was previously willing, but financially
unable to address those debts. In the past year, he paid five of the debts at issue. Two
of his remaining delinquent debts are now in repayment. Now working for a stable
employer, he should be able to continue making payments on those two remaining
debts. In light of the facts in this case, financial considerations security concerns are
mitigated. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-g For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
