  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 09-04188 
   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has six unpaid accounts placed for collection or charged off totaling 
about $31,000. Applicant has failed to rebut or mitigate the security concerns under 
financial considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
1 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on September 24, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
  
 On November 18, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On June 7, 2010, I was assigned the case. On June 7, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing for the hearing held on June 28, 2010.  At the hearing, the Government offered 
Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibit A, which was admitted into 
evidence without objection. The record was held open to allow additional information 
from Applicant. No additional material was submitted. On July 7, 2010, DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the factual allegations in ¶ 1.b and 
1.i of the SOR. He admitted the remaining factual allegations, with explanations. He 
also provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security 
clearance. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. After 
a thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old software engineer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since October 2008, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. Applicant 
was in the United States Air Force from February 1997 through August 1999. (Ex. 4, DD 
Form 214) Applicant asserted he left the Air Force in August 2001. (Tr. 34) After leaving 
the Air Force, Applicant was unsuccessful in his attempt to become an insurance agent, 
and returned to the information technology field. (Ex. 1) Before obtaining his current job, 
Applicant was a software consultant working on projects routinely lasting three to four 
months. (Tr. 35) As a consultant he was paid $75 per hour. (Tr. 36) Applicant was 
unemployed from February 2002 through August 2002; May 2004 through July 2004; 
June 2007 through November 2007; and from June 2008 through August 2008. (Ex. 1) 
 
In July 20092, Applicant enrolled with a company specializing in credit and debt 
counseling, credit restoration, and credit score rebuilding. The company was working to 
resolve five derogatory accounts listed in the SOR. Those debts were: $53 (SOR ¶ 1.d); 
$8,930 (SOR ¶ 1.d), $12,986 (SOR ¶ 1.h); $1,810 (SOR ¶ 1.i); and, $538 (SOR ¶ 1.j). 
Ex. 4) The service agreement required a $250 initial set-up fee and $65 monthly service 
fee for work performed. There is an indication the initial set-up fee and the monthly 
service fee would be automatically deducted from Applicant’s debit card. (Ex. 4) 
Applicant asserts, but did not document, that the monthly charge is being debited from 
 
 
2 There is a March 2009 letter from the company indicating they were currently working on resolution on 
accounts with eight creditors. (Ex. 4) However, the service agreement with this company was signed in 
July 2009. 
 
3 
 
 
 
his account. (Tr. 23) He asserted he had paid the company approximately $1,200. (Tr. 
29) 
 
Applicant failed to show what the company has done to address his delinquent 
accounts. He believes their method is to send out letters to the creditors regarding 
discrepancies on his CBR and attempt to negotiate settlements on his debts. (Tr. 28) He 
stated, “I couldn’t tell you the details of what they do.” (Tr. 27) Two accounts have been 
removed from his CBR. The record was kept open for Applicant to provide the 
company’s current actions to address his delinquent accounts. (Tr. 30) No documents 
were received. 
 
 In 1997, Applicant asserted he settled a $1,810 credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.i) prior 
to joining the Air Force. (Tr. 38) The account had been opened in January 1996. (Ex. 2) 
Applicant’s March 2009 credit bureau report (CBR) lists the account as having been 180 
days past due before being charged off. This debt was disputed and deleted from 
Applicant’s August 2009 CBR. (Applicant’s answer to SOR)  
 
 In January 2005, Applicant obtained numerous student loans for college. He 
incurred a $5,613 (SOR ¶ 1.a) tuition fee owed directly to the college. As of March 
2009, the loan was past due in the amount of $7,484. (Ex. 2) Applicant received several 
checks from the Department of Veteran’s Affairs (VA) through the G.I. Bill program (Tr. 
24), which totaled $19,000 or $20,000. (Ex. 3) Applicant assumed the VA had paid his 
college tuition directly. Instead of using the checks to pay his tuition, he used the money 
for living expenses. Almost immediately after enrolling in college, he obtained a full-time 
job and failed to dis-enroll from college. (Ex. 3) Applicant asserted his college tuition 
debt is the same obligation as the VA debt. (Tr. 25) He was asked to provide 
documentation that the two debts were the same obligation. (Tr. 45) He failed to 
document that the debts were the same obligation.  
 
Since 2005, Applicant’s federal income tax refunds were intercepted and applied 
to his VA loan debt. Applicant’s March 2009 CBR also lists five Sallie Mae student loans 
with a zero balance. (Ex. 2) As of May 2009, Applicant had repaid his VA education 
indebtedness ($2,426.08). (Applicant’s answer to the SOR) A VA debt was also 
challenged and deleted from Applicant’s March 2009 CBR. 
 
The SOR lists two state higher education accounts placed for collection ($689, 
SOR ¶ 1.f and $459, SOR ¶ 1.g). In November 2009, Applicant made a $463 payment 
to the state higher education account. (Applicant’s answer to SOR) Applicant asserted 
both accounts have been paid. (Tr. 33) He was asked to provide documentation 
supporting payment of each debt. No documents were received. Applicant’s May 2010 
CBR does list the two accounts as paid collection accounts with a zero balance. (Ex. 6) 
  
Applicant incurred two debts with the same creditor: $8,930 for a credit card 
account charged off (SOR ¶ 1.e) and $12,989 for a repossessed vehicle (SOR ¶ 1.h). 
 
4 
 
 
 
Both accounts were opened in August 2005. Due to unemployment Applicant was 
unable to repay his auto loan as agreed. Applicant had three cars before going through 
several lay-offs. He voluntarily returned one car to the creditor so he could stay current 
on the other two cars. In his April 2009 interview, Applicant stated he owed 
approximately $8,000 on the credit card and was past due on the account. At that time, 
April 2009, he had not contacted the creditor, but did plan to pay the debt and it was 
“one of his next priorities to pay off.” (Ex. 3) He stated it was his intent to contact the 
creditor and negotiate a repayment plan. (Ex. 3)  
 
Applicant’s August 2009 Personal Financial Statement (PFS) lists monthly 
payments of $312 on the vehicle repossession and $90 on the credit card repayment. 
(Ex. 4) Applicant failed to document he made any payment on these two debts. At the 
hearing, he asserted these accounts were being handled by the debt resolution service. 
(Tr. 32)  
  
Applicant incurred a $578 electric bill (SOR ¶ 1.c) Applicant moved from one 
location to another. After vacating the apartment, the new tenants did not transfer the 
electrical service account to their name. Applicant did not see why he needed to pay for 
service when he no longer lived at that address. (Applicant’s answer to SOR) Applicant 
asserted the debt had been paid and he would provide documentation. (Tr. 32) No 
documents were received. 
 
Applicant denies making purchases at a hobby store and incurring a $665 debt 
(SOR ¶ 1.b). He asserted this debt was included in those with the debt resolution 
service. (Tr. 26) However, the company’s March 2009 letter (Ex. 4) fails to list either the 
original creditor or the collection firm as an account the service was attempting to 
resolve.  
 
Applicant incurred a $53 debt (SOR ¶ 1.d) as the result of a returned check. (Ex. 
6) The debt is listed in Applicant’s May 2010 CBR as paid with a zero balance. (Ex. 6) 
At the hearing, Applicant stated it was paid and he had documentation showing it was 
paid. (Tr. 32) No documents were received.  
 
As of April 2009, Applicant’s monthly income was approximately $6,700 and his 
monthly expenses were approximately $3,600. (Ex. 3) As of August 2009, his net 
monthly income was approximately $6,640, his total monthly expenses were $2,500, 
and his net monthly remainder was approximately $3,700. (Ex. 4) In At the hearing, 
Applicant said his yearly income had increased. (Tr. 42)  
 
In December 2009, Applicant obtained a $281,000 mortgage. (Tr. 39) He is 
current on his $2,100 monthly mortgage payments. (Ex. A, Tr. 40) In February or March 
2010, Applicant purchased a 2005 Nissan for $16,000. He is current on the $403 
monthly payments. (Tr. 40) He pays $900 monthly for his daughter’s private school 
 
5 
 
 
 
tuition. (Tr. 41) Applicant has been married since December 1997. He has four children 
ages 1, 3, 8, and 12. His wife does not work outside the home. (Tr. 37)  
 
 A summary of Applicant’s judgment, accounts charged off, accounts placed for 
collection and other unpaid obligations and their current status follows: 
  
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a. Account placed for 
collection for college 
tuition. 
$7,484 Unpaid. Applicant paid his VA student 
loan, but failed to document this debt 
and the VA debt were the same 
obligation.  
b. Account placed for 
collection. 
$665 
 
Unpaid. Applicant has no information 
about this debt. (Tr. 26) Applicant 
asserted this debt was being handled 
by the debt resolution service, but is 
not listed as an account the service is 
attempting to resolve. (Ex. 4) 
c. Collect for an electricial 
utility account. 
$578 
 
Unpaid. Applicant asserted the debt 
had been paid, but failed to provide 
any documentation.  
d. Account placed for 
returned check.  
$53 Paid. (Ex. 6)  
e. A charged-off credit card 
account. 
$8,930 Unpaid. this debt was being handled 
by the debt resolution service, but 
there is no showing what action, if any, 
the service has taken concerning this 
debt.  
f. State higher education 
account placed for 
collection. 
$689 Paid. Applicant’s May 2010 CBR lists 
this as a paid collection account with a 
zero balance. (Ex. 6) 
g. State higher education 
account placed for 
collection. 
$459 Paid. See item f. above.  
h. Vehicle repossession 
debt. 
$12,986 Unpaid. This debt was being handled 
by the debt resolution service, but 
there is no showing what action, if any, 
the service has taken concerning this 
debt. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
i Discover account 
charged off. 
$1,810 Deleted from Applicant’s August 2009 
CBR. 
j Account placed for 
collection. 
$538 Unpaid. This debt was being handled by 
the debt resolution service, but there is 
no showing what action, if any, the 
service has taken concerning this debt. 
 Total debt listed in SOR $34,201  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
 
7 
 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant had ten charge-off or 
accounts placed for collection, which totaled approximately $34,000. Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 
Although Applicant was informed he need to provide documentation establishing 
he had paid, was paying, had established repayment plans, or had successfully 
disputed debts, no documents were received. Six accounts, which are past due, 
charged off, or placed for collection, have not been paid.  
 
 Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of any mitigating conditions 
because he did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his delinquent 
debts. His delinquent debts are a continuing course of conduct. Applicant does not 
receive credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because he did not establish that his financial problems 
“occurred under such circumstances that [they are] unlikely to recur.” There is doubt 
about whether Applicant is fully committed to resolving his delinquent SOR debts and is 
making adequate steps to do so.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) has limited applicability. Applicant was unemployed seven months in 
2002, three months in 2004, six months in 2007, and three months in 2008. 
Unemployment is a condition largely beyond the person's control. Applicant has been 
employed full time since October 2008. As of April 2009, his monthly income was 
approximately $6,700 and his monthly expenses were approximately $3,600. As of 
August 2009, his net monthly income was approximately the same and his total monthly 
expenses were $1,000 less. His net monthly remainder was approximately $3,700. 
Applicant has had sufficient income to address some of this debt.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. Six of his debts remain unaddressed. He contracted 
with a debt resolution service to assist him with his debts, but he has only limited 
awareness of what the service has done on his behalf. The service wrote letters 
disputing the debts and two debts were removed from his recent CBR. However, 
Applicant admits incurring four of his unpaid accounts. He admitted the $8,930 credit 
card debt (SOR ¶ 1.e), the $12,986 repossession (SOR ¶ 1.h), the $578 electrical utility 
bill (SOR ¶ 1.c), and that he incurred a tuition bill (SOR ¶ 1.a). He disputed the 
remaining two debts ($665, SOR ¶ 1.b and $538, SOR ¶ 1.j). 
 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) applies only to the two state higher education loans 
and the returned check collection account, which have been paid.  
 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) applies only to the $1,810 credit card debt (SOR ¶ 
1.i). He asserted he paid the debt before joining the Air Force in 1997. The debt was 
challenged and removed from his CBR. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to the two other 
debts he is disputing. Merely stating he does not owe the debt is insufficient. He must 
have a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt and provide 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provide evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. He has failed to provide any documentation.  
 
In sum, Applicant should have been more diligent and made greater efforts 
sooner to resolve his delinquent SOR debts. He has not provided documentation 
 
9 
 
 
 
showing sufficient progress on his SOR debts. His actions are simply inadequate to fully 
mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant said he had 
documentation showing certain debts had been paid and the debt resolution service 
was acting on his behalf to resolve the remaining debts. He has documented that one 
debt ($1,810) was deleted from his CBR and that three debts ($53, $459, and $689) 
were paid. This addresses $3,000 of the $34,000 in delinquent debt. Six debts totaling 
approximately $31,000 have yet to be addressed.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, financial considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f – 1.g:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
