 
1 
 
 
                            
                   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08715 
                     )                                                                                          
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Debra L. Roth, Esquire, and Julia H. Perkins, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the record in this case, the applicable adjudicative 
guidelines, and the whole-person concept, I conclude that Applicant mitigated the 
Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, but failed to 
rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline C, Foreign 
Preference. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) on July 6, 2009. On March 8, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under the foreign preference and foreign influence adjudicative guidelines. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
    
 
2 
 
 
                                           
 On April 16, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 3, 2010. 
On May 5, 2010, DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing, scheduling the case for hearing on 
May 26, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced four exhibits, which 
were marked Ex. 1 through 4 and admitted without objection. Applicant testified, called 
no other witnesses, and introduced nine exhibits, which were marked as Ex. A through 
Ex. I and admitted without objection.  
 
 Applicant submitted information about the country of Uruguay, derived from 
official U.S. government documents, for administrative notice.1 The Government did not 
object to Applicant’s administrative notice documents, and they are identified in the 
record as Hearing Exhibit (H.E.) 1. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on 
June 8, 2010.  
 
                                          Procedural Matters 
 
Prior to his hearing, Applicant submitted a document correcting a statement he 
made in his Answer to the SOR. His original statement read: “My parents, two sisters, 
their husbands and children, my thirteen aunts, uncles and more than thirty first cousins 
are all US citizens and reside in the USA.” In a notarized statement, dated May 24, 
2010, Applicant corrected that statement with the following information: 
 
The fact is that out of fifteen aunts and uncles, nine siblings of my mother, 
and six siblings of my Dad, all are or were U.S. citizens (two are now 
deceased) but only fourteen of them reside (or resided) in the USA. My 
uncle [name deleted] . . . has resided in . . . East Africa, carrying out his 
duties as a . . . missionary.  
 
Applicant’s correction to his Answer to the SOR was noted and included in the 
record as H.E. 2. 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend SOR ¶ 1.a. to conform with 
facts provided by Applicant in his Answer to the SOR. The allegation at SOR ¶ 1.a. was 
amended to read: “As a native-born United States citizen, you took action to obtain 
Ireland citizenship in 1993.” Applicant did not object to the amendment, and it was 
approved. (Tr. 27-28.) 
 
At the conclusion of the hearing, I asked the Parties to provide me with 
information addressing the conditions under which children born to an Uruguayan 
citizen and a U.S. citizen in the United States might claim Uruguayan citizenship. On 
 
1 The documents offered by Applicant for administrative notice were: Background Note: Uruguay, U.S. 
Department of State, April 8, 2010, (7 pages) and Country Specific Information: Uruguay, U.S. 
Department of State, March 12, 2010 (5 pages). 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
June 4, 2010, the Parties filed a joint memorandum which provided the information I had 
requested. The memorandum is marked as H.E. 3. 
 
On June 14, 2010, Applicant filed a motion for leave to submit additional 
evidence for the record. Applicant’s motion is marked as H.E. 4. The Government did 
not oppose Applicant’s motion, and Applicant was granted leave to submit additional 
evidence. Applicant subsequently provided a notarized statement, dated June 8, 2010, 
that reflected his and his wife’s intentions regarding the citizenship of their two children. 
The Government did not object, and Applicant’s statement was marked as his Ex. J and 
admitted to the record.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The amended SOR contains three allegations that raise security concerns under 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.) and three allegations that 
raise security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 2.a. through 
2.c.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the three Guideline C allegations 
and the three Guideline B allegations but denied they were of security significance. He 
provided additional information. His admissions are admitted as findings of fact.  
  
 Applicant, a U.S. citizen, was born to citizens of the United States residing in the 
United States. He holds dual citizenship with the Republic of Ireland. He is employed as 
a senior consultant by a government contractor. He seeks a security clearance.2 (Ex. 1; 
Tr. 91.) 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old, married, and the father of two young children. 
Applicant’s wife, to whom he has been married for 15 years, is a citizen of Uruguay and 
a U.S. resident alien. (Ex. 1; Tr. 40-39, 64-65.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife is a homemaker. She resides with Applicant in the United States 
and is not employed outside of their home. When she came to the United States, she 
worked as a nanny and as a preschool teacher. She has never been employed by a 
foreign government.  (Tr. 121.)  
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law and brother-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Uruguay. The father-in-law is retired and lives in an assisted-living facility in Uruguay. 
He receives a pension from the government of Uruguay. Before retirement, he worked 
as an electrician. He was not employed by the government of Uruguay, and he did not 
serve in the military of Uruguay. (Tr. 121-122.) 
 
 Applicant’s wife’s brother works at a rubber factory in Uruguay. He has neither 
worked for the government nor served in the military of Uruguay. (Tr. 125.) 
 
2 Applicant stated that he had undergone a background check when he accepted employment with a 
federal executive agency. He stated, however, that he did not have an active security clearance, and he 
did not have access to classified information. Tr. 118-119.) 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant’s wife speaks with her father on the telephone every two weeks. 
Applicant speaks with his father-in-law less frequently, since his father-in-law speaks 
very little English. Applicant speaks by telephone with his wife’s brother once or twice a 
year. (Tr. 123-124.) 
 
 Although the citizenship of Applicant’s two American-born children was not 
alleged in the SOR, he stated that he and his wife did not intend to apply for dual 
citizenship with Uruguay for the children. (Ex. J.)    
 
 In 1991, when he was 22 years old, Applicant received a Bachelor of Arts degree 
in history. In 2000, he received a Master of Business Administration degree. Both of 
Applicant’s degrees were from U.S. universities. (Answer to SOR; Ex. 1.) 
 
 From September to November 1991, Applicant traveled in Europe. During this 
trip, he stopped in Ireland for a week and visited for the first time with two great aunts, 
who were the sisters of his maternal grandfather. Applicant did not know his maternal 
grandfather, who died before he was born. However, Applicant’s large extended 
American family revered the memory of the grandfather, who immigrated to the United 
States from Ireland at age seventeen in about 1924. During his visit to Ireland, Applicant 
also met and spent time with several other Irish cousins and their families. (Answer to 
SOR; Tr. 41-50.) 
 
  Applicant returned to the United States and in 1992 took a position as a budget 
analyst with a federal agency. He learned that he could apply for Irish citizenship 
because his grandfather had been born in Ireland. He applied for, and received, 
citizenship in the Republic of Ireland in 1993. At his hearing, he confirmed his dual 
citizenship with the Republic of Ireland. (Ex. 1; Tr. 51-53, 119.) 
 
 Applicant stated that one reason he obtained Irish citizenship was to honor his 
grandfather, establish familial connections, and strengthen his cultural bonds with 
Ireland. Since obtaining Irish citizenship, Applicant has not returned to Ireland. In 1997, 
Applicant acquired an Irish passport. In 2007, when his Irish passport expired, he 
renewed it. Applicant’s renewed Irish passport will expire in 2017. Applicant stated that 
he had not used his Irish passport for foreign travel. (Tr. 51-56.) 
 
 Applicant provided a photocopy of his current Irish passport for the record. The 
cover of Applicant’s Irish passport identifies it as an official document of the European 
Union (EU) and of Ireland.  (Ex. 3 at 13.)   
  
 Applicant explained that he had other reasons for obtaining Irish citizenship: 
 
I knew there were privileges that if you had an EU passport you could 
work in any European Union country.3 Which I felt was just a good option 
 
3 Neither party submitted administrative notice material on the EU or on the Republic of Ireland. For the 
purpose of providing context for Applicant’s remarks, I take administrative notice of the following facts: 
 
5 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
to have in my back pocket in case there was a chance to, you know, have 
a career that would be enhanced by working in Europe for a period or in 
case there was trouble finding work in the US. 
 
(Tr. 54.) 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) on August 7, 2009. The investigator noted that Applicant held an 
active Irish passport and summarized a discussion of Applicant’s dual citizenship with 
Ireland as follows: 
 
The subject holds dual citizenship with Ireland and the U.S. The subject 
sought his citizenship with Ireland due to his family’s background from 
Ireland. The subject provided that he also applied for citizenship with 
Ireland because he thought it was a good opportunity in case he needed 
to work in Europe. The subject does not hold allegiance to Ireland. The 
subject does not experience conflict because of any sense of loyalty to 
Ireland and obligation as a U.S. citizen. The subject is not sure if he is 
willing to relinquish his citizenship with Ireland. The subject provided that 
his willingness to relinquish his citizenship with Ireland would be based on 
if he was relinquishing his citizenship with Ireland for a period of time or 
permanently. The subject provided that he also is not sure if he wants to 
relinquish his citizenship with Ireland because he might want to work in 
Europe in the future. 
 
(Ex. 2 at 3.)  
 
 After reviewing the investigator’s summary, Applicant added the following 
information: “Before applying for dual citizenship with Ireland, I called the U.S. State 
Department and inquired if there would be any employment or security clearance 
restrictions if I obtained dual citizenship with Ireland, and was told there would be no 
such employment or security clearance restrictions. In fact I understood the US 
government encourages goodwill and strong ties between the USA and our close ally, 
Ireland.” (Ex. 2 at 7.)  
 
 On February 22, 2010, Applicant responded to a DOHA interrogatory which 
sought further information about his possession of an Irish passport. In response to 
interrogatory question 5d, he cited the following reasons for obtaining and currently 
 
The EU, a supranational/mixed intergovernmental entity, is a strong strategic partner of the United States. 
Ireland is one of the 27 member states in the EU. The other member states in the EU are: Austria, 
Belgium, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, 
Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, 
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. “European Union,” Regional Topics, Bureau of 
European and Eurasian Affairs, U.S. Department of State, at 1-2; Fact Sheet, “European Union Profile,” 
Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs, U. S. Department of State. I have marked the documents I 
used as reference as H.E.5, and they are included in the record. 
 
 
6 
 
 
possessing the Irish passport: “To potentially take advantage of benefits of dual 
citizenship including (1) opportunity to work or live in any EU country [and] (2) 
opportunity to purchase property in any EU country.” (Ex. 3 at 2-3.) 
 
 When asked if he was willing to destroy, surrender, or invalidate the foreign 
passport, Applicant responded: “I am willing to surrender the Irish passport temporarily.” 
He cited these reasons for his willingness to temporarily surrender his Irish passport: “I 
would like to obtain the security clearance for current projects and the immediate future. 
However, eventually I would like to have the option to take advantage of the benefits [of 
dual citizenship] described in 5d above.” (Ex. 3 at 3.) 
 
 In the interrogatories, DOHA requested that Applicant provide documentation 
that he had destroyed, surrendered, or invalidated his passport, or that he intended to 
do so. On February 22, 2010, Applicant surrendered his EU/Irish passport to his 
employer’s facility security officer, who provided the following written acknowledgment 
of receipt: “[Company] accepts responsibility for the foreign passport, and will retain the 
foreign passport along with a copy of the surrender documentation until further notice. 
[Company] records will be annotated with the requirement that should the foreign issued 
passport be returned to [Applicant], [Company] will notify DOHA immediately.” (Ex. 4.) 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant declined to renounce his citizenship with the Republic of 
Ireland. He stated: “At this point I’m not looking to renounce. I won’t say I would never 
consider renouncing.  But at this point, no.” (Tr. 119.)  
 
 When asked on cross examination if he still intended to use his Irish passport to 
live, work, or purchase property in the European Union, Applicant stated: “I don’t have 
any plans to move, live, work, or buy property in . . . the EU. As I mentioned earlier, I 
maintained the passport with the idea that it might be good to have just in case, with no 
active plans to . . . do any of the above.” (Tr. 120.) 
 
 Applicant and the Department Counsel then engaged in the following colloquy: 
 
Department Counsel:  But still, at some point in the future, you may use your Irish 
citizenship to live, work, or purchase property in the European Union? 
 
Applicant: I don’t have any plans to do so. I guess I’m not 100 percent ruling it 
out. 
 
(Tr. 120.) 
    
 Applicant provided evaluations of his work performance from his current 
employer which identified him as a valued employee. He also provided documents 
establishing that he received awards and other certificates of appreciation for his 
professional contributions as a budget analyst at a federal executive agency. 
Additionally, Applicant provided twelve letters of support from family members, friends, 
 
7 
 
 
and colleagues, all of whom identified Applicant as a person of intelligence and 
character. (Ex. A through Ex. I, 1-12.) 
 
 Applicant provided facts for administrative notice derived from the following 
documents: U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Uruguay, April 8, 2010 
(7pages) and U. S. Department of State, Country Specific Information: Uruguay, March 
12, 2010 (5 pages). I take administrative notice of the following facts from those two 
documents: 
 
Uruguay, a country with a population of approximately 3.3 million, became 
an independent country in 1825. Uruguay is a constitutional republic . . . 
comprised of   three branches: executive (a president who is chief of state 
and head of government); legislative (a general assembly elected by 
proportional representation consisting of a 99-seat Chamber of Deputies 
and a 30-seat Senate; and, judicial (A Supreme Court of Justice). 
 
Uruguay is ‘distinguished by its high literacy rate, large urban middle 
class, and relatively even income distribution.’ (U.S. Department of State: 
Background Note: Uruguay, at 2.) Uruguayans share a Spanish language 
and cultural background, and although the majority of Uruguayans are 
nominally Roman Catholic, the church and state officially are separated. 
 
The Uruguayan 1967 Constitution created a strong presidency, with 
checks and balances through the legislative and judicial branches. Each 
president’s term is 5 years; a former president may run later in subsequent 
elections but the terms must be non-consecutive. In November 2009, Jose 
Mufica of the Frente Amplio party won the presidential election and was 
sworn in for a 5-year term on March 1, 2010. 
 
Uruguay ranks ‘first in the world on a per capita basis for its contributions 
to UN peacekeeping forces.’ (U.S. Department of State: Background Note: 
Uruguay, at 7.) Uruguay is a ‘strong advocate of constitutional democracy, 
political pluralism, and individual liberties’ and its relations with the United 
States are based on a ‘common outlook and emphasis on democratic 
ideals.’ (U.S. Department of State: Background Note: Uruguay at 7.)  
Moreover, Uruguay is a partner with the United States on law enforcement 
matters relating to drug trafficking and terrorism, and it has long been 
involved in human rights issues. 
   
         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
 
8 
 
 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an  
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
9 
 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9, the security concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States.” Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes several conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and, 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and  
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
10 
 
 
 Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen. In 1993, at the age of 24, he acquired dual 
citizenship with the Republic of Ireland. In 1997, he acquired an Irish passport. He 
renewed his Irish passport for ten additional years in 2007. Because Ireland is a 
member state in the EU, Applicant also acquired with his Irish citizenship certain 
privileges exclusive to citizens of EU member states. Those privileges pertain to work 
and owning property in EU countries. Applicant intended to use his Irish citizenship to 
make use of those privileges and to acquire a job or a business situation in an EU 
country.   
 
Applicant’s acquisition of an Irish passport as a U.S. citizen raised a concern that 
he actively exercised dual citizenship with Ireland. However, in February 2010, he 
relinquished his active Irish passport to his facility security officer. In doing so, he made 
clear that he was only temporarily relinquishing the passport and would seek to 
repossess it after his work requiring a security clearance was completed. Moreover, at 
his hearing, he stated that he did not intend to renounce his dual citizenship with the 
Republic of Ireland. These actions suggest a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States and they raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 10(a) and 10(b). 
 
Under AG ¶11(a), dual citizenship might be mitigated if “it is based solely on [an 
applicant’s] parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” Under AG ¶11(b), an 
individual’s dual citizenship might be mitigated if he or she “has expressed a willingness 
to renounce dual citizenship.” Under AG ¶11(c), an individual’s “exercise of the rights, 
privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship might be mitigated if it occurred before 
becoming a U.S. citizen or when the individual was a minor.” Under AG ¶11(d), an 
individual’s use of a foreign passport might be mitigated if it were “approved by the 
cognizant security authority.” Under AG ¶11(e), an individual’s use of a foreign passport 
might be mitigated if he or she presents credible evidence that “the passport has been 
destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated.” 
 
Applicant, a native-born U.S. citizen, actively sought dual citizenship with the   
Republic of Ireland. In 1997, he acquired an EU/Irish passport. Ten years later, in 2007, 
when his Irish passport expired, he renewed it for an additional term of ten years. 
Applicant was unwilling to renounce his Irish citizenship. He relinquished his active Irish 
passport to his employer’s security officer, but only temporarily. Nothing in the record 
supports a conclusion that Applicant’s use of his Irish passport was approved by his 
cognizant security authority. Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶11(e) applies in part in 
mitigation in this case. After a careful review of the record, I also conclude that AG ¶¶ 
11(a), 11(b), 11(c), and 11(d) do not apply in mitigation in this case. 
 
I also conclude SOR allegation 1.c. for Applicant because it describes an 
aspiration and not active conduct. As such, it is a consequence of Applicant’s deliberate 
act to acquire Irish citizenship, which is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 identifies foreign influence security concerns as follows: “[f]oreign 
contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or 
foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, 
group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.” Additionally, adjudications under 
Guideline B “can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the 
foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain 
protected information and/or is associated with the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Applicant’s wife is a citizen of Uruguay and a resident U.S. alien. She has 
resided in the United States with Applicant for 15 years. Her aged father and brother are 
citizens of Uruguay and reside in Uruguay. Neither Applicant’s wife nor his father-in-law 
and brother-in-law have been employed by the government of Uruguay. Applicant’s 
contacts with his wife and her family members are not a security concern within the 
context of their Uruguayan citizenship. 
 
 Uruguay is a constitutional democracy which supports political pluralism and 
individual liberties. Like the United States, Uruguay emphasizes democratic ideals.   
Moreover, Uruguay is a partner with the United States on law enforcement matters 
relating to drug trafficking and terrorism, and it has long been involved in human rights 
issues. I conclude that AG ¶ 8(a) applies in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
AG ¶ 8(a) reads: “the nature of the relationships with the foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government 
and the interests of the U.S.”    
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his or her 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
12 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent and well-
educated professional who is considered to be a valued employee by his government 
contractor employer. He is a devoted and loyal son, husband, father, and family 
member. In 1993, as a young adult, Applicant acquired Irish citizenship. In 1997, he 
acquired an Irish passport, which he hoped might provide him with an alternative source 
of employment in European Union member countries. He has temporarily relinquished 
his Irish passport, which he renewed in 2007, and he has declined to renounce his Irish 
citizenship. Applicant wishes to maintain his active Irish citizenship and an active Irish 
passport in order to benefit from privileges that accrue to Irish citizens through their 
country’s membership in the European Union. Applicant’s actions indicate a preference 
for the Republic of Ireland and his Irish citizenship.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude that while Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence, he failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline C, 
Foreign Preference. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.:       Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
             Subparagraph 2.a. - 2.c:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
                           Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
