                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-05496 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a lengthy history of excessive alcohol consumption. In September 
2000 and September 2005, he was involved alcohol-related incidents with law 
enforcement and the courts. He received outpatient alcohol-related treatment and 
counseling. In 2007, he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. He continues to consume 
alcohol. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 19, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (SF 86) (Item 5). On 
March 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline G (alcohol consumption). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be 
granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On June 22, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations. (Item 4) He 
requested a decision without a hearing. (Item 4) A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated July 22, 2010, was provided to him on July 29, 2010. He was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and to submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.1 Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on September 21, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e. (Item 4) He 
denied that he was continuing to drive after consuming alcohol. (SOR ¶ 1.f) His 
admissions are accepted as factual findings.   
 
Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor, working as a 
technician. (Item 5) He received a high school diploma or equivalent in 1997. (Item 5) 
He has not attended college. (Item 5) He has not served in the military. (Item 5) He has 
never married. (Item 5)  
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
Applicant consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication from approximately 1991, 
when he was 16 years old, to at least May 2009. (SOR ¶ 1.a; Item 4) He stopped 
consuming alcohol from age 19 to age 21 because he was concerned it was affecting 
his anxiety medication. He resumed his consumption of alcohol after his doctor told him 
it was safe to drink alcohol at the same time he was taking his medication. In 
September 2000, Applicant was charged with public intoxication and criminal 
trespassing. (SOR ¶ 1.b; Item 4) He pleaded guilty, and he received a fine and 
probation. Id. 
 
In September 2005, Applicant was charged with operating a vehicle while 
intoxicated. (SOR ¶ 1.c; Item 4; Item 6 at 4) He pleaded guilty, and the court sentenced 
him to one year of probation and fined him. Id. The court required him to attend alcohol 
treatment and counseling and suspended his driver’s license. Id.  
 
 
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated July 22, 2010, and Applicant’s receipt is dated July 29, 
2010. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt to submit 
information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Applicant received alcohol treatment and counseling from September 2006 to 
February 2007. (SOR ¶ 1.d; Item 4; Item 8 at 2) He received a diagnosis of alcohol 
dependence from a medical doctor with a prognosis of “moderate” relapse potential. 
(Item 8 at 3, 8, 36-37, 55-57) He continues to consume alcohol. (SOR ¶ 1.e; Item 4; 
Item 6 at 5) However, he indicated that he does not “over indulge” in his alcohol 
consumption. (Item 4) He does not drive after consuming alcohol. (Item 4) He 
considered his alcohol consumption to be “responsible.” (Item 4; Item 6 at 5) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in 
this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline G (alcohol consumption) with respect to the allegations 
set forth in the SOR. 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” Seven Alcohol Consumption disqualifying conditions listed in AG ¶ 
22 could raise a security or trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying in this 
case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22(c), and 22(d) apply. In September 2000 and September 2005, 
Applicant was arrested for alcohol-related incidents. He pleaded guilty to both offenses. 
Part of his sentence for the 2005 offense was attendance at an alcohol-treatment 
program. In 2007, a physician diagnosed him as alcohol dependent.3 He continues to 
consume alcohol. 
 
3The well-respected psychiatric reference, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 
Fourth Edition, Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR). Washington, DC, American Psychiatric Association, 2000, 
has defined “alcohol dependence” to be a psychiatric condition that meets the following diagnostic 
criteria:  
  
A maladaptive pattern of alcohol use, leading to clinically significant impairment or 
distress, as manifested by three (or more) of the following, occurring at any time in the 
same 12-month period:  
 
(1) Tolerance, as defined by either of the following: (a) a need for markedly increased 
amounts of the alcohol to achieve intoxication or desired effect; or (b) markedly 
diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of the alcohol.  
 
(2) Withdrawal, as manifested by either of the following: (a) the characteristic withdrawal 
syndrome from the alcohol; or (b) the same (or a closely related) alcohol is taken to 
relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms.  
 
(3) The alcohol is often taken in larger amounts or over a longer period than was 
intended.  
 
(4) There is a persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or control alcohol use.  
 
(5) A great deal of time is spent in activities necessary to obtain the alcohol (e.g., visiting 
multiple doctors or driving long distances), using the alcohol, or recovering from its 
effects.  
 
(6) Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are given up or reduced 
because of alcohol use.  
 
(7) The alcohol use is continued despite knowledge of having a persistent or recurrent 
physical or psychological problem that is likely to have been caused or exacerbated by 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
  “Once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 07-00852 at 3 (App. Bd. May 27, 2008) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 
F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990)). Because the Government has met its initial burden 
concerning alcohol consumption security concerns, the burden now shifts to Applicant 
to establish any appropriate mitigating conditions. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. Four Alcohol 
Consumption mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f are mitigated. Applicant’s alcohol-related treatment is a 
positive, mitigating development, and does not constitute a disqualifying condition. 
Applicant does not drive after consuming alcohol.  
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply to SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.c, and 1.e. 
Applicant began consuming alcohol at age 16. Applicant was convicted of two-alcohol 
related offenses. He was diagnosed as alcohol dependent in 2007, and he continues to 
consume alcohol. He is not currently attending AA meetings or receiving any other 
ongoing alcohol-related counseling or treatment. He does not fully acknowledge his 
alcohol-consumption problems. He believes he can consume alcohol responsibly, 
despite the diagnosis of alcohol dependence. He has not received a positive prognosis 
 
the alcohol (e.g., continued drinking despite recognition that an ulcer was made worse by 
alcohol consumption). 
 
Available at http://www.rma.gov.au/SOP/08/017.pdf. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
from a medical professional. In sum, the possibility of relapse continues to cast doubt on 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Alcohol consumption concerns 
are not fully mitigated for the reasons stated under this guideline and in the whole-
person concept, infra. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Although there is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance, 
the mitigation evidence is insufficient to resolve security concerns at this time. He 
attended an alcohol-treatment program, and he received some alcohol-related 
counseling from 2006 until February 2007. He is not on probation and his driver’s 
license is not suspended. He contributes to his company and the Department of 
Defense. There is no evidence of any disciplinary problems unrelated to his off-duty 
alcohol-consumption in 2000 and 2005. There is no evidence of any drug abuse, 
financial problems, disloyalty, or violations of national security. His character and good 
work performance show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. His 
supervisors evidently support him or he would not have been able to retain his 
employment after his security clearance was called into question. Applicant knows the 
consequences of driving after excessive alcohol consumption, and he has does not 
drive after consuming alcohol. He states he is plans to drink alcohol responsibly.   
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. Applicant has had a problem with alcohol use beginning when he was 16 
years old. He has consumed alcohol at times to excess, with some periods of 
abstinence, for about 19 years. He was involved in alcohol-related offenses that 
resulted in misdemeanor convictions in 2000 and 2005. In 2007, a physician providing 
alcohol-treatment diagnosed him as alcohol dependent. Even though there is no 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
evidence of any alcohol-related incidents in five years, I am not convinced he fully 
recognizes the importance of overcoming his alcohol problems and establishing a 
significant pattern of abstinence.4 
 
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree, and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show 
many different permutations. The Appeal Board has determined in cases of substantial 
alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence that full mitigation of security concerns is not 
possible unless there was a fairly lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol 
consumption.5 Applicant continues to consume alcohol. Abstinence from alcohol 
consumption for a significant period of time is needed to provide sufficient assurance 
that he will not return to alcohol consumption. His limited rehabilitative efforts and lack 
of fundamental changes in behavior are important manifestations that increase security 
concerns. Lingering doubts remain concerning his current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 12968, the Directive, the Regulation, the AGs, and other 
cited references to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. For 
the reasons stated, Applicant has not mitigated or overcome the Government’s case, 
and he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 
4For example, in ISCR Case No. 05-16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007) the Appeal Board 
reversed the administrative judge’s grant of a clearance and noted, “that Applicant continued to drink 
even after his second alcohol related arrest vitiates the Judge’s application of MC 3.”  In ISCR Case No. 
05-10019 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2007), the Appeal Board reversed an administrative judge’s grant of a 
clearance to an applicant (AB) where AB had several alcohol-related legal problems. However, AB’s most 
recent DUI was in 2000, six years before an administrative judge decided AB’s case. AB had reduced his 
alcohol consumption, but still drank alcohol to intoxication, and sometimes drank alcohol (not to 
intoxication) before driving. The Appeal Board determined that AB’s continued alcohol consumption was 
not responsible, and the grant of AB’s clearance was arbitrary and capricious. See also ISCR Case No. 
04-12916 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2007) (involving case with most recent alcohol-related incident three 
years before hearing, and reversing administrative judge’s grant of a clearance). 
 
5See ISCR Case No. 06-17541 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 
(App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007). 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
