 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03983 
 SSN: )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Darin Groteboer, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Personal Conduct and Use of Information 
Technology Systems security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines E (Personal Conduct) and M (Use of Information Technology Systems). The 
action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 12, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 4, 2010. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on August 18, 2010, as amended on August 19, 2010. The 
 
2 
 
hearing was convened as scheduled on September 13, 2010. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 24, which were received without objection. Applicant testified 
and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted without objection. The 
record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted 
a letter that was marked AE E and admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s 
memorandum is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on September 21, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from 
a military service academy in 1992. He was commissioned in the U.S. military in 1982 
and served continuously on active duty until he received a dismissal from a general 
court-martial. He seeks to retain a security clearance that he has held since before his 
dismissal. Applicant attended graduate school but did not obtain a post-graduate 
degree. He married in 1992 and divorced in 2009. He has two children, ages 15 and 13. 
He is engaged to be married.1 
 
Applicant was stationed overseas from 2004 to 2007. He was an aviator and had 
risen to pay grade 0-4. In the summer of 2004, he met the wife (Mrs. A) of another 
officer of equal rank in his unit. Applicant and Mrs. A began an affair in late 2004. 
Applicant deployed to a Middle Eastern country from May 2005 to the beginning of 
September 2005. He and Mrs. A sent e-mails to each other with sexually-graphic 
pictures. Applicant received and sent the e-mails using the U.S. Government computer 
network, and he displayed them on his government computer. Applicant violated a 
military directive when he sent and displayed the “offensive” images using the 
government computer hardware and network.2 
 
Applicant’s commanding officer became aware of a possibly improper 
relationship between Applicant and the other officer’s wife in late May or June 2005, 
shortly after the Applicant deployed. After a casual unit dinner, Applicant’s wife told the 
commanding officer that she was concerned about the relationship between Applicant 
and Mrs. A. Shortly thereafter, the commanding officer spoke with Applicant on the 
phone. He told Applicant that his relationship with Mrs. A appeared inappropriate. 
Applicant told his commanding officer that his relationship with Mrs. A was over, and 
that they had only been friends. That statement was false in that Applicant and Mrs. A 
continued to send sexually explicit e-mails and digital images, and their affair continued 
until after he returned from deployment and lasted through late September or early 
October 2005. Applicant repeated the false statement to his commanding officer on 
several occasions and in an e-mail.3 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 19-21, 35-40, 49, 57, 75; GE 1, 2, 16. 
 
2 Tr. at 20, 23, 32, 41-44; GE 5, 14, 16, 17. 
 
3 Tr. at 23, 42, 44-45, 57-58; GE 3, 5, 6, 13-17. 
 
3 
 
In June 2005, the other officer discovered e-mails and a picture on his computer 
that suggested there was a relationship between Applicant and his wife. He sent 
Applicant an e-mail pleading with Applicant to consider the officer’s four children and 
end any relationship Applicant had with the officer’s wife.4 
 
In September 2005, Applicant’s commanding officer received from an 
anonymous source a CD-ROM that contained sexually-explicit digital images of the 
Applicant and Mrs. A. He told the Applicant in October 2005 that he was grounded 
pending an investigation into allegations of an adulterous relationship between 
Applicant and Mrs. A. He told the Applicant that if he discovered Applicant did anything 
wrong, he would punish him. Applicant said “I don’t know what wrong is.” The 
commanding officer responded with words to the effect that Applicant was an officer in 
the United States military, what did he mean he did not know. Applicant responded that 
he knew having sex with Mrs. A would be wrong, but he did not have sex with her. The 
commanding officer issued a written order on October 12, 2005, directing Applicant to 
have no contact with Mrs. A.5 
 
Applicant was charged at a general court-martial with (I) disobeying the order of 
his commanding officer to have no further contact with Mrs. A; (II) violating a military 
general regulation by “wrongfully storing, displaying, sending or otherwise transmitting 
offensive material on government-provided computer hardware and networks”; (III) two 
specifications alleging multiple false official statements to his commanding officer that 
Applicant’s relationship with Mrs. A was that of friendship and he did not have sex with 
her; (IV) conduct unbecoming an officer by engaging in the conduct charged under 
other sections of the Uniform Code of Military Justice; and (V) adultery.6 
 
In January 2007, Applicant pleaded guilty, pursuant to a pretrial agreement, to 
charges II, III, and V. He pleaded not guilty and was found not guilty of the remaining 
charges. He was sentenced to a dismissal from the armed forces and 30 days 
confinement. The convening authority approved the sentence except reduced the 
confinement to 23 days, which had already been served. Applicant went on appellate 
leave in a no-pay status while his case pended appeal. He did not receive relief on 
appeal, and his dismissal was executed last year.7 
 
Applicant stated that he is sorry for his poor judgment. He stated that he has 
learned from the experience and would never do anything similar again.8 He wrote in his 
response to the SOR: 
 
                                                          
4 GE 4, 7. 
 
5 Tr. at 46-47; GE 8-10, 13, 15-17. 
 
6 Tr. at 48, 57; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 17-21, 23. 
 
7 Id. 
 
8 Tr. at 30-34 
 
4 
 
I admit I was in an adulterous affair in 2004-2005, and failed to reveal the 
details of my involvement to my commander when asked about it. 
However, I think many in a similar situation would have done the same 
thing to prevent the disclosure of an inappropriate relationship, especially 
to your peers and friends. My behavior during that time was completely 
out of character and I allowed myself to engage in a negative behavior 
rather than deal with any troubles I had in my own marriage. However, I 
submit that I am a trustworthy person and extremely loyal to not only my 
superiors and subordinates but also the organization that which I’m 
employed, and have definitely learned from this mistake. 
 
Applicant provided similar testimony at his hearing: 
 
APPLICANT: Of course, I think most people in a situation like that would 
deny that they were in that, until they got caught and ended up getting 
myself in a lot of trouble through all of that, and just hope I can redeem 
myself for that, but no denying it. I had the affair. Tried to kind of bow out 
with a little grace from the military - - 
 
ADMINISTRATIVE JUDGE: Why do you think that most people would 
deny it? Do you think most people would lie as opposed to tell the truth, or 
simply not say anything at all? 
 
APPLICANT: Probably not say anything at all, or if you think you can get 
away with it or that they don’t know, you would probably not say anything 
or deny it at the time.9   
 
 With the exception of the events that led to his general court-martial conviction, 
Applicant’s service in the military was outstanding. Applicant has worked for his 
company overseas in a high-risk area for more than two years. His job performance has 
been excellent. He submitted a number of letters on his behalf. He is praised for his 
reliability, trustworthiness, credibility, strength of character, judgment, integrity, 
responsibility, dedication, and ability to do the right thing. The authors recommend that 
he retain his security clearance.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 23.  
 
10 Tr. at 20-21; AE A-E. 
 
 
5 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
6 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person’s personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 Applicant intentionally provided false information to his commanding officer on 
several occasions about his adulterous affair with the wife of another officer in his unit. 
AG ¶ 16(b) is applicable. His criminal actions that resulted in a general-court-martial 
conviction could also have been alleged under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and D 
(Sexual Behavior), and one of the charges was alleged under Guideline M (Use of 
Information Technology Systems). His actions, when considered as a whole, support a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. His conduct also 
created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(e) 
are applicable.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
 
7 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant’s lies to his commanding officer occurred about five years ago. There is 
no evidence that he made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the falsifications before 
being confronted with the facts. AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(b) are not applicable.  
 
Applicant was having marital difficulties at the time of his actions. He is now 
divorced and engaged to be married. Other than the conduct that resulted in his 
conviction at a general court-martial, his military record is outstanding. He has worked 
overseas consistently since his dismissal, and he has earned a solid reputation. His 
actions resulted in a general court-martial conviction and are now common knowledge. 
All these factors show some mitigation under AG ¶ 17(e). However, I remain concerned 
about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, and willingness to comply with 
rules and regulations. I am particularly concerned about Applicant’s willingness to lie to 
cover up his illegal acts. I am unable to find that the conduct is unlikely to recur. AG ¶¶ 
17(c) and 17(d) are not applicable. 
 
 In sum, I conclude that Personal Conduct concerns remain despite some 
mitigation. 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
The security concern for Use of Information Technology Systems is set out in AG 
¶ 39: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to protect sensitive systems, networks, and 
information. Information Technology Systems include all related computer 
hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the communication, 
transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or protection of 
information. 
 
 AG ¶ 40 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
8 
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system. 
 
Applicant used a government computer and network to transmit and display 
offensive material in violation of a military directive. AG ¶ 40(e) is established. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate the Use of Information Technology Systems 
security concerns are provided under AG ¶ 41: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one’s 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and   
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor.  
 
It has been a number of years since Applicant committed the conduct alleged in 
the SOR. However, I am unable to find that the conduct is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 41(a) is not 
applicable. The actions were intentional and they were not done in the interest of 
organizational efficiency and effectiveness. AG ¶¶ 41(b) and 41(c) have no applicability. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
9 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E and M in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s character evidence, his otherwise outstanding military 
career, and his service overseas in a high-risk area since he left the military. Applicant 
has divorced his wife and is engaged to be married. He provided a number of false 
statements to his commanding officer to conceal his illegal acts. He stated in his 
response to the SOR and again at his hearing that he would expect most people to act 
similarly. I have no faith, should circumstances such as a security infraction occur in the 
future, that Applicant would be completely honest and truthful. I am concerned that he 
would again resort to what “most people” would do, and he would lie to protect himself. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated Personal Conduct and Use of Information 
Technology Systems security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline M:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
