 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05313 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On March 24, 20101, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
 
                                                          
1 The SOR was undated, but the notice sent by DOHA to Applicant accompanying the SOR was 
dated March 24, 2010.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 10, 2010, and requested an administrative 
determination. On April 27, 2010, department counsel requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 17, 2010. Department 
counsel amended the SOR on April 29, 2010, and the Applicant answered the amended 
SOR on May 10, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 19, 2010, and the 
hearing was convened as scheduled on June 15, 2010. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were received without objection. Applicant testified and 
submitted Exhibits (AE) A through G. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
June 23, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 63-year-old government employee. He has worked for his 
government employer since March 1983. He is seeking a security clearance because of 
consulting work he does for a defense contractor. He received a PhD in 1975. He has 
been married for 40 years. He has three children whose ages range from 22 to 25.2  
 
 The SOR alleges three delinquent real estate debts. The debts were listed on 
credit reports obtained on April 11, 2009 and April 29, 2009. Applicant denied the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.c, because all three have been resolved either through short 
sales (for two properties) or through Applicant’s giving the lender a deed in lieu of 
foreclosure (one property).  
 
 In 2005, Applicant decided to purchase seven vacation condominiums (condos) 
in an eastern shore resort community as a real estate investment. The plan was to hold 
on to the properties for a period of time, renting them out when he could, then sell them 
when the real estate market rose. Besides the seven condos, Applicant also owns his 
residence and a second home. Applicant paid monthly mortgages on all nine of the 
properties. The mortgage on his residence is approximately $85,000 and the mortgage 
on his second home is approximately $190,000. Both are current.3 
 
 Six of the seven condos were financed (one is mortgage-free) with 20% down 
payments and with mortgages totaling over $1,200,000.4 Applicant was aware when he 
purchased the condos that there would be a negative cash flow based upon the rental 
income they would generate versus the mortgage payments he was making. He and his 
wife were making up the difference with their incomes (his: $153,000 annually; hers: 
$106,000 annually) and their savings. Because these investment properties were 
depleting his financial resources and they were losing market value because of the state 
of the economy, Applicant came up with a plan to extricate himself from this situation. 
He stopped paying on the three mortgages listed in the SOR knowing that the lender 
would take some action at that point. At the time, the respective mortgage obligations 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 18, GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 18, 32-34. 
 
4 Tr. at 34; Applicant’s Answer to SOR (Answer). 
 
 
3 
 
on the debts listed in the SOR were: ¶ 1.a: $187,000;   ¶ 1.b: $183,000; ¶ 1.c: $199,000. 
Consequently the properties listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b were sold through short sales. 
In each case, Applicant received debt forgiveness of about $100,000. Concerning the 
debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.c, Applicant executed over to the lender a deed in lieu of 
foreclosure and his debt on that mortgage note was also forgiven. All these transactions 
occurred between September 2009 and January 2010.5    
 
 Applicant’s current condo holdings require him to inject between $30,000 and 
$35,000 per year from his own funds to overcome the negative cash flow from the rental 
condos. As a result, two more of the condo units face either a short sale or a deed in 
lieu of foreclosure transaction in the near future. Applicant has already engaged the 
lender about proceeding along these lines on the two condo units.6 
 
 Except for the condo issues, Applicant has never defaulted on any other debt 
obligations. He is current on all other debts. Both he and his wife have IRA accounts 
with a combined value of about $210,000, but no other savings. Applicant is highly 
valued by his employer. He is a recipient of agency awards for his technical 
achievements. He is universally recognized as a highly productive technician and leader 
within his agency.7  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 37-44, 52; Answer; AE A-C. 
 
6 Tr. at 52-54. 
 
7 Tr. at 48-49; AE D-G. 
 
 
4 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant purchased multiple condos for investment purposes. Because of the 
negative cash flow resulting from these condos, Applicant defaulted on his mortgage 
payments and three properties were sold or turned over to the lender. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s actions in defaulting on three mortgages and the resulting short 
sales/deed turnover occurred within the last year and are therefore multiple and recent. 
Additionally, testimony revealed that Applicant was about to default on two more condo 
mortgages. His financial issues are current and ongoing. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties resulted because of his own deliberate real estate 
investment strategy. Certainly, market factors played a role in depressing the real estate 
sellers market, however, Applicant knew at the time he purchased all the condos that he 
would be operating those condos from a negative cash flow perspective. He made a 
deliberate choice to assume that investment risk. Under these circumstances, these 
conditions were not outside his control. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
 There is no evidence in the record that Applicant received any financial 
counseling. Although three of the mortgage-deficiency debts were forgiven, Applicant is 
in the process of defaulting on two more mortgages. At this point, his finances are not 
being resolved and are not under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not applicable. 
Applicant’s finances remain a concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
6 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s outstanding work performance and favorable character 
evidence. I also found Applicant to be honest and candid about his finances. I believe 
he is sincere about getting his finances in order. However, he is still encumbered by his 
real estate investment choices and is currently operating at a negative cash flow of 
approximately $30,000 per year on his remaining holdings.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
