                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                            )
                                                                     )
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-00569
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
History of Case
On November 23, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs).
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 7, 2009, and requested a hearing.
The case was scheduled for hearing on April 13, 2010. A hearing was held on the
2
scheduled date. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of nine exhibits (GE).
Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and no exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was
received on April 21, 2010. 
Besides its nine exhibits, the Government requested administrative notice of five
documents: Background Note: Iraq, U.S. Department of State (February  2008);  Country
Specific Information: Iraq, U.S. Department of State (January 25, 2010); Travel Warning:
Iraq, U.S. Department of State (November 2009) Country Reports on Terrorism 2008,
U.S. Department of State (April 2009); 2008 Human Rights Report: Iraq, U.S.
Department of State (February 2009). 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings.  See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007).
Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or government reports that are well
known.  See Stein, Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006).  For good
cause shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to the above-named
background reports addressing the geopolitical situation in Iraq. 
Administrative notice was extended to the documents themselves, consistent  with
the provisions of Rule 201 of Fed. R. Evid.  This notice did not foreclose Applicant from
challenging the accuracy and reliability of the information contained in the reports
addressing Iraq’s  current status.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline B, Applicant is alleged in the SOR to: (a) have a mother, three
brothers, and two sisters who are citizens and residents of Iraq; (b) have a spouse who
is a citizen of Iraq and resides in the U.S.; (c) send $600 a month to his family in Iraq;
and (d) have traveled to Iraq in 2006, 2007, and 2009 to visit relatives. 
Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have falsified his Questionnaire for
National Security Positions (e-QIP) by omitting his driving under the influence (DUI)
arrest of July 1999 and his October 2007 criminal trespass arrest (banned from a casino
for two years by the court, and the charges were dismissed in January 2008). 
 Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have accumulated 11 delinquent debts
exceeding $32,000.  Allegedly, the debts have not been satisfied.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations.  He added
no explanations. 
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 44-year old former employee  for a defense contractor who seeks a
security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
3
Background
Applicant was born and raised in Iraq.  He served in the Iraqi military between
1991 and 1992, and has no further obligations to fulfill his mandatory military service as
an Iraqi citizen. (GE 4) He has expressed a willingness to renounce his Iraqi citizenship.
(GE 4)
Applicant immigrated to the U.S. in 1996 without any familiarity with the English
language. (see GE. 4; Tr. 91-92)  He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in September
2005. (GE 1)  Applicant’s spouse is a citizen of Iraq who resides in the U.S. Applicant
married his spouse in 2007, and they have one child from their marriage. (GE 1; Tr. 56,
67)  She moved to the U.S. in April 2009 and intends to apply for U.S. citizenship.  (Tr.
75-76)  Before she can apply for U.S. citizenship, she will need to first apply for and
obtain permanent resident status in the U.S. (GE 4)
Applicant’s mother, three brothers, and two sisters are citizens and residents of
Iraq. (see GE 1; Tr. 55, 63-65) Applicant maintains monthly telephone contact with his
mother, and relies on her to convey messages to his other family members. (Tr. 69, 72)
He communicates less frequently with his brothers and sisters. (Tr. 72-73)  Applicant
periodically travels to Iraq to visit his family. Specifically, he traveled to Iraq in 2006,
2007, and 2009.  (see GEs 1 and 4 through 7; Tr. 76-78)  
Until recently, Applicant sent about $600 a month to his family members in Iraq.
(GEs 4 and 6) Pending his receipt of his security clearance, his employer has suspended
him from employment. (see GE 7; Tr. 52, 58)  Without work, he has had to suspend his
practice of providing financial assistance to his family. (Tr. 73-74)  
Still dual citizens of Iraq and the U.S., Applicant and his wife recently voted in Iraqi
elections. (Tr. 78-79) Because his wife is not a U.S. citizen, she cannot vote in U.S.
elections. (Tr. 79) Given his Shiite religious attachments and Saddam Hussein’s years of
political domination, Applicant  does not feel he can safely return to Iraq for any extended
period without placing himself at considerable risk. (Tr. 77)  
Iraq’s country status
Iraq is a country of 27 million that is broken down along ethnic and religious lines:
Shiites, Sunni, Kurds and Turkoman comprise the predominant ethnic and sectarian
groups.   Once known as Mesopotamia (the fertile crescent), Iraq is bordered by Kuwait,
Iran, Turkey, Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia (see Background Note, Iraq, supra, at 2-3).
At the end of World War I, Iraq became a British-mandated territory, and founding
member of the Arab League (id.).
General Abdul Karim Qasim assumed power in a July 1958 coup and held power
for five years before succumbing to the Ba’ath Party’s takeover of the Iraqi government,
4
and Hasan al-Bakr’s selection as prime minister.  (see Background Note, Iraq, supra, at
4)  When Bakr resigned in 1979, Saddam  Hussein assumed the reigns of power. Under
Saddam Hussein’s direction, Iraq launched a major invasion of its neighbor, Iran in the
1980s (see Background Note Iraq, supra).  Iraq declared victory in 1988 and survived to
claim the largest military establishment in the region.  Iraq then turned its forces to
mounted attacks against the ongoing Kurdish rebellion by Kurdish elements in the
northern mountains of Iraq.    
Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, and was repelled by a U.S.-led coalition in
February 1991 (see Background Note, Iraq, supra).  After the war, the UN Security
Council required the Hussein regime to surrender to the coalition and submit to UN
inspections.  When the Ba’ath regime refused to fully comply, the Security Council
invoked sanctions to prevent further weapons of mass destruction (WMD) development,
and to enforce Iraq’s surrender terms.  Coalition forces employed limited no-fly zones in
southern and northern Iraq and a limited no-drive zone in southern Iraq to prevent the
regime from invading Kuwait again. (id.)
In 2003, A U.S.-led coalition invaded Iraq and succeeded in removing Saddam
Hussein and his Ba’athist regime from military and political power (see Background Note,
Iraq, supra, at 3).  After two years of operations under a provisional authority, Iraq’s new
government assumed office in March 2006 (with the approval of the U.S. Government),
following free elections. (see id.)
Notwithstanding the election of a new national government with U.S. backing,
violence continued to envelop the country.  This violence was fueled and perpetrated by
Al Qieda terrorists, Sunni insurgents, and, Shiite militias and death squads. (see
Background Note, Iraq, supra, and Country Reports on Terrorism 2008, supra) State
Department reports document human rights abuses that include a “pervasive climate of
violence, misappropriation of official authority by sectarian, criminal and insurgent
groups; arbitrary deprivation of life, disappearances, torture and other cruel, inhumane or
degrading treatment or punishment.” (see id.)
Since March 2006, the Government of Iraq has been comprised of a broad
coalition of political alliances representing the Shiite, Sunni and Kurdish blocs. (see
Background Note, Iraq, supra, at 8)  While elections have been held, none of the key
constituent groups have been able to form a government, adopt an oil law, establish and
maintain effective security throughout the provinces, or neutralize sectarian divisions. In
this still very fragile political environment in Iraq, there are substantiated reports of
human rights abuses that continue to underscore a still pervasive climate of tension and
violence.
Economically, Iraq’s economy continues to be dominated by the oil sector, as it
has for the past half century since the completion of new pipelines to Lebanon in 1949,
and to Syria in 1952. (see Background Note, Iraq, supra)  As a result of the  U.S.-led
invasion in 2003, much of Iraq’s oil refining capabilities were shuttered.  The rebuilding of
oil infrastructure and utilities infrastructure has continued to expand since 2004 with U.S.
5
aid and support, despite setbacks from insurgent activity.  Proposed oil revenue sharing
legislation still awaits passage, however, and at the moment, there are no good
estimates of when such legislation will be approved and implemented. For the
foreseeable future, the national government can be expected to continue to seek the
passage and implementation of a revenue sharing law to strengthen and encourage the
development of this important sector (see id.)
Despite recent improvements in its security enforcement efforts, Iraq remains a
very dangerous, volatile and unpredictable country. The U.S. State Department
continues to strongly warn U.S. citizens against traveling to Iraq. (see Travel Warning,
Iraq, supra, at 1) Attacks against military and civilian targets throughout Iraq continue
and include sites and facilities where foreign tourists frequently visit: hotels, restaurants,
police stations, check points, foreign diplomatic missions, international organizations,
and other locations with expatriate personnel. (id.)
Applicant’s e-QIP omissions 
Asked to complete a security clearance application in July 2008, Applicant omitted
his 1999 DUI arrest and his 2007 criminal trespass arrest. Applicant attributes his
omissions to haste, language difficulties, and confusion over the meaning of arrest. (Tr.
89-91) The questions were straight-forward, though, and not susceptible to mistaken
reading.  Considering Applicant’s arrest history, education, and experience at the time,
Appellant cannot avert inferences that he knowingly and wilfully omitted his 2007 and
2008 arrests from his e-QIP. 
When questioned by an agent from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
in September 2008, Applicant was confronted with his two omitted arrests and disclosed
them fully when pressed by the agent. (Tr. 89-90, 96, 112)  Applicant’s explanations are
insufficient to avert inferences he acknowledged his arrests voluntarily without
prompting.    
Applicant’s finances
Since his lay-off in 2002, Applicant accumulated considerable delinquent debts.
(see GE 4)  His credit reports reflect 11 delinquent debts (mostly credit cards) exceeding
$32,000. (see GEs 2, 8, and 9)  Many of these delinquent accounts reflect debts related
to his periods of unemployment and  gambling losses. (Tr. 99-101)  
Since he moved to his current state of residence in October 2009, he has ceased
gambling. (Tr. 100-05)  However, he can document little progress in addressing his
debts. His personal financial statement reflects an $1,820 net monthly remainder and no
payment progress on his delinquent debts, despite periods of gainful employment when
he enjoyed positive cash flows (see GEs 5 and 6; Tr. 106-09). He provided no
repayment plan to address his delinquent debts, and has sought no financial counseling.
(Tr. 109)
6
Endorsements
Applicant provided no endorsements, performance evaluations, or evidence of
community service.  Little is known about his work experience and personal life outside
what of what was developed in the Government’s exhibits.  
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be considered by judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and all of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns,” if any. These guidelines must be considered
before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or
denied.  Although, the guidelines do not require judges to place exclusive reliance on the
enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a
decision. 
In addition to the relevant AGs, judges must take into account the pertinent
considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in 2(a) of the AGs,
which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial, commonsense
decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines within the context
of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period
of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the
applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct: (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent herein:
Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security
concern if the individual has divided  loyalties or foreign financial interests,
may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
7
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.  Adjudication
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located,
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. (see AG ¶ 6)
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness
to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.  (AG, ¶ 15)
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts. (AG, ¶ 18)
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the revised AGs, a decision to
grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a
threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because
the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
8
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing  to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation. Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis
Applicant is a former employee of a defense contractor who has family
members who are both citizens and residents of Iraq. Trust concerns are raised under
the foreign influence guideline due to Applicant’s longstanding family ties to Iraq.
Although his contacts with family members residing in Iraq appear to somewhat
limited, they do involve his mother and five siblings.  He continues to maintain regular
contact with his mother and siblings. Until he ran into recent financial problems
following his lay-off, he regularly sent money to his family, and he has traveled every
two or three years to Iraq to visit them.  Iraq is also a liberated ally of the U.S. that has
encountered difficulty forming a government and avoiding a return to sectarian conflict
that has dominated the region for many years.
Security concerns over Applicant’s e-QIP omissions and his finances are also
raised.  They are addressed as well.   
Foreign influence concerns
Key to the Government’s foreign influence concerns are Applicant’s immediate
family members who still reside in Iraq, a country in the process of establishing a
stable democratic government able to protect all of its disparate constituent groups
and maintain peace with its neighbors. Despite the encouraging developments in Iraq,
the country is still very dangerous and volatile in certain sectors. 
Applicant’s historically close relationship with his living family members in Iraq
makes them potentially vulnerable to coercion and non-coercive measures because of
their close familial family ties with Applicant. Because non-governmental entities
operating in Iraq, as well as the former Iraqi military and intelligence authorities, have
9
a history of violating Iraqi domestic laws and regulations, and international laws, they
are more likely to use improper and/or illegal means to obtain classified information in
Applicant’s possession or control through his siblings and in-laws. 
Because Applicant’s contacts with his Iraqi family members occurred in a war
zone, the Government urges security concerns over risks that his face to face and
telephonic contacts with his immediate family members might be subject to
exploitation, coercion, or duress by Iraqi military and government authorities to access
classified information in Applicant’s possession or control.  Applicant’s activities
warrant some application of two of the disqualifying conditions of the foreign influence
guideline: DC ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if
that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” The citizenship/residence status of Applicant’s
siblings in Iraq pose some potential concerns for Applicant because of the risks of
undue foreign influence that could compromise sensitive or classified information
under Applicant’s possession and/or control. 
Although none of Applicant’s family members have any identified Iraqi military
or government service, or other demonstrated links to the Iraqi government, they
remain vulnerable to potential compromise and coercion for so long as they reside in
Iraq.  Were any of these family members to be placed in a hostage situation, Applicant
could be subject to conflicts over ensuring his family’s well being and protecting
classified information.  For this reason, DC ¶ 7(b), “connection to a foreign person,
group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that
information,” is applicable to the facts of this case. 
True, neither Applicant’s mother nor any of his siblings residing in Iraq have any
history to date of being subjected to any coercion or influence. These historical
antecedents do limit the severity of a conflict situation.  However, the absence of any
past coercive measures taken by Iraqi authorities does not absolve Applicant from
coercive risks in the future given Iraq’s checkered history of political instability,
violence,  hostage taking, and abusive measures taken against its own citizens.
The AGs governing security clearances do not dictate per se results or
mandate particular outcomes for any chosen set of guidelines covering risks of foreign
influence.  What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one foreign country may not
be in another. While foreign influence cases must by practical necessity be weighed
on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for referencing.  Personnel security
assessments necessarily embrace similar risk assessments under the new AGs for
assessing foreign influence risks and concerns associated with the individual's having
family abroad, which include both common sense assessments of country risks and
information available from public sources. 
10
Unlike the old Adjudicative Guidelines, though, the new ones do take into
account the country’s demonstrated relations with the U.S. as an important
consideration in gauging whether the particular relatives with citizenship and residency
elsewhere create a heightened security risk. The geopolitical aims and policies of the
particular foreign regime involved do matter. 
Mitigation is not available to Appellant under the foreign influence guideline of
the AGs.  Based on his case-specific circumstances, mitigating condition (MC) ¶ 8(a),
“the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these
persons are located, or the persons or activities of these persons in that country are
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign a foreign individual, group, organization, or
government and the interests of the U.S.” is not applicable to Applicant’s
circumstances.   Information about Applicant’s family members is too limited to permit
safe predictions about their future safety, and Applicant’s exposure to risks of pressure
and compromise of any of his family members currently residing in Iraq. 
Of some benefit to Applicant is MC ¶ 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either
because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group,
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.”  Applicant’s
demonstrated loyalty and commitment to the U.S. and its institutions and values and
the absence of any history of coercive measures taken against any of his family
members residing in Iraq are sufficiently demonstrated to warrant some application of
MC ¶ 8(b).
Heightened risks associated with Applicant’s long concealed status of his
mother and siblings cannot be safely discounted.  Iraq’s strategic location and political
character and Applicant’s case specific relationships with his immediate family
members in Iraq combine to create pressing security concerns over risks of direct or
indirect pressure or influence of a family member of Applicant’s by Iraqi authorities, or
(more likely) by terrorists or insurgents operating in Iraq.
To complete a  whole-person assessment of Applicant’s foreign influence risks
to ascertain whether they are fully compatible with the restoration of his security
clearance, Applicant’s U.S. citizenship and his wife’s U.S. citizenship interests require
careful balancing. Whole-person assessment takes account of Applicant’s immigration
to the U.S. to pursue a better life for himself and his wife.  Without any character
references, performance evaluations, or community credits to appraise his
commitments to the U.S., and responsibility at work and in his community, it is difficult
to find evidence of positive contributions to neutralize risks associated with raised
foreign influence concerns. 
11
Overall, potential security concerns attributable to Applicant's relations with his
mother, brothers, and sisters residing in Iraq (as Iraqi citizens), are insufficiently
mitigated to permit safe predictive judgments about the ability of Applicant and his
family members to withstand pressure, compromise, or coercion from government and
non-government sources in Iraq.  Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by Guideline B. 
Falsification concerns
Applicant omitted his 1999 DUI arrest and 2007 criminal trespass arrest from
the e-QIP he completed in July 2008.” By omitting his criminal arrests, Appellant failed
to furnish materially important background information that was needed for the
Government to properly process and evaluate his SF-86.
Applicant does not challenge the omissions, but attributes them to haste,
language difficulties, and confusion over the meaning of the term “arrest.” Despite his
claims, the questions as written in the e-QIP are straight-forward and manifestly
comprehensible to Applicant, given his level of education and experience at the time.
His omissions invite the application of the DC ¶ 16(a) of the personal conduct
guideline, “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities.”
Considering his arrest history, his court appearances associated with each
arrest, Applicant’s guilty pleas associated with each arrest, and the plain wording of
question 23 of his e-QIP, Applicant’s omissions cannot be excused. His omissions
were made knowingly and wilfully under all of the circumstances, 
When interviewed two months later by an OPM agent, Applicant  disclosed his
arrests.  Review of his summary of interview reflects clear evidence of prompting by
the interviewing agent. Under the circumstances, his corrections cannot be considered
sufficiently prompt and voluntary to enable him to take advantage of MC ¶ 17(a), “the
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or
falsification before being confronted with the facts.” Applicant’s corrections do reflect
candid, sincere, and complete corrections.  Nonetheless, they fail to meet both the
prompt and good-faith prongs of MC ¶ 17(a), as these terms have generally been
interpreted by the Appeal Board.  
Taking into account all of the evidence and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s two omitted arrests and his less than prompt and voluntary disclosures of
them when questioned by an OPM agent, conclusions warrant that the allegations are
are not mitigated. Unfavorable conclusions are warranted with respect to the
allegations covered by Guideline E. 
12
Financial concerns
Applicant’s admissions of the debts covered in the SOR negate the need for the
Government to provide any independent proof of the debts.  But the Government has
documented proof of the listed debts just the same.  The listed debts in the SOR are
fully documented in his latest credit reports and provide ample independent proof of
the debts. Applicant does not dispute any of the debts.  Accumulation of these debts,
and his past inability to pay, or otherwise address them, warrant the application of two
of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c)) “a history of not meeting financial
obligations.”
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
government business. (see Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980))
Failure of an applicant to make more concerted efforts to pay or resolve his debts
when able to do so raises security-significant concerns about the sufficiency of the
applicant’s demonstrated trust and judgment necessary to safeguard classified
information.
Extenuating circumstances are very limited.  To a large extent, Applicant’s
listed debts involve credit card accounts that he used to gamble with before he
relocated to his current state of residence.  Loss of employment has hampered his
ability to address his debts., but his unemployment alone does not explain his failure
to demonstrate any repayment efforts with his creditors.  Consequently, MC  ¶ 20(b) of
the financial considerations guideline, “the conditions that resulted in the behavior
were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the
individual acted responsibly,” has  limited application to Applicant’s circumstances. 
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s financial history, the limited extenuating circumstances associated with his
accumulation of the debts, and his inability to address any of them without full time
employment, Applicant cannot be credited with mitigating financial concerns and
restoring the state of his finances to stable levels commensurate with the minimum
requirements for holding a security clearance.  Unfavorable conclusions warrant with
respect to the allegations covered by Guideline F.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the factors and conditions enumerated in AG ¶ 2(a).
13
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following
separate formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subpara. 1.a: Against Applicant
Subpara. 1.b: Against Applicant
Subpara. 1.c: Against Applicant
Subpara. 1.d:            Against Applicant
GUIDELINE E ([PERSONAL CONDUCT): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subpara. 2.a: Against Applicant
Subpara. 2.b: Against Applicant
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 3.a through 3.k: Against Applicant 
 Conclusions  
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified
information.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
14
