                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06147 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn MacKinnon, Esq. Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On April 6, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 3, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 2, 2010. DOHA 
issued a Notice of Hearing on July 21, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
September 1, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant did 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
not object and they were admitted. Applicant testified on her own behalf and offered 
Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were admitted without objections. The record 
remained open until September 14, 2010, to allow Applicant an opportunity to provide 
additional documents, which she did. One document was provided and it was marked 
as AE H. Department Counsel had no objections and it was admitted.1 DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 8, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. She is married and has two grown children. She has 
worked as a senior consultant for a federal contractor since 2001. She has been 
continuously employed since 1984.2 
 
 In 2006, Applicant and her husband purchased a home. They financed the 
purchase with two mortgages. Mortgage #1 ($275,000, SOR ¶1.f) had an initial monthly 
payment of $1,675. Applicant believed the payment would increase after one year, but it 
would not continue to increase. However, she later learned that each year the mortgage 
payment increased. In April 2009, her monthly payment was $2,005. Mortgage #2 
($65,000, SOR ¶ 1.c) had a monthly payment of $672.3  
 
 In 2009 Applicant’s husband did not receive two months pay due to a problem 
with his employer. She estimated that he did not receive $7,000 in pay. They paid what 
they could, but this event caused them to fall behind in paying their mortgages. He 
eventually received the back pay he was owed, but it was about six months later and he 
received it piecemeal and not in one payment. They used this money to pay other bills 
and put some toward their mortgage. In August 2009, they received a notification of 
foreclosure from their mortgage company. They hired an attorney in September 2009. 
The mortgage company would not accept any further payments because the loan was 
in a foreclosure status. They were five months past due with their payments. By March 
2010 they were approximately $40,000 past due in their payments. On the advice of her 
attorney she did not attempt to make any mortgage payments and the attorney 
submitted paperwork to the loan companies to modify her loan. She has not made any 
payments on this mortgage since June 2009. The request to the mortgage company is 
still pending.4 
 
1 Department Counsel’s Memorandum was marked Hearing Exhibit I. 
 
2 Tr. 82-85. 
 
3 Tr. 34-44. 
 
4 Tr. 25-26, 34-44, 49-51; AE F. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Regarding Mortgage #2 there was confusion as to who was the current creditor. 
Applicant attempted to pay one company and they would tell her to pay a different one. 
The same would happen with the other company. Neither would accept her payments 
and each would tell her to pay a different creditor. Once it was determined who owned 
the debt, Applicant negotiated a payment plan to pay $1,000 on August 25, 2010, and 
then $400 each month until September 2011 (one year). After consistently monthly 
payments for a year, the mortgage company will re-evaluate the payment schedule. 
Applicant stated the loan officer would not provide any document in writing. Applicant 
made a payment of $1,000 on August 23, 2010. She is still $3,000 in arrears, but stated 
the creditor is aware and once Applicant establishes a consistent payment record the 
creditor will renegotiate the terms of the payment. Applicant is not paying the full 
monthly amount that is due or paying any amounts in arrears, rather she is attempting 
to establish a track record of consistent payments.5 
 
 Applicant explained when her husband did not receive his pay for two months it 
had an effect on their ability to pay other debts. They fell behind in their car payments 
too. Because they fell behind in their car payments, the insurance on one of their 
vehicles lapsed for a short period. During that period the car was stolen and later found 
burned. Their lack of insurance caused them to have to repay the total amount of the 
loan (SOR ¶ 1.d, $12,861). Applicant did not pay the debt and it was charged-off. The 
creditor entered into a consent judgment stipulation which requires Applicant to make 
$300 monthly payments on the 13th of each month until the debt is paid in full. Applicant 
made a payment of $150 on August 16, 2010 and another payment of $150 on August 
27, 2010, instead of one payment of $300. She stated the creditor agreed, contrary to 
the stipulation, to accept payment in this manner. Applicant purchased a new car in 
2008 to replace the stolen car. Her car payments are $549 a month. She was two car 
payments behind because she had to pay the $1,000 for the payment agreement on 
Mortgage #2, and the $300 for the payment agreement on the consent judgment. She 
also had to pay her attorney’s fees.6 
 
 Applicant also had difficulty maintaining her car payments on their second vehicle 
(SOR ¶ 1.e, $1,159) and missed two payments. She contacted the creditor and they 
agreed to accept $391, plus $6 processing fee, bi-weekly from July 30, 2010 to October 
22, 2010, to allow her to catch-up on the missed payments. After she completes the 
rehabilitation schedule, she stated the creditor agreed to re-evaluate the loan and may 
agree to refinance the debt. Applicant has made four bi-weekly payments and is current 
with the payments. Applicant does not have a written agreement with the creditor.7 
 
5 Tr. 24-25, 27-33, 78-79; AE E. 
 
6 Tr. 22-23, 44-49, 51-55, 68-73; GE 3; AE B, H. 
 
7 Tr. 25, 27, 52, 55-57; AE G. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($266) was paid on April 29, 2010.8 The debt in SOR ¶ 
1.b ($366) was paid in May 2010.9 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.g ($861) was paid.10  
 
 Applicant admitted that when they sought advice from an attorney, they realized 
they bought a house they could not afford and they are overextended in their finances. 
Applicant does not have any savings. Although she has not been making payments on 
Mortgage #1 since June 2009, she has not saved the money she would normally have 
used to pay the mortgage. Her husband took a loan from his retirement account that he 
is repaying. She does not have credit cards or have any other loan payments. She does 
not have a budget and does not know where they spend their money, other than for 
household requirements, such as utilities. She has not attended any financial 
counseling. Her husband has been continuously employed, and is now looking for a 
part-time job. Applicant admitted her finances are a mess and the notification of the 
security concerns has been a wake-up call for her. She and her husband have also 
incurred about $4,500 in attorney’s fees to help them resolve their foreclosure. Applicant 
received about $1,200 for her 2009 tax refund. She used it to pay bills. She is living 
paycheck to paycheck.11  
 
 Applicant provided character letters that I have considered. Her supervisor since 
2001 stated Applicant’s work habits and work products are exemplary. She is punctual 
and cooperative. She takes on ad hoc assignments to support emergency needs. She is 
professional, courteous, reliable, and a person with integrity. Coworkers describe her as 
hardworking, loyal, and she demonstrates high morals standards.12   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
8 Tr. 21; AE C. 
 
9 Tr. 23, 27; AE D. 
 
10 GE 5. 
 
11 Tr. 60-68, 73-82, 87. 
 
12 AE A. 
 
5 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
6 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19 and especially considered: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant had delinquent debts that were unpaid and unresolved for a period of 
time. I find there is sufficient evidence to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 Applicant’s has debts she is still resolving and they are current. She does not 
have a budget or have a realistic grasp on how she spends her money. I find that AG ¶ 
20 (a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s husband did not get paid for two months which affected their ability to 
pay their mortgages and other bills. This event was beyond their control. She also was 
unaware of the contractual obligations she incurred when she secured a mortgage for 
her home, in that the mortgage rate would be adjusted annually. The annual increase in 
the mortgage was something she should have understood and planned for before 
purchasing their home. This was within her control. In order for AG ¶ 20(b) to fully 
 
7 
 
 
applicable, a person must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. In this 
instance, Applicant admitted that since their home has been in a foreclosure status, she 
has not made payments because the mortgage company would not accept them. Her 
attorney is attempting to renegotiate the loan. However, Applicant has not saved any of 
the monthly payments that she normally would be paying to the mortgage company. 
Instead she has used that money to pay other bills or for other things. She is 
renegotiating other debts and is hopeful she can secure new payment plans after a 
period of time of consistent payments. Applicant does not have a budget and admitted 
she does not know where she spends her money. She lives paycheck to paycheck. To 
make payments on certain delinquent debts, she has gotten behind in paying other 
debts. Applicant has not provided sufficient evidence to conclude she acted responsibly. 
I find AG ¶ 20(b) only partially applies.  
 
 Applicant has not had any financial counseling. She does not have a grasp on 
how she spends her money or a realistic plan for managing her finances. She has made 
efforts to work out rehabilitation payment plans, but has not presented a plan for how 
she will meet future payments when they are no longer at a reduced rate and when she 
has to make her regular mortgage payments. Without a budget and an understanding 
for managing her money, her long-term financial stability is unlikely. She did pay several 
of her delinquent debts and is attempting to resolve her other debts, but it is too early to 
conclude that there are clear indications that the problem is under control. I find AG ¶ 
20(c) does not apply. I find AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies because she has paid some 
creditors. Applicant did not provide any documents to support a dispute of any of the 
debts. I find AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant experienced financial 
difficulty when her husband did not receive pay for two months. She was unable to pay 
her mortgages and other bills. Her first mortgage is in a foreclosure status. She hired an 
attorney and she is hopeful they can renegotiate the loan, but that is still pending. 
Applicant also has begun rehabilitation payment plans with other debts. She is required 
to make consistent payments before the creditors will renegotiate the loans. She is in 
the initial stages of these plans. To Applicant’s credit she has attempted to address her 
delinquent debts. However, it appears she is able to manage staying current on the 
rehabilitation plans because they are at a reduced rate and she is not currently paying 
her largest bill, her mortgage payment. She has not saved any money while her 
mortgage payments have been suspended. Without a detailed financial plan, and a 
budget that she strictly abides by for a consistent period of time, it is unlikely her 
finances will be stabilized. Once Applicant has resolved the foreclosure issues, has 
completed her rehabilitation plans and is consistently paying all of her bills, her security 
clearance application should be reconsidered. However, at this juncture, it is too early to 
conclude that her financial situation is not a security concern. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial Considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.g:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
