 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05343 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns raised 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Her eligibility 
for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On April 1, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 26, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under the guidelines for Drug Involvement and Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On March 23, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on May 7, 
2010, and issued a Notice of Hearing on June 18, 2010. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on July 28, 2010. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 4 into evidence, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified.  
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 9, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer, Applicant admitted all allegations contained in the SOR, except 
those contained in ¶ 2.c. Those admissions are incorporated into the findings herein.   
 
 Applicant is 43 years old and divorced since 1994. She has two children, ages 22 
and 12. Her 12-year-old child lives with her. She completed a year of college. In 1998, 
she began working as a general clerk for a defense contractor. 
 
 Applicant has a history of illegal drug abuse. Between 1992 and early 1993, she 
used crack cocaine about eight times. She was 25 years old and married at the time. 
(Tr. 15.) She voluntarily entered a 28-day drug rehabilitation program at the end of 
December 1992 for substance abuse and depression. (Tr. 27.) She subsequently 
participated in 12-Step meetings for narcotics and alcohol abuse for the next three 
years and then stopped. She admitted that she has an alcohol and drug problem. (Tr. 
18.)  She was arrested and charged with Driving Under the Influence (DUI) in 1993, 
1995, and 1999.  
 
 On September 18, 2003, Applicant sought pain management treatment for 
cervical and lumbar spinal problems. According to the medical record from that date, 
she denied a history of alcohol or substance abuse. Since then, she has received 
treatment for back and hip pain, degenerative disc disease, and arthritis. As a condition 
of treatment, her physician required monthly drug screenings for non-prescribed 
controlled substance abuse before dispensing or prescribing another month’s supply of 
medication. On February 3, 2009, Applicant tested positive for cocaine. All subsequent 
screenings up to July 2010 have been negative and she has continued receiving 
treatment from her physician. (Tr. 19.) 
 
 Applicant acknowledged her mistake and lapse in judgment on February 1, 2009, 
the night she used cocaine. She was at a party with her cousin and was consuming 
alcohol beforehand. She stated that she “didn’t get myself out of [a] situation when I 
should have.” (Tr. 17.) She has not sought counseling or treatment since that incident. 
(Tr. 18, 27.)  She no longer associates with that cousin or other people who use illegal 
drugs. (Tr. 47.) 
 
 In response to Section 24: Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity on the April 2009 
e-QIP, Applicant did not disclose that she illegally used cocaine within the last 7 years, 
viz., in February 2009. On May 27, 2009, a government investigator interviewed 
Applicant about her answers in the e-QIP. Applicant disclosed her 1992 to 1993 illegal 
 
3 
 
 
drug use, but did not disclose the February 2009 incident.  She admitted that she made 
a serious mistake and should have disclosed it. (Tr. 20-21, 33.) As stated earlier, she 
did not disclose her previous drug and alcohol abuse history to her physician during the 
course of treatment because she had previously ceased using alcohol and illegal 
substances when she started attending the pain management program in 2003. (Tr. 22.)  
 
 Applicant expressed sincere regret and sadness over the February 2009 
incident. She acknowledged that she had not used an illegal substance for about 16 
years prior to that night. She is remorseful about her conduct. She stated, “I take full 
responsibility for wrong actions. I’m doing the best I can do to overcome these things 
and get past them.” (Tr. 41.) She recognized that she continues to suffer from 
depression, in addition to physical conditions. She has not sought psychiatric treatment 
for the depression because she has not had enough money for additional medical care 
or psychotherapy. She would like to obtain it in the future. (Tr. 39.)     
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a), describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”   
 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
The security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. (a) Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and; (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; (b) drug abuse is the illegal use of 
a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction. 
This guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Based 
on Applicant’s admissions that she illegally used cocaine between 1992 and 1993, and 
in February 2009, the Government raised a disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 25(a), 
“any drug abuse (see above definition).” 
After the Government raised a potential disqualifying condition, the burden 
shifted to Applicant to rebut and prove mitigation of the resulting security concerns. AG 
¶ 26 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate the security concern arising 
from illegal drug use: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
5 
 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional.   
Applicant illegally used cocaine from 1992 to early 1993, and again in February 
2009. As a result the February 2009 incident, a break in that 16-year period of 
abstinence, AG ¶ 25(a) does not apply because the recent relapse calls into question 
her good judgment. Since February 2009, Applicant’s monthly drug screenings for 
illegal substance abuse have been negative. That is some evidence of her intent not to 
use illegal drugs, along with her statement that she no longer associates with her 
cousin, warranting a limited application of AG ¶ 25(b). The record does not contain any 
evidence to support the application of AG ¶¶ 25(c)(1) and (3). Applicant completed a 
rehabilitation program in 1993, but has not participated in any substance abuse 
treatment since February 2009 or documented a favorable prognosis, which is 
necessary to trigger the application of AG ¶ 25(d).  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
The security concern pertaining to this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in ¶ 2 of the SOR that Applicant’s history of cocaine use 
and deliberate concealment of it to the Government and to her physician may raise a 
disqualification under AG ¶ 15. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 16 sets out seven conditions that could raise security concerns and be 
disqualifying. Two of them are applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
Applicant admitted that she intentionally concealed using cocaine in February 
2009 on the April 2009 e-QIP. That evidence raised a potential disqualification under 
AG ¶ 16(a). She admitted that she failed to disclose that incident and a subsequent 
positive drug screening to a government investigator during a May 2009 interview. She 
denied that she intentionally concealed her history of alcohol and substance abuse from 
her physician, beginning in 2003. However, her explanation that she did not feel that it 
was necessary because the abuse was in the past is not credible. These facts raise 
disqualifications under AG ¶ 16(b).  
AG ¶ 17 includes six conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
under this guideline: 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
 
7 
 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to trigger the application of any 
mitigating conditions listed under AG ¶ 17.  She did not make an attempt to disclose the 
information prior to being interviewed about it, as required under AG ¶ 17(a). While her 
drug use between 1992 and 1993 is not recent, she acknowledged that she made a 
grave mistake when she used cocaine in February 2009, calling into question her 
current judgment. Hence, AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  Although she acknowledged her 
lapse of judgment, she did not obtain counseling for her problems or take other 
rehabilitative steps to alleviate the possibility of a recurrence. AG ¶ 17(d) does not 
apply. There is insufficient evidence to support the application of AG ¶¶ 17(b), (e), or 
(g). AG ¶ 17(f) is not relevant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 43-year-old woman, 
who has worked for a federal defense contractor since 1998. Despite a 16-year period 
of abstinence from illegally using cocaine, she relapsed in February 2009 after 
consuming alcohol. She exhibited sincere remorse and embarrassment over her 
conduct. Unfortunately, she has not participated in any form of rehabilitative treatment 
 
8 
 
 
since the incident, which could mitigate some of the security concerns and diminish the 
likelihood of a recurrence.   
 
An equal security concern is Applicant’s intentional failure to divulge her past 
illegal cocaine use on the e-QIP application, and the February 2009 incident during an 
interview. Her reticence to disclose her substance abuse issues from her physician also 
raises concerns, not only of a security nature, but also in terms of her physician’s ability 
to render effective treatment. The Government imposes a special trust in one who holds 
a security clearance and relies on a person to be honest and truthful regardless of the 
consequences.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant did 
not mitigate the security concerns arising from her drug involvement and personal 
conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c:  Against Applicant  
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
