1
 
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-02838
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On October 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under
Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In a response dated October 26, 2009, Applicant admitted all four allegations
raised under Guideline F and requested an administrative determination. On March 9,
2010, Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), which
included nine attached items. Applicant timely responded to the FORM by submitting an
undated letter and additional materials. The case was assigned to another DOHA
administrative judge on April 27, 2010, then reassigned to me on September 7, 2010,
for caseload considerations. Based on a review of the case file, submissions, and
 FORM, Item 8, Interrogatories, dated Jul. 8, 2009, at 4.      1
 FORM, Item 7, Interrogatories, dated Jul. 8, 2009, at 4.      2
 Id.      3
 Id.      4
 Id. Applicant admitted she would spend $400 to $600 per casino visit in response to the SOR. In FORM,      5
Item 7, at 4, she noted that she took $200 to $300 with her on her casino trips, then stated that “she is trying
to cut back on going as the casino is not paying very well and she could use the money for her bills.” 
 Id.      6
 Response to FORM, undated.      7
 Applicant admitted SOR allegation ¶ 1.d, which states: “You spend approximately $400.00 to $600.00 a      8
month gambling.”
2
exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet her burden regarding the security concerns
raised. Security clearance denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old team leader who has worked for her present employer,
a government contractor, since 2003. She earned a high school diploma and has
experience as an aircraft mechanic. In requesting an administrative determination, she
offered scant facts regarding her personal life or current financial situation. 
Applicant was divorced in 1988. Except for a period of about three months of
unemployment in early 2003, she has worked steadily since September 2001. Between
2001 and today, she has twice struggled with some financial issues. First, in 2001, she
worked away from her home, incurring additional costs. Second, in December 2008,
she accepted a supervisory position which resulted in a pay cut of approximately
$1,600 a month.  1
In 2009, Applicant depicted her financial situation as being “tight,” barely making
“enough to pay her living expenses, vehicle payments, and credit card monthly
minimum payments.”  At the same time, she commented that she “does do some2
gambling.”  From 1998 until 2001, she would frequent a local casino every Friday she3
received her pay check, taking about $100 with her each time.  More recently, she4
traveled about an hour and a half to a casino about twice a month, taking $200 to $600
with her each trip.  In 2009, Applicant stated that she did not feel she had a gambling5
problem.  In her 2010 response to the FORM, she noted that she “joined Gambler6
Therapy.”  No evidence was offered describing Gambler Therapy’s program. There is7
no direct evidence indicating that her debts are gambling related.
At issue in the SOR are three debts, noted at SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a - 1.c.  In8
her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debts. SOR allegation ¶ 1.a is for a
 Response to FORM, supra, note 7.      9
 Id.      10
 The underlying account was opened in 2001 and ultimately closed by Applicant when the balance was      11
approximately $2,900. Applicant stated that she closed the account because she could not make the minimum
payments. She stated that she was later advised that the account was sold to the same entity as is reflected
in SOR allegation ¶ 1.b. That entity is also noted as having been the source for the balance owed in SOR
allegation ¶ 1.c, although there is no evidence showing that the two collection accounts are for the same
underlying account balance.  See FORM, Item 7, supra, note 2, at 3, and FORM, Item 5, dated Dec. 3, 2009.
 Answer to the SOR, Oct. 26, 2009.      12
 Response to FORM, supra, note 7.      13
 FORM, Item 7, Interrogatories, supra, note 2, at 4.      14
3
medical services account for $187. The debt is from six years ago.  Applicant wrote that9
she previously tried to pay this balance, but that her payment was returned as
undeliverable. She provided evidence that the debt was paid on April 6, 2010.10
SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c are for collection accounts in the amounts of
$4,984 and $4,136, respectively. Applicant’s December 2008 and May 7, 2009 credit
reports, included as Item 5 and Item 6 of the FORM, note that the former account
($4,984) was opened in October 2007. It reflected a high credit limit of $3,675 and a
November 2002 date of last activity. The December 2008 credit report reflects the
entity’s address and phone number. The credit reports also note that the latter account
($4,137) was opened in October 2007 with a high credit limit of $4,136, a balance of
$9,411, and a date of last activity of October 2008. The latter is noted as being a
collection effort on behalf of the banking account entry reported immediately above its
own entry, for a charged-off account with a balance of $4,136.  Given the one dollar11
difference between $4,137 and $4,136, these two accounts may be assumed to be
related. Applicant argues that  SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c are both collection efforts
for the $4,136 charged-off account, but provided no evidence linking the debt at SOR
allegation ¶ 1.b for $4,984 to the charged-off account. Regardless, Applicant notes that
the two accounts at issue were poised for removal from her credit report in October
2009. She was advised by attorneys not to make payments on either accounts because
“[i]t would have started the 7 years of bad credit over again.”  She wrote that the “212
credit cards are no longer on my credit report and NO I’m not going to open that can of
worms again.”  (emphasis in the original)13
As noted, Applicant’s current finances are “tight,” and she is barely making
enough to meet her monthly obligations.  There is no evidence that she has sought or14
received financial counseling, nor is there evidence of any additional sources of income
or savings. Applicant expressed no concern regarding the debts noted at SOR
allegations ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, noting only that they are now off her credit report. She
presented no evidence linking the two collection accounts as being duplicative efforts.
Applicant stresses that she does not pose a threat to the national security. She feels
 Response to FORM, supra, note 7.      15
 Id.      16
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      17
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      18
4
that this process has been dehumanizing and degrading.  Applicant stated: “You15
already revoked my clearance last year for the 1 year I had it. I’ll just have to submit
paper work again next year and every year after that until it’s allowed.”  16
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. The AG lists potentially disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied in
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under
AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The United States Government (Government) must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. It is an applicant’s responsibility to
present  “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is17
something less than a preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion
is on the applicant.  18
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 See also EO 12968, § 3.1(b)  and EO 10865 § 7.      19
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      20
 Id.      21
 AG ¶ 18.      22
 Id.      23
 In the absence of evidence that Applicant’s gambling is or was compulsive or addictive, AG ¶ 19(i) does      24
not apply.
5
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security19
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any20
reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive
information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information.  A security21
clearance denial does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
In this case, Guideline F is the appropriate guideline for consideration. Under
that guideline, “failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”  It also states22
that “an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal
acts to generate funds.”  Here, Applicant admitted that her credit reports reflected23
three delinquent debts, totalling approximately $9,307. She also admitted that she has
gambled, spending about $200 to $600 a month at casinos. Therefore, Financial
Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts) and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations)
apply.  With such conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against24
her and mitigate security concerns. 
Two of the delinquent debts at issue continue to be neglected. Although
Applicant argued that they both represent the same debt, she provided no evidence
that they are duplicative efforts by two separate collection agencies for the same
account. She offered no documentary efforts demonstrating any efforts to verify those
accounts or to dispute them with any of the three leading credit reporting bureaus. She
is content that they were removed from her credit report last year, unresolved and
unaddressed, through no efforts of her own. Financial Considerations Mitigating
Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent,
or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
 Examination of the “whole-person” in this matter is limited due to Applicant’s failure to supplement the      25
record with more personal information that might be relevant and material to this case.
6
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not
apply. 
Applicant was divorced over a decade ago and there is no evidence that the
debts at issue are related to that divorce. In 2001, she worked away from home,
incurring higher expenses, but she provided no narrative linking the debts at issue to
events in 2001. Indeed, the evidence shows that 2001 was the year she opened the
account underlying the collection effort noted in SOR allegation ¶ 1.c. In December
2008, Applicant accepted a supervisory position that entailed a pay cut. There is no
evidence, however, that her promotion led to the creation of the accounts noted in SOR
allegations ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, nor that the pay cut led her to become delinquent on those
debts. Therefore, regarding the debts noted in allegations ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c, Financial
Considerations Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the
behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply.
Without evidence or any indication that Applicant has received or is receiving
financial counseling, FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control) does not apply. Moreover, while Applicant paid the $187
debt noted in SOR allegation ¶ 1.a, she volitionally chose to ignore the other two
accounts at issue, obviating application of FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts).
The burden for mitigation in these proceedings is placed squarely on Applicant.
Lacking additional evidence as to her handling of the accounts at issue, any pursuit of
financial counseling, or her present finances, Applicant failed to mitigate financial
considerations security concerns. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. As noted above, the ultimate burden of persuasion is on the
applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors.  Applicant is a mature woman who has risen to a supervisory position. She has25
7
been continuously employed since at least 2001. She is currently single and earning
insufficient income to cover her monthly expenses. 
Applicant chose to gamble at casinos at the same times she stated she was
short on available funds. She continued to gamble despite her difficulty paying bills and
her apparent dissatisfaction with the casino’s odds. To her credit, she is now in
Gamblers Therapy, although she failed to describe that program and she did not
indicate whether she is still gambling. 
When faced with two negative credit report entries that Applicant suspected
might be duplicative efforts to collect on one charged-off account, she did not attempt to
verify or dispute those entries in order to confirm her suspicions. Such a process could
have been initiated on-line or by letter with the credit reporting bureaus. Rather, she
chose to ignore those accounts until they were deleted from her credit report. 
Applicant finds this process to be degrading and dehumanizing, failing to
appreciate the Government’s interest in the trustworthiness, judgment, and willingness
to abide by rules and regulations of those seeking a security clearance. Here, Applicant
showed that she paid one of the debts at issue. Her intentional disregard of the other
two accounts, however, demonstrates an admitted effort to skirt her financial
obligations, as well as poor judgment in light of her pursuit of a security clearance. The
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err,
if they must, on the side of denials. As noted above, any reasonable doubt about
whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information. In light of the foregoing, security
concerns remain unmitigated. Clearance denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a  For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b  Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.c  Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d  Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified
information. Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
