 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6, Section E3.1.2.2.1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 09-03946
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, Applicant’s request for
eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
On December 29, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain or renew a security clearance required for
his job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of Applicant’s background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent
interrogatories to Applicant to clarify or augment information in his background.  After1
reviewing the results of the background investigation and Applicant’s responses to the
interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary affirmative
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
 The adjudicative guidelines were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. These3
guidelines were published in the Federal Register and codified through 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).
Pending official revision of the Directive, they take precedence over the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the
Directive.
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included 14 documents (Items 1 - 14) proffered in4
support of the Government’s case.
 Applicant submitted a two-page memorandum, dated August 4, 2010, with an attached two-page letter of5
recommendation.
2
finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue2
Applicant’s access to classified information. On March 30, 2010, DOHA issued to
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which, if established, would
raise security concerns addressed in the adjudicative guidelines (AG)  under Guideline3
G (alcohol consumption) and Guideline J (criminal conduct).
On April 13, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR through a notarized
statement and requested a decision without a hearing. On July 8, 2010, Department
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the Government’s4
preliminary decision. Applicant received the FORM on July 16, 2010, and was given 30
days to file a response to the FORM. On August 16, 2010, Department Counsel
forwarded Applicant’s timely response to the FORM  without objection. The case was5
assigned to me on September 1, 2010.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline G, the Government alleged that Applicant consumed alcohol, at
times to excess, from about 1999 until at least January 2009 (SOR 1.a); that in August
2001, he was charged with, and fined for being drunk in public (SOR 1.b); that in May
2003, he was charged with, and fined for being drunk in public (SOR 1.c); that in
September 2003, after consuming alcohol, he was arrested for trespassing and resisting
arrest without violence, and that the charges were nolle prosequi (SOR 1.d); that in
November 2004, he was arrested and charged with being drunk in public, disorderly
conduct, and harassment, and that the charges were dismissed after he completed
counseling (SOR 1.e); that in September 2005, he was arrested and charged with
driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI), and that he entered an “Accelerated
Rehabilitative Disposition Program” (SOR 1.f); that in December 2005, he was
intoxicated when he was arrested and charged with trespassing, for which he was fined
(SOR 1.g); and that in January 2008, he was charged with, and fined for being drunk in
public and disorderly conduct (SOR 1.h). Applicant denied the SOR 1.a allegation. He
averred that his excessive drinking ceased in January 2008, citing to his remarks in
response to e-QIP question 23. (FORM, Item 2) He admitted the SOR 1.b - 1.h
allegations.
Under Guideline J, the Government cross-alleged the alcohol-related criminal
conduct detailed in SOR 1.b - 1.h (SOR 2.a). Applicant admitted this allegation. In
3
addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I make the following findings
of relevant fact.
Applicant is 31 years old and has been employed as an engineer for a defense
contractor since October 2008. He requires a security clearance for his work. In May
2008, Applicant received a bachelor of science degree in engineering from a well-known
university. Thereafter, he worked as a research assistant at that university before
entering the workforce. (FORM, Item 4)
In his e-QIP, Applicant disclosed that he had completed alcohol-related
counseling in February 2005, and that he had been arrested for or charged with
numerous alcohol-related offenses. The circumstances of his arrests and his history of
alcohol use were discussed in detail during a subject interview with a Government
investigator on January 26, 2009. (FORM, Item 5) Applicant first consumed alcohol at
about age 21, and was soon consuming about 12 beers in a single sitting each week.
When he was arrested for public drunkenness around midnight on January 13, 2008, he
claimed he had consumed 12 beers at a bar earlier in the evening, but had fallen asleep
on a park bench because he got tired while walking home. (Id.) The related police report
indicated that he was lying face down on the ground and was “passed out” with a strong
odor of alcohol about him. When the police rolled him over, he took a swing at the
officer and had to be restrained. Accordingly, he was arrested and charged with public
drunkenness and disorderly conduct. (FORM, Item 7) 
When he was arrested and charged with DUI in September 2005, Applicant had
consumed about 12 beers and two shots of liquor over a 10-hour period. Police
administered a field sobriety test, which he failed. When he was arrested for public
drunkenness in November 2004, he had consumed half of a bottle of vodka before
getting into a fight with his brother. (FORM, Items 5 and 10)
In his subject interview, Applicant told the investigator that, regarding his arrest
for public drunkenness in May 2003, he had consumed two beers and seven shots of
liquor at a local bar. He further stated that he was not aware of a problem before police
came and took him out of the bar. (FORM, Item 5) The related police report indicated
that police responded to a report of someone causing a disturbance in the bar.
Applicant was drunk and became belligerent to the bartender and other customers after
the bartender refused to serve him any more alcohol. Applicant also refused to
cooperate with the police when they arrived. (FORM, Item 13)
Applicant was arrested on two other occasions for refusing to leave a bar after he
was drunk and was asked to leave. In describing the arrests during his subject
interview, Applicant did not acknowledge that he had refused to leave on each
occasion, or that he had refused to cooperate with the police. (FORM, Item 5)
In January and February 2005, Applicant attended court-ordered counseling after
his November 2004 arrest for public drunkenness. He disclosed that he used alcohol
regularly, but denied that he had a substance abuse problem. He also disclosed that he
had been drinking a fifth of alcohol each week for about five years. (FORM, Item 5) 
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.17.7
 Directive, 6.3.8
4
During his subject interview, Applicant stated that he had he no longer drank to
excess. (Id.) In his e-QIP and in response to the SOR, he stated that the last time he
was intoxicated was when he was arrested in January 2008. (FORM, Items 2 and 4) In
response to the FORM, Applicant acknowledged that, although he has not been
diagnosed as an alcoholic, he has abused alcohol. He further claimed that he has
abstained from alcohol, with the rare exception of having a beer if he goes on a date.
He claimed that he now leads a lifestyle supportive of sobriety, as shown by the
completion of his engineering degree after his last arrest. Applicant cited improved
relationships with his family, and he provided a positive recommendation from the
commanding officer of the military facility where he works.
Procedural Issue
Applicant denied SOR 1.a, and averred that he has not abused alcohol since
January 2008, as opposed to January 2009, as alleged. Thus, Department Counsel was
required to present information to support this allegation.  Having reviewed all of the6
available information probative of SOR 1.a, I have sua sponte amended the SOR to
conform to the evidence presented by the FORM and Applicant’s response thereto.7
Specifically, SOR 1.a is amended by changing “2009" to “2008." 
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines.  Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the8
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information.
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).9
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).11
5
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to9
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  A person who has access to classified information enters into a10
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the
Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in
favor of the national interest.11
Analysis
Alcohol Consumption
The Government’s information support’s the factual allegations under Guideline
G (SOR 1.a - 1.h). Applicant has abused alcohol for most of the past ten years. His
conduct in this regard has led to numerous arrests and has hindered his relations with
his family. These facts raise a security concern about Applicant’s use of alcohol, which,
as stated in AG 21, is that:
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
More specifically, Applicant’s admitted abuse of alcohol and the adverse conduct
stemming therefrom requires application of the disqualifying conditions at AG 22(a)
(alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence,
fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern,
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent) and AG ¶ 22(c) (habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent).
By contrast, Applicant claimed that he has not been intoxicated since his last
known alcohol-related arrest in January 2008. He also claimed that he has largely
6
abstained from alcohol since then, and that he now lives a lifestyle supportive of
continued sobriety. Such information requires consideration of the mitigating conditions
at AG ¶ 23(a) (so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment), and AG ¶
23(b) (the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse,
provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a
pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser)).
However, these factors do not apply because the only evidence in support of their
application is Applicant’s statements in his e-QIP and in response to the SOR and the
FORM. In assessing the persuasive value of those claims of sobriety, I have also
considered his statements about his alcohol-related conduct and arrests to a
Government investigator during his January 2009 subject interview. Those statements
indicated that Applicant was not candid about that information and was trying to
minimize the scope of his conduct when he was drinking. Department Counsel
presented sufficient reliable information to support the SOR allegations under Guideline
G. Thus, it fell to the Applicant to present sufficient information to refute, extenuate, or
mitigate the security concerns raised by the Government’s information. When compared
with his subject interview statements, Applicant’s reliance on his claims of sobriety since
January 2008 are insufficient to meet his burden of persuasion. He has failed to mitigate
the security concerns about his alcohol consumption.
Criminal Conduct
The Government submitted sufficient reliable information to support the factual
allegations under Guideline J (SOR 2.a). Applicant has been arrested for or charged
with numerous criminal offenses since 2001. The fact that he may not have been
convicted for some of them, given all of the available information about his conduct,
does not lessen the security significance of his arrest record. Available information
raises a security concern about his criminal conduct, which, as stated in AG ¶ 30, is
that:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
The facts established herein further require application of the disqualifying conditions at
AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses) and AG ¶ 31(c)
(allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted).
By contrast, all of Applicant’s criminal conduct has been alcohol-related. As
discussed under Guideline G, above, concerns persist about his alcohol abuse. His last
arrest was in January 2008. However, given the scope of his drinking problem, the
passage of time since his last offense does not indicate that his criminal conduct is no
longer a concern. In summary, available information militates against the application of
any of the AG ¶ 32 mitigating conditions. Applicant has failed to mitigate, refute, or
extenuate the security concerns raised by the Government’s information.
7
Whole-Person
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines G and J. I have also reviewed the record before
me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant, a 31-year-
old employee of a defense contractor, has significantly abused alcohol, which has led to
numerous instances of criminal conduct since at least 1999. Since his last arrest in
2008, Applicant has obtained his college degree. His job performance has impressed a
senior military officer, whom Applicant supports through his defense contractor position.
However, the letter from that officer does not reflect any knowledge of the alcohol-
related incidents in Applicant’s background, and it appears that Applicant tried to
minimize the full scope of his adverse conduct when he spoke to an investigator during
his background investigation. Applicant has not established that the conduct in his
background will not recur. Accordingly, the positive information in his background is not
sufficient to overcome the adverse security inferences drawn from his extensive alcohol
abuse and his inconsistent statements to the Government about that conduct. A fair and
commonsense assessment of this record shows that significant doubts remain about
Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Because protection of the
national interest is paramount in these determinations, those doubts must be resolved
for the Government.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2 Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
