 
 
1
                                                
                DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 09-00905   
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esquire 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for 
handling protected information, personal conduct, and use of information technology 
systems. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing, 
which he signed on July 21, 2005. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
 
2
                                                
 On January 14, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its finding: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline K (Handling Protected Information), Guideline M (Use of Information 
Technology Systems), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).2 Applicant signed his notarized Answer on February 4, 2010. He 
denied all allegations in the SOR. He also requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on March 24, 2010, and the case 
was assigned to me on March 29, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 14, 
2010, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 19, 2010. 
 
During the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits, which were admitted as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1, 2, 4, and 5, without objection.3 I admitted GE 3 over 
Applicant’s objection to two pages. Applicant testified, presented the testimony of two 
witnesses, and offered 31 exhibits, admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through EE. 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on May 28, 2010. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
On April 13, 2010, Applicant requested to have witnesses testify by telephone. 
Department Counsel did not object to the telephone testimony. I held a telephone 
conference call with both parties on April 14, 2010, and granted Applicant’s request.4  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, the testimony, and the record evidence, 
I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 27 years old, single, and has no children. He graduated from college 
cum laude with a bachelor’s degree in economics and international affairs in 2005. 
Since 2005, when he began working for a defense contracting company, he has 
received training in Department of Defense functional areas and holds a certification in 
life-cycle logistics. He held an interim security clearance in 2005 while working for 
Company A, a defense contractor, but did not work with classified material in that 
position. In 2006, he accepted employment with another defense contractor, Company 
B, as a logistics analyst. He worked for Company B from 2006 to 2008. Since 
November 2008, he has worked for Company C, a defense contractor, where he holds 
the positions of senior logistics manager and assistant facility security officer (FSO). In 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which apply to all 
adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 
2006.  
 
3 Applicant objected to pages 110 and 111 of GE 3, the courier instructions, on the grounds that he had 
not seen them before he received them during discovery for this hearing. However, the record indicates 
that he received this information in either December 2007 or January 2008. (See footnote 11, infra)  
 
4 See Directive, Enclosure 3, §§ E3.1.9 and E3.1.10. 
 
 
3
                                                
April 2010, he completed coursework for FSO certification and is qualified as an FSO. 
He currently holds a security clearance. (GE 1; AE K – Q, R - U; Tr. 64-80, 136, 140-
141, 155) 
 
 According to Company B’s FSO, Applicant “received necessary security training 
in October 2006” when he joined Company B. On October 16, 2006, Applicant read 
and signed four documents titled, “General Security Briefing,”5 “Reporting of Adverse 
Information,” “Counterintelligence Briefing,” and “Foreign Travel Defensive Security 
Briefing.” The General Security Briefing6 ended with the following statement above the 
signature line: “By signing this form I acknowledge my security responsibilities as 
explained to me and agree to observe security rules and regulations involved.” At the 
hearing, he testified that he did not receive a briefing about security, the National 
Industrial Security Program Operating Manual (NISPOM),7 Company B’s Standard 
Practices and Procedures (SPP) for security, or about the information in the documents 
he signed. He did not receive a copy of the documents. (GE 3; Tr. 82-83, 85-87, 230) 
 
 While employed by Company B, Applicant was transferred from his original job 
at Site C to Site A, where the testing and evaluation (T&E) of military equipment was 
conducted. He provided daily reports on the T&E, and acted as liaison to the project’s 
program management office, which was located at Site C. His military supervisor for 
the T&E project was Major A, a Marine Corps officer, whose office was at Site C. 
Applicant provided daily reports to Major A about each day’s testing. His reports were 
not classified; however, test results, images, and videos of the testing were classified. 
(Tr. 81, 89) 
 
 On August 8, 2007,8 Major A told Applicant he wished to see several compact 
disks (CDs) showing testing of the equipment. He told Applicant to obtain these secret-
 
5 The two-page General Security Briefing contained in GE 3 is partially illegible. Upon request for a more 
legible copy, Department Counsel provided to Applicant's counsel and to me her own transcribed 
account of the two pages. I have not used this account, as it was prepared by one of the parties. In 
referring to this document, I rely only on those sections that are legible, or that were read into the record 
and agreed to by Applicant during the hearing.  
 
6 The General Security Briefing contained the following relevant sections: Section 9, which prohibits 
reproduction of classified material without the prior consent of the FSO and without entering the 
reproduction into accountability records; Section 16, which prohibits holding classified materials 
overnight, without special provisions; and Section 19, which requires immediate reporting to Security of 
the following, inter alia, "Loss, compromise or suspected compromise of classified material by yourself or 
any other employee or subcontractor employee.” (GE 3) 
 
7 See Department of Defense Manual 5220.22-M, National Industrial Security Program Operating 
Manual (NISPOM). (February 28, 2006) 
 
8 The record is contradictory as to when Applicant brought the CDs to Major A. Applicant testified that he 
provided the CDs to Major A in August 2007. However, emails among the involved civilians and military 
members indicate Applicant gave the classified CDs to Major A in June 2007. (AE G; Tr. 94) 
 
 
 
4
                                                
level CDs from Mr. B, who was in charge of the ballistics program at Site A. Major A 
also told Applicant to put the CDs in the safe9 in Applicant's office, and later, he would 
let Applicant know when he should take them to the Major’s office. Mr. B told Applicant 
that he would not release the classified CDs until Applicant had a courier card 
authorizing him to transport them, and Applicant should contact his FSO about the 
courier card. Applicant’s FSO informed him that he did not need a courier card to 
transport classified information from one cleared facility to another cleared facility.10 
However, she faxed a courier card to Applicant. Once Applicant had the courier card, 
Mr. B. had Applicant sign a form, which Applicant thinks was a release or receipt 
indicating that the material was being released to him. Mr. B. kept the form. He then 
handed Applicant a locked, zippered pouch that held a plastic container with 
approximately 20 CDs. The container was marked Secret, but Applicant does not 
remember if the individual CDs were marked. Each CD contained three videos and 
approximately 20 images. Each video began and ended with a Secret marking. 
Applicant returned to his office, placed the pouch in the safe, and called Major A to let 
him know he had the CDs. Major A then told Applicant to bring the CDs to the Major’s 
home at Site B, instead of to his office. He also told Applicant not to tell anyone about 
bringing the CDs from Site A to Site B. Applicant drove to Major A’s home with the CDs 
in the locked pouch. (GE 2, 3; AE H; Tr. 94-101; 163-166, 174, 260) 
 
 After receiving the pouch, Major A told Applicant that he needed the CDs in 
order to prepare a briefing about the equipment testing. In his statement to the NCIS 
investigator, Applicant stated, “[Major A] informed me he was burning copies of the 
CDs.” Applicant said, “I remember [Major A] continually told me to keep quiet about the 
CDs and what we were doing was technically wrong.” Applicant's understanding was 
that, “He [Major A] didn’t want a lot of folks to know about it.” He testified that the Major 
indicated it was bringing the CDs to his home that was “technically wrong.” Applicant 
testified that he did not pursue this remark for several reasons: he never questioned 
the Major; the Major was an expert who had written the security classification guide for 
the program; Applicant respected and admired him; and he did not think Major A was 
doing anything wrong. Applicant did not report his own actions, the Major’s actions, or 
Major A’s comments to any authority. He testified, “I didn’t understand what he meant 
and I didn’t ask questions. I wasn’t in the position to ask him what he meant. I did not 
have a relationship like that with him. It was – I was very intimidated by him as well. He 
was very powerful. He was very – you know, I just didn’t really talk to him.” As to why 
 
9 During his NCIS interview, Applicant described this safe as a “file cabinet.” His signed statement says 
he told the investigator it was not a classified container. However, Applicant denies that he said that, and 
states that the investigator inserted that comment. Applicant testified that he signed it despite the 
inaccuracy because he was under a lot of stress and overlooked it. The container where Applicant 
stored the CDs is the only one in that office. On December 18, 2007, the Company B FSO verified that 
the cabinet in Applicant's office was “an approved GSA safe there physically in the office, with an X09 
lock and that the level of that safe was SECRET.” (GE 2; AE EE; Tr. 224-225) 
 
10 Applicant testified that he believes his FSO thought that he was bringing the CDs to Major A at his 
office in a cleared facility. At that point in time, Major A had not yet requested Applicant to bring them to 
his home.(Tr. 258-259) 
 
 
5
he brought the classified CDs to the Major’s house, he testified, “I was following 
orders.” (GE 2; Tr. 102-105, 174, 176, 181-183, 205, 207-208, 234-235, 238) 
 
 Applicant saw Major A open the pouch, remove the CDs, put them into his 
computer, and start downloading the contents. Applicant did not see any markings on 
the computer indicating it was cleared for use with classified material. Before Applicant 
left, the Major said he would call him the next day to let him know when to pick up the 
CDs. Applicant did not receive a receipt for the CDs. Major A called Applicant the 
following afternoon, and Applicant drove back to the Major’s house and retrieved the 
CDs. There is no evidence that Applicant obtained a receipt from Major A when he 
retrieved the CDs. Applicant told Major A that he planned to put the CDs in the safe in 
his office at Site A. He drove directly to his office after leaving Major A’s home. (Tr. 
102-105, 174, 181, 187) 
 
 When Applicant arrived at his office at Site A, he did not store the CDs in the 
safe immediately. He used his unclassified computer to view the videos and images on 
eight of the CDs, and he downloaded the data onto his work computer. He testified that 
he thought if the Major had put the data on his computer, then Applicant could do the 
same. He believed that since he held a security clearance, he was entitled to view 
them. He also testified that he thought he was allowed to place the secret data on his 
computer because it was password protected, and no one else had access to it. He 
wanted to have the testing images because he was too busy to be able to view the 
testing himself, and having the images would allow him to answer customer questions 
about the testing. In addition, one of his assignments was to train two Chief Warrant 
Officers (CWOs) about his job, and he thought it would be helpful if he had the data on 
his computer during the training. Applicant testified that he always brought his work 
computer home with him because he worked long hours, and he continued his email 
correspondence after work hours. Applicant returned the CDs to Mr. B two days later. 
Applicant testified that, before he couriered the secret CDs, he had never handled 
classified material or been informed about classified computers. (Tr. 105-110, 194, 
197-204, 220) 
 In September 2007, Applicant was transferred to State A to train the CWO who 
would be taking over his job. Applicant was still reporting to Major A, and still preparing 
daily test reports. The company had no knowledge of these events, and in October, 
Applicant received laudatory emails from his company supervisor and a vice-president, 
congratulating Applicant because Major A was very satisfied with his performance. On 
November 29, 2007, Applicant was training one of the CWOs, who was the lead on the 
project. When the CWO saw the classified video, he told Applicant that it was 
prohibited to have this classified data on an unclassified company computer. Applicant 
testified that he was surprised and upset. The CWO told Applicant not to delete the 
images, but to be sure they were protected. Mr. C, a civilian contractor who also 
worked on the project and saw the images, told Applicant he should delete them. 
However, Applicant decided to follow the instructions of the CWO, and he knew the 
data was password protected, so he did not delete them. He testified, “I listened to the 
 
 
6
                                                
uniformed chief warrant officer who was now the lead.” Applicant brought his computer 
to his apartment in State A, because there had been thefts in the area where he was 
working. He did not contact his FSO after he was informed that he had committed a 
security violation. There is no record evidence that he stored the computer in an 
approved safe while he worked in State A. (GE 2; AE A, B; Tr. 110-117, 214-215, 219-
220) 
 In early December 2007, Applicant informed his FSO that he would be out of the 
country from December 3 to December 14. He testified that at least part of his 
awareness that he was required to contact his FSO about foreign travel came from the 
General Security Briefing he received on his first day at Company B. He went on 
vacation to Asia with his parents. On December 6, Major A emailed Applicant asking 
him to call. However, Applicant did not have email access during his trip abroad. Also 
on December 6, Major A informed Applicant's manager and FSO at Company B that 
Applicant had committed a security violation by having classified images on his work 
computer. Between December 6 and December 12, Company B’s FSO and senior-
level personnel, pertinent military members, the Defense Security Service, and Naval 
Criminal Investigative Service (NCIS) personnel were notified of Applicant's security 
violation. (AE C-G; Tr. 111-116, 118, 248, 257-258)  
 
 When Applicant returned to work in State A on December 14, 2007 after his 
vacation, his supervisor told him that there had been potential security violations 
related to (1) Major A’s use of the classified CDs; and (2) Applicant's downloading of 
classified images onto his work computer. The case was referred to NCIS for 
investigation. Applicant's apartment in State A was searched for classified data. On 
December 14, his computer and thumb drive were confiscated and provided to NCIS. 
Applicant gave a statement to an NCIS investigator on December 17, 2007. He then 
flew back to his home state and met with his manager, a human resources 
representative, a vice president, and the FSO. On December 18, Applicant gave a 
statement to the FSO. He was removed from the T&E project, prohibited from having 
contact with Major A, and was required to report any attempted contact by Major A. On 
December 19, 2007, Applicant forwarded to his FSO an email he received from Major 
A. (GE 2; AE H, I; Tr. 119-130) 
 
 In January 2008, Applicant returned to his original worksite and to his previous 
assignment of logistics analysis. The FSO gave him security briefings on how to handle 
and store classified data, and related material to read.11 The FSO reported in the 
security database that, “Due to the circumstances and amount of time the information 
has been out there, it is felt that a compromise cannot be precluded.” Company B 
 
11 GE 3, the NCIS report of investigative action, contains two pages related to guidance for couriers of 
classified material. Although the pages are not signed as received by Applicant, the date on the NCIS 
cover sheet indicates that Applicant received the courier briefing on December 17, 2007, which is after 
Applicant had couriered the classified information to Major A. Applicant testified that he received this 
information on courier requirements in January 2008. Whether he received the courier instructions in 
December 2007 or January 2008, I find that he did not receive the courier guidelines until after he had 
couriered the classified information in August 2007. (GE 3; Tr. 21-22, 87-88) 
 
 
7
                                                
suspended Applicant for five days, and confiscated his badges and Common Access 
Card. Applicant does not believe that he was suspended, but only that he was told not 
to report to work for a week and to use his leave hours. Applicant's security clearance 
was suspended for six months. It was reinstated on July 28, 2008. In his August 2008 
performance evaluation, Applicant was rated as “Meets Expectations” for two job 
objectives and “Below Expectation” in the third objective, Classified Data. The 
evaluation noted his “self-admitted mishandling of, unauthorized couriering and 
disclosure of classified (Secret) [program name] test-related files….” In November 
2008, before leaving Company B, Applicant received a Certificate of Appreciation from 
his Department of Defense customer for his work. (GE 3, 4; AE J, V, W; Tr. 130-133, 
165, 235-236) 
 
 The program manager for the Company B T&E team, who knew Applicant in 
2008, describes him as task-oriented, ambitious, and mature for his age. Applicant’s 
2009 performance evaluation from his current employer notes that he is an outstanding 
asset to the customer, and he “meets and may exceed some goals.” One of his 
customers, who has known him for one year, found him to be motivated, hard-working, 
and of good character. A friend-coworker describes him as being conscientious and 
having sound judgment. Another close friend-coworker opined that Applicant has 
integrity and reliability. Applicant's friend of nine years believes that it is not in 
Applicant's nature to violate rules and regulations. His current supervisor, who testified 
on his behalf, recommends Applicant as honest, trustworthy, and without guile, and 
someone who displays good judgment. Company B’s FSO testified that Applicant did 
an excellent job as temporary FSO while the FSO was on medical leave. He considers 
Applicant to be honest, reliable, and responsible. (AE AA, X, Y, Z, BB, CC, DD; Tr. 
157-158) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the revised AG.12 
Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of 
the Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured against them, as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information.  
 
 
 
12 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
8
                                                
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest13 for an applicant to receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.14 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
trust and confidence. The Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that an 
applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the 
national interest as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information in favor of the Government.15 
 
Analysis 
 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
AG ¶ 33 expresses the security concern pertaining to handling protected 
information: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 34 are relevant to the facts of the 
case and raise a security concern: 
 
(b) collecting or storing classified or other protected information at home or 
in any other unauthorized location;  
 
(c) loading, drafting, editing, modifying, storing, transmitting, or otherwise 
handling classified reports, data, or other information on any unapproved 
equipment including but not limited to any typewriter, word processor, or 
 
13 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
14 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
15 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
9
computer hardware, software, drive, system, gameboard, handheld, 
"palm" or pocket device or other adjunct equipment; 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information; and 
 
(i) failure to comply with rules or regulations that results in damage to the 
National Security, regardless of whether it was deliberate or negligent. 
 
 In August 2007, Applicant violated security rules by carrying classified CDs to 
the home of his supervisor, Major A. Applicant claims that he did not know this was a 
violation because he did not receive the courier guidelines until after he had couriered 
the CDs. In addition, the FSO did not alert Applicant to a security issue because she 
thought he was taking the CDs to the Major’s office, i.e., that Applicant was carrying 
them from one cleared facility to another cleared facility. Applicant may not have 
realized at first that his couriering was a violation, although the Major’s instructions not 
to tell anyone about it should have raised a flag.  
 
 However, after Applicant handed over the CDs, the Major explicitly told him that 
bringing the CDs to his house was wrong. At that point, Applicant knew or should have 
known that his couriering to a personal residence was a security violation. Despite this 
knowledge, he left the CDs at Major A’s home. He did not determine if there was a safe 
to store the material; he did not obtain a receipt. He reported neither Major A’s conduct 
nor his own to his FSO, as required by item 19 of the General Security Briefing that he 
signed. As cited in SOR allegation 1.c., his actions also violated the following NISPOM 
sections: 
 
5-100. General. Contractors shall be responsible for safeguarding 
classified information in their custody or under their control. Individuals 
are responsible for safeguarding classified information entrusted to 
them. The extent of protection afforded classified information shall be 
sufficient to reasonably foreclose the possibility of its loss or 
compromise. 
 
5-401. Preparation and Receipting  
a. Classified information to be transmitted outside of a facility shall be 
enclosed in opaque inner and outer covers. The inner cover shall be a 
sealed wrapper or envelope plainly marked with the assigned 
classification and addresses of both sender and addressee. The outer 
cover shall be sealed and addressed with no identification of the 
classification of its contents. A receipt shall be attached to or enclosed in 
the inner cover, except that CONFIDENTIAL information shall require a 
receipt only if the sender deems it necessary. The receipt shall identify 
the sender, the addressee and the document, but shall contain no 
 
 
10
classified information. It shall be signed by the recipient and returned to 
the sender. 
 
5-410. Use of Couriers, Handcarriers, and Escorts. Contractors who 
designate cleared employees as couriers, handcarriers, and escorts shall 
ensure:…  
c. The employee retains classified material in his or her personal 
possession at all times. Arrangements shall be made in advance of 
departure for overnight storage at a U.S. Government installation or at a 
cleared contractor's facility that has appropriate storage capability, if 
needed. 
 
5-303. SECRET Storage. SECRET material shall be stored in a GSA-
approved security container, an approved vault, or closed area.  
 
 Applicant subsequently downloaded classified information from the CDs onto his 
work computer, which was not approved for classified information. The data was stored 
on his computer for four months, until December 14, 2007. During that period, at times 
he brought his work computer home at night. At those times, his computer was not 
secure. He then traveled with the computer from his home state to his temporary duty 
in State A. He kept the computer at his worksite in State A. He also brought it to his 
apartment in State A after work hours. Nothing in the record indicates that Applicant 
followed security rules to protect the classified information on his computer during this 
extended period. The data was vulnerable to disclosure numerous times between 
August and December, until it was confiscated in December 2007. AG ¶ 34(b) and (c) 
apply. His actions also violated these NISPOM sections cited in SOR allegation 1.b.:  
 
 5-100 (supra) 
 
8-100. General  
a. Information systems (IS) that are used to capture, create, store, process 
or distribute classified information must be properly managed to protect 
against unauthorized disclosure of classified information, loss of data 
integrity to ensure the availability of the data and system.  
b. Protection requires a balanced approach including IS security features 
to include but not limited to, administrative, operational, physical, 
computer, communications, and personnel controls. Protective measures 
commensurate with the classification of the information, the threat, and the 
operational requirements associated with the environment of the IS are 
required.  
c. The requirements outlined in the following sections apply to all 
information systems processing classified information. Additional 
requirements for high-risk systems and data are covered in the NISPOM 
Supplement. 
 
 
 
11
                                                
8-105. Users of IS. Users of IS are either privileged or general users….  
b. General users are individuals who can input information to or modify 
information on an IS or who can receive information from an IS without a 
reliable human review.  
c. All users shall:  
(1) Comply with the IS Security Program requirements.  
(2) Be aware of and knowledgeable about their responsibilities in regard to 
IS security.  
(3) Be accountable for their actions on an IS.  
(4) Ensure that any authentication mechanisms (including passwords) 
issued for the control of their access to an IS are not shared and are 
protected at the highest classification level and most restrictive 
classification category of information to which they permit access.  
(5) Acknowledge, in writing, their responsibilities for the protection of the 
IS and classified information. 
 
 While the CDs were in Applicant's custody in his home state, he stored them in 
a container in his office at Site A. In his statement to the NCIS investigator, he said the 
container was a file cabinet that was not approved for storage of classified data. 
However, the FSO subsequently verified that the sole container in Applicant's office, 
which Applicant thought was not approved, was in fact a GSA-approved safe with an 
X09 lock that was aprroved to store secret data. Applicant’s actions, as cited in SOR 
allegation 1.a., did not violate section 5-100 (supra) or 5-303 (supra), because in 
August 2007, in his office, he stored the secret data in an approved safe.16 
 
 Applicant admits his security violations, but claims that his employer did not train 
him in the handling of classified information. However, Applicant testified that he read 
and signed the General Security Briefing provided by his employer. The briefing 
included the requirements and prohibitions surrounding the handling of classified 
information. By signing the General Security Briefing in October 2006, Applicant 
acknowledged his security responsibilities, and was on notice that classified 
information was subject to those rules to prevent its disclosure. Applicant failed to 
follow these requirements. AG ¶ 34(g) applies.  
 
 AG ¶ 34(i) relates to damage to the national security as a result of failure to 
follow rules. The record does not contain sufficient evidence to show such damage. 
The FSO indicated only that compromise of the information could not be ruled out, 
given the extensive amount of time that Applicant failed to protect the classified 
information. AG 34(i) does not apply. 
 
 
16 There is no record evidence that Applicant kept his computer in an approved safe while he was at his 
work site in State A. Moreover, he testified that he usually took his computer to his apartment in State A 
after work. During those times, it was not secured in a safe. Applicant violated NISPOM sections 5-100 
and 5-303 while in State A from September to December 2007. However, failure to store the data in a 
secure container during that period was not alleged in the SOR. 
 
 
12
 AG ¶ 35 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns, including the 
following relevant conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security 
training and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of 
security responsibilities; and, 
 
(c) the security violations were due to improper or inadequate training. 
 
 Applicant's actions did not occur under unusual circumstances, but rather in the 
regular course of his duties. He committed an ongoing security violation that began in 
August and continued until December 2007. Although the events occurred three years 
ago, the extent of the violation outweighs any claim that they are not recent. Each CD 
contained three videos and about 20 images. He downloaded eight CDs to his work 
computer, which resulted in storing 24 classified videos and approximately 160 images 
on his unclassified computer. This large volume of critical information regarding testing 
and evaluation of military equipment remained at risk until Applicant's computer was 
confiscated. His actions reflect poorly on his reliability and judgment, and AG ¶ 35(a) 
does not apply.  
 
 Applicant received security training at the Defense Security Service Academy, 
and functioned as the FSO while his current company’s FSO was on sick leave. As a 
result, he has greater knowledge of security regulations than he did in 2007. In 
addition, the record shows that Applicant's company should have been more diligent in 
ensuring that Applicant had sufficient security training. While Applicant receives some 
mitigation under AG ¶ 35(b) and (c), it must be viewed in light of the scale of 
Applicant's conduct: He ignored the Major’s plain statement that their actions were 
wrong; he downloaded classified information to an unauthorized computer; he left 
classified information unprotected for an extended period; and even after being told by 
the CWO and contractor that he had committed a security violation, he failed to inform 
his FSO or any other authority. The mitigation available under AG ¶ 35(b) and (c) does 
not outweigh the significance of Applicant's actions. 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
 AG ¶ 39 expresses the security concern related to use of information technology 
systems:  
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
 
 
13
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
 AG ¶ 40 describes disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern, 
including the following relevant conditions:  
 
(d) downloading, storing, or transmitting classified information on or to 
any unauthorized software, hardware, or information technology system; 
and 
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, 
or media to or from any information technology system without 
authorization, when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or 
regulations. 
 
As discussed supra, Applicant inserted CDs with secret data into his work computer, 
which was not approved to store classified data. He then downloaded approximately 24 
videos and 160 images of the testing of military equipment, and failed to properly 
protect it over an extended period. AG ¶ 40(d) and (f) apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 41 provides the following relevant mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and  
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of a 
supervisor. 
 
Applicant's actions occurred during his routine work, not in unusual circumstances. 
Moreover, his conduct was not minor, as his actions placed secret defense-related 
information at risk. Although this conduct occurred several years ago, the importance 
of the data that was put at risk, and the length of time that passed before it was 
remedied, outweighs the distance in time. AG ¶ 41(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant downloaded the classified information after seeing Major A do it. Even 
if, arguendo, Applicant did not intend to violate security rules when he copied the CDs 
at his work site, his behavior after he transferred to State A shows that he was not 
acting in good faith. In State A, the CWO and Mr. C alerted him to the fact that he was 
 
 
14
committing a security violation by having the classified data on his unclassified 
computer. But Applicant did not contact his FSO, or seek out an approved container in 
which to store the computer, or determine some appropriate way to protect the 
information. Instead, he brought the computer to his apartment in the evenings, where 
it was unprotected. Within days, he departed for a trip to Asia, leaving the computer in 
his apartment where it remained unprotected for an additional two weeks. AG ¶ 41(c) 
does not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information…. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern, including the 
following relevant condition: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior…  
 
Applicant failed to follow security requirements that he knew or should have known 
after reading and signing the security briefing. His violations included transporting 
secret data to a private home; downloading that data onto an unclassified computer; 
and failing to store his computer containing classified data in an approved container 
when he was in State A. Even if, as he contends, he did not know these were 
violations, once the CWO pointed it out, Applicant still decided not to inform his FSO of 
his violations, still kept his computer with classified information in his apartment, and 
left for an overseas trip with the computer still unprotected. Applicant's conduct was 
highly untrustworthy, shows poor judgment, and demonstrates a willingness to ignore 
rules. AG ¶ 16(d) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns under 
Personal Conduct guideline. The following conditions are relevant: 
 
 
 
15
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
Applicant is now aware that he failed to follow important security regulations. He has 
taken security courses. He is qualified as an FSO and performed well when he acted 
as FSO on a temporary basis for his current employer. AG ¶ 17(d) applies. However, 
Applicant's violations of the security rules and regulations were frequent, as they 
extended over a period of four months. In addition, his violations were of the most 
serious type, as they involved exposing secret data to disclosure. Applicant failed to 
notify security officials of the possible compromise, and his own and the Major’s 
violations, in August 2007. He again decided not to inform his FSO in November 2007, 
after he was specifically told he was in violation. AG ¶ 41(a) does not apply. The 
magnitude of Applicant's violations raises serious doubts about his reliability and 
judgment and outweighs the mitigation under AG ¶ 17(d).  
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited guidelines, I considered 
the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 
 
16
 It is not credible that Applicant was unaware that his actions violated security 
rules. He is an intelligent and well-educated young man. Having read the security brief, 
and heard the Major’s instruction not to tell anyone and his plain statement that what 
they were doing was wrong, Applicant knew or should have known that he had to, at 
the least, contact his FSO for guidance. He testified that he did not think the man who 
wrote the security protocols could be breaking the rules. But that man specifically 
stated to Applicant that they were breaking the rules, and certainly, the man who wrote 
the security protocols would be the one who would know they were breaking the rules.  
 
 Company B shares some responsibility: it should have been more thorough in 
providing security information to Applicant when he joined the company, and it should 
have presented the courier briefing to him before he transported classified material, not 
after. But Applicant had responsibilities as well. Once he read and signed the security 
brief, he was responsible for following the requirements. His signature is a valid and 
binding acknowledgment that he read the security requirements. To rule otherwise 
would render meaningless the certifications and acknowledgments that applicants sign. 
 
 Even if Applicant's actions in his home state were excused based on ignorance, 
he could not be excused for his conduct in State A. The CWO and Mr. C told him he 
had broken security rules by placing classified data on an unauthorized computer. Yet, 
with this knowledge that he had committed a serious security violation, and that 
classified information was at risk, he committed an additional violation by failing to 
inform his FSO of a possible compromise. Nor did he notify his supervisor or any 
authorized person. Although he knew that the classified CDs had to be stored in the 
locked safe at his office in his home state, he did not seek out an approved container in 
State A to store his computer, and he took his computer to his apartment during non-
working hours. Finally, he left the computer in his apartment while he traveled overseas 
for two weeks.  
 
 Applicant's youth and inexperience at the time of these events explain his 
conduct to some extent, especially his failure to report Major A, a powerful person 
whom Applicant did not feel comfortable challenging. But this failure shows a serious 
lack of judgment. The Government must be able to rely on those who hold security 
clearances to place the Government’s interests above their own. In addition, 
Applicant's failure to inform the FSO, once he was told he was in violation, was a 
conscious decision to violate security regulations. His actions not only raise questions 
as to his trustworthiness, but are particularly troubling because they violate the 
regulations on which the industrial security system is based.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
 
 
 
 
17
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline K   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b. – 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline M   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a.   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
