 
1 
 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00460 
 SSN:  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 7, 2010, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on July 12, 2010. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on July 28, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
August 19, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
 
2 
 
received without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A through C, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on August 30, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 28 years old. He served in the United States military from 2000 until 
he was honorably discharged in 2003. He is applying for a security clearance. He has 
an associate’s degree. He married his first wife in 2001, and they divorced in 2005. He 
married his current wife in 2005. He has a four-year-old child.1 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant has a delinquent debt of $15,904 owed to a 
credit union for the deficiency balance on a car loan after the vehicle was repossessed. 
Applicant admitted the allegation. He also provided information in support of his request 
for a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant and his first wife owned two vehicles. She took one of the vehicles 
when they separated and was supposed to make the loan payments or refinance it. She 
did neither, and the car was repossessed. There was a deficiency balance on the loan 
of about $8,000. Applicant settled the debt with the creditor for $4,000 in October 2009. 
The second vehicle was in his first wife’s name, but Applicant cosigned the loan. When 
they separated, his first wife called the credit union and had them pick the vehicle up for 
a voluntary repossession. The credit union listed the deficiency balance as $15,904.2  
 
 Applicant did not hear from the credit union about the loan after the vehicle was 
returned. He contacted the credit union in July 2010. He agreed to settle the debt and 
entered into a stipulated judgment with the attorney for the credit union. The stipulated 
judgment calls for Applicant to pay $8,000 for the debt. He is to pay $150 per month for 
six months starting in August 2010. He made the first payment. After six months, 
Applicant and the attorney will reassess the monthly payments.3 
 
 Applicant’s other debts are current. He had a few other delinquent debts for 
relatively small amounts. All of those debts were paid or settled by February 2010. 
Applicant has not received financial counseling. He and his wife are living within their 
means and not accruing new delinquent debts.4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 18, 21-22; GE 1, 2. 
 
2 Tr. at 17-20; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3. 
 
3 Tr. at 20-21, 27; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE A-C. 
 
4 Tr. at 22-28; GE 3-5. 
 
3 
 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
 
4 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant owed the deficiency balance on a loan he cosigned after the vehicle 
was voluntarily repossessed. The evidence raises the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant just started making the payments on the stipulated judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) is not yet applicable. 
 
 Applicant cosigned a car loan for his first wife. She voluntarily returned the 
vehicle without any input from Applicant. Her actions were outside his control. To be 
fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. When he cosigned the loan, Applicant agreed to be personally liable if 
she did not pay. He settled the deficiency owed on another car loan in 2009. He settled 
or paid several other delinquent debts. He entered into a stipulated judgment to settle 
 
5 
 
the deficiency owed on the second car loan. Those are all responsible actions. He does 
not rate full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) because it took several years before he took 
action on this debt.  
 
 Applicant has not received financial counseling. However, he has resolved other 
delinquent debts. His actions convince me that he will continue with the payments under 
the stipulated judgment. I find there are clear indications that his financial problems are 
being resolved and are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable. Applicant does not 
receive full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) because he only recently started the payments 
on the stipulated judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s honorable service in the United States military. His ex-
wife caused two cars to be repossessed. Applicant settled the deficiency balance on 
one car loan, and he entered into a stipulated judgment to settle the second loan. His 
finances are currently in order and do not generate a security concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
