 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00968 
 SSN: )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J, Criminal 
Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 12, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement, Guideline E, Personal Conduct, and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. 
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 22, 2010, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on May 28, 2010. The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and 
he received it on June 14, 2010. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, and mitigation. Applicant submitted a 
reply that was received by DOHA on June 16, 2010. The case was assigned to me on 
July 26, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the factual allegations. 
However, he disputes the deliberateness of his false security clearance information 
regarding SOR ¶ 2.a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He is married and has two children. Since October 
2009, he has worked for his current defense contractor. Prior to his current position, he 
also worked for a defense contractor and was granted a security clearance in February 
2009. He did not serve in the military.1   
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) using prescription 
pain medications without an authorized prescription on several occasions between 
January 2008 and June 2009, including when he held a security clearance; (2) using 
marijuana on three occasions between December 2007 and June 2008; and (3) failing 
to list the above described prescription drug and marijuana use when he completed his 
security clearance questionnaire on January 26, 2009.2 
  
 From 1975 to 1980, Applicant was a weekly user of marijuana. Beginning in 1980 
and continuing trough 1987, he reduced his marijuana use to once or twice a year. He 
used the marijuana at home and purchased it from two persons he knew. He used 
marijuana because he preferred the stimulation and relaxation it gave him over using 
alcohol. He stopped using marijuana in 1987 because his children were growing older 
and he had a financial obligation to support his children.3 
 
 Applicant came into possession of the prescription drugs Percocet and Vicodin 
when his mother-in-law passed away. She was prescribed both drugs and they were left 
over after she died. Applicant and his wife took control of his mother-in-law’s 
possessions after her death and Applicant chose to keep these two prescription 
medications. Although Applicant was never authorized by a doctor to take these 
medications, between January 2008 and June 2009, he used Percocet and Vicodin 
                                                          
1 Items 5, 7. 
 
2 Item 4. 
 
3 Item 6. 
 
 
3 
 
 
three to five times. He took the medicine because of chronic back pain he experienced 
from exercising. He stopped using these drugs in June 2009, when he was going 
through the security clearance process because he did not think his actions were 
smart.4  
 
 Between December 2007 and June 2008, Applicant resumed smoking marijuana 
on three occasions. The first use of marijuana was in December 2007, when he was 
attending a party at his daughter’s house. He inhaled marijuana one time from a metal 
tube that looks like a cigarette. He decided to smoke marijuana because he saw other 
people were doing it and because he was curious about whether marijuana had 
changed since he last used it in 1987. He felt sick after using the marijuana. The next 
two uses of marijuana occurred in June 2008, while Applicant was on a camping trip. He 
inhaled marijuana one time on the first night of the trip and inhaled marijuana several 
times on the second night of the trip. He used marijuana on these two occasions 
because he wanted to see if the marijuana was different from the marijuana he smoked 
in 2007. Once again the use of marijuana made Applicant feel sick.5 
  
 Applicant failed to list his 2007-2008 marijuana use and his 2008-2009 
unauthorized prescription drug use on his January 26, 2009, security clearance 
questionnaire (e-QIP).6 Applicant’s explanations for these omissions are that he did not 
think the prescription drug use was illegal and he had forgotten about the marijuana use 
because he was impaired by his drinking at the time. He revealed his drug use for the 
first time when questioned by an Office of Personnel Management interviewer on 
December 2, 2009.7  
 
 In Applicant’s response to the FORM, he states that he takes his security 
clearance seriously and would never put the country at risk through his actions. 
Additionally, he claims he has been marijuana-free for two years and has not used 
prescription drugs in 18 months. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
4 Id. 
 
5 Id. 
 
6 SOR ¶ 2.a mistakenly refers to the relevant security clearance question as “Section 24. Your Use of 
Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity”. The correct reference is Section 23. 
 
7 Item 6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
5 
 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.   
 
 Applicant used prescription drugs that were not prescribed for him on several 
occasions, including after he obtained a security clearance in February 2009. He also 
resumed using marijuana in 2007, after having given up marijuana use in 1987. He 
used marijuana on multiple occasions between 2007 and 2008. I find that both above 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed and the abuse has since ended. 
 
 Applicant’s marijuana use was recent and although infrequent (three uses), it 
occurred after Applicant had purportedly given up using marijuana for over 20 years. His 
resumption of use after such a long period of abstinence makes it more likely that future 
use could reoccur. Additionally, Applicant’s resumption of use at this stage of his life, 
certainly calls into question his judgment, reliability and trustworthiness. Likewise, his 
recent use of prescription medications that were prescribed to his dead mother-in-law 
also casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does 
not apply. 
 
Although Applicant states he intends to abstain from future drug use, insufficient 
time has passed to conclude that he has demonstrated such intent not to abuse drugs. 
AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply. 
 
Applicant abused the prescription drugs Percocet and Vicodin that were 
prescribed for his mother-in-law not for him. AG ¶ 26(c) does not apply. 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
When Applicant completed his January 26, 2009 e-QIP, he failed to list his 2007-
2008 marijuana use and his unauthorized prescription drug use. Applicant denied any 
intentional falsification stating that he did not remember his marijuana use because he 
was also drinking alcoholic beverages and because he did not think there was anything 
wrong with the prescription drug use. Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification 
of a material fact in any written document or oral statement to the Government, when 
applying for a security clearance, is a security concern. But every inaccurate statement 
is not a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. It is deliberate if it is 
done knowingly and willfully. I am persuaded that Applicant was attempting to deceive 
the Government when he neglected to list this information. Additionally, Applicant used 
unauthorized prescription drugs while holding a security clearance. AG ¶¶16(a) and (e) 
apply. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 (a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant failed to meet his burden to show that he put forth a good-faith effort to 
correct his drug use omissions prior to being confronted with the facts. The 
unauthorized use of another person’s prescribed drug medicine is not a minor offense 
and Applicant failed to convince me that this behavior is unlikely to recur. Neither AG 
¶¶17(a) or (c) apply. 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant admitted to using marijuana and unauthorized prescription drugs. I find 
that the above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for Criminal Conduct under 
AG ¶ 32 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
   
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 Applicant’s criminal conduct was recent and happened under such 
circumstances that shows he disregarded the laws prohibiting using marijuana and 
taking prescription drugs intended for someone else. In the case of the prescription drug 
abuse, rather than engage proper medical professionals to seek relief, Applicant opted 
to use his dead mother-in-law’s prescribed medication to relieve his back pain on 
multiple occasions. Applicant’s behavior casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness 
and good judgment. Sufficient time has not passed to determine whether Applicant’s 
rehabilitation has been successful. I find that neither of the above mitigating 
circumstances applies. 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have considered Applicant’s written 
response to the FORM. Although Applicant stresses he has abstained from marijuana 
and unauthorized prescription drugs for two years and 18 months respectively, his 
resumption of marijuana use after 20 years of non-use and his using his mother-in-law’s 
prescribed medicine show questionable judgment for someone of Applicant’s age and 
life experience level. Applicant failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement; Guideline E, Personal Conduct; and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
