                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00410 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On April 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline B. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on April 28, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on June 17, 2010. DOHA issued 
a Notice of Hearing on July 19, 2010. I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 
24, 2010. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant did not object and 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
they were admitted. The Government requested administrative notice be taken of 
certain facts relating to India as contained in Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. I took administrative 
notice of the source documents. I did not consider for administrative notice Department 
Counsel’s brief. This document was admitted as GE 3. The Government offered a chart 
for demonstrative purposes. It was marked as HE II. Applicant and two witnesses 
testified on her behalf. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted 
without objections. She also offered documents for administrative notice and they were 
marked as HE III. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 1, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. She was born in India and has lived in the United 
States since 1978. She has worked for her current employer, a federal contractor, for 
three and a half years as a senior test engineer. Before then, she was employed for 15 
years with the same employer. She and her husband immigrated to the United States in 
1978. Her husband worked for the same employer from 1978 until he retired in 2008. 
She has three children, ages 35, 33, and 26 years old. Her oldest daughter is trained as 
an engineer, but is presently a homemaker. She is married to an American citizen and 
they have two children. Her middle daughter is working on her PhD and works for a 
large company. She is also married to an American citizen and has two children. Her 
youngest daughter is completing a residency in dentistry. She is not married. Her two 
oldest children were born in India. In 1987, Applicant and her family became naturalized 
American citizens. Her children and their families reside in the United States. Applicant 
earned a bachelor’s degree in India.1 
 
 Applicant has three brothers and a sister who are citizens and residents of India. 
Brother #1 is a judge employed by the state government. He is married and has three 
grown children. He is expected to retire in September 2010. Brother #2 is a retired 
manager of a petroleum depot. It is unknown if the depot is government owned. His wife 
is a homemaker and they have two grown children. Brother #3 worked at a bank and is 
retired. It is unknown if the bank was government owned. His wife is a homemaker. 
They have two grown children. Applicant’s sister is a homemaker. Her sister’s husband 
is a retired civil engineer.2  
 
 Applicant’s husband has three brothers who are citizens and residents of India. 
All three are owners and partners in a brick manufacturing company. Their wives are 
homemakers.3  
 
1 Tr. 57-64. 
 
2 Tr. 77-80-82, 41-53. 
 
3 Tr. 53-55. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s husband has three sisters who are citizens and residents of India. 
Sister-in-law #1 is a homemaker. Her husband is retired. Applicant did not know what 
he did for a living. Sister-in-law #2 is a homemaker. Her husband sold life insurance 
about ten years ago. Applicant does not know how he is currently employed. Sister-in-
law #3 is a homemaker and she and her husband own a small business. Applicant 
believes the business manufactures and sells jewelry.4  
 
 Applicant also has three brothers who are citizens and residents of the United 
States. Brother #4 immigrated to the United States in 1962 and is employed by a United 
States government agency. He has worked there for more than 30 years. He married a 
citizen of the United States and they have two children, born in the United States. He 
sponsored Applicant and her family for entry into the United States. Brother #5 
immigrated in 1967 and worked for a department store for many years until it closed. He 
was then employed by the federal government as a senior accountant for about 12 
years. He is married to a United States citizen who works for a county government. 
They have three children, one who was born in India, and the other two were born in the 
United States. His eldest child is a naturalized United States citizen. All three children 
are married and have children. Brother #6 immigrated in 1981. He works in the United 
States for an international bank. He married a United States citizen. His wife works for a 
federal agency and holds a security clearance. They have two children who are in 
college. Both are citizens of the United States. Applicant’s parents and her husband’s 
parents are deceased. None of Applicant’s relatives have served in the Indian military.5 
 
 Applicant visits India about every three to four years to visit family, unless there is 
an emergency. Her visits are decreasing since her parents and husband’s parents have 
passed away. All of her family is scattered and busy with their own jobs and families, so 
the family ties are looser. There is no longer a central family figure to host them. Since 
1995, she has visited India four times. Because the family is scattered throughout the 
country, depending on how much time she has when she visits, she may only visit those 
that live close to each other. Her three brothers-in-law live close to each other so she 
will visit them. Her family in India has visited Applicant and her family in the United 
States. The most recent visit was in 2004 for her daughter’s wedding. Four family 
members from India attended. Prior to then, a family member visited in 1999 and 1987.6  
 
 Applicant contacts someone in her family in India about once a month. She 
alternates who she contacts. She and her husband may make another phone call 
monthly to his side of the family. If there is a family problem they may contact them 
more than once a month. She rarely contacts her sisters-in-law. If someone is traveling 
4 Tr. 56-58, 66. 
 
5 Tr. 77, 25-41, 58. 
 
6 Tr. 65-68, 82-84. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
to India, she may, on occasion, have them deliver a gift to a family member. She never 
mails gifts to family in India.7 
 
 Applicant has regular contact with her brothers living in the United States. They 
all live within a ten mile radius of each other. They visit often and get together for family 
events and holidays. Applicant and her family belong to their denominational temple. 8  
 
 Applicant and her husband do not own any property in India. They do not have 
any investments or accounts located there. They do not have any inheritance rights in 
India.9  
 
 Applicant and her family have lived in their present home for 11 years. Before 
that, they lived in the same house for 15 years. Applicant and her husband own their 
home in the United States with an estimated value of $550,000. Their cash savings are 
estimated at about $160,000. Her husband has a 401(K) pension account worth about 
$450,000. Applicant has a 401(K) pension plan worth about $80,000. They own three 
cars. Applicant and her husband do not provide any financial support to their family in 
India.10  
 
 Applicant is registered to vote in the United States and exercises her right. She 
has never been arrested. She and her husband plan on remaining in the United States 
after she retires. Applicant considers herself a loyal, hardworking American, who is 
dedicated to her job. She consistently complies with all of the rules and regulations of 
her company and their security requirements.11  
 
 Applicant’s supervisor testified on her behalf. Applicant has worked under her 
supervision for eight months. She is considered an excellent worker and when the 
supervisor is absent, Applicant is the one she chooses to covers her responsibilities. 
Her supervisor has never observed Applicant break any rules. She completely complies 
with all of the rules and she considers her a quality individual. She noted that 
Applicant’s family now has three generations of American citizens. She is aware that 
Applicant is a devoted mother and grandmother. She heard Applicant make a comment 
about the United States. It was: “what a wonderful place it’s been to raise three grown 
daughters and grandbabies.”12  
7 Tr. 68-70, 72-73. 
 
8 Tr. 70-71, 84. 
 
9 Tr. 71. 
 
10 Tr. 73-76, 80. 
 
11 Tr. 84-85. 
 
12 Tr. 86-95. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant’s brother’s wife testified on her behalf. She has known Applicant for 44 
years. She considers her a trustworthy, honest, and intelligent person.13  
 
Applicant believes she is respected by her peers and supervisors she works with 
and is held in high regard because of her work ethic and the quality of her work. She 
respects the laws of this country.14 
 
Applicant provided character letters that were considered. Her supervisor for the 
past three and a half years provided a statement describing Applicant as a loyal and 
dedicated employee. She has demonstrated that she loves the United States and is 
dedicated to making a positive impact. She considers her to be patriotic and trustworthy, 
and she highly recommended Applicant be granted a security clearance.15  
 
A colleague of eight years provided a statement describing Applicant as 
intelligent, hardworking, and enthusiastic. She gets along with all of the team members. 
She is punctual and treats members fairly. She is honest and loyal and always follows 
the company’s rules. Applicant helps others and has outstanding initiative in learning 
new skills. She is considered an asset who possesses great management and 
supervisory skills.16 
 
Applicant provided a performance appraisal report reflecting her solid 
performance and outstanding contribution to the company. She has been recognized by 
her past employer for her excellent work.17 
 
India18 
 
 India is a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic. It is a multiparty, 
federal parliamentary democracy with a bicameral parliament and a population of 
approximately 1.1 billion. 
 
 The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but serious 
problems remain. Police and security forces have engaged in extrajudicial killings of 
persons in custody, disappearance, torture, and rape. The lack of accountability 
permeated the government and security forces, creating an atmosphere in which human 
rights violations went unpunished. A number of violent attacks were committed in recent 
13 Tr. 96-101. 
 
14 Tr. 104; AE D. 
 
15 AE A. 
 
16 AE B. 
 
17 AE D, E, F. 
 
18 HE I, III. 
 
6 
 
 
yeas by separatist and terrorist groups. In November 2008, the terrorists coordinated an 
attack at a hotel in Mumbai, frequented by westerners.  
 
 The United States recognizes India as key to strategic interests and has sought 
to strengthen its relationship with it. The two countries are the world’s largest 
democracies, both committed to political freedom protected by representative 
government, and share common interests in the free flow of commerce, in fighting 
terrorism, and in creating a strategically stable Asia. However, differences over India’s 
nuclear weapons program and pace of economic reform exist. There are also concerns 
about India’s relations with Iran, including their increasing cooperation with the Iranian 
military. 
 
 There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of 
U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to India, including technology and equipment which 
were determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the 
development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. Foreign 
government and private entities, including intelligence organizations and security 
services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology. In March 
2008, an American businessman pleaded guilty to conspiring to illegally exporting 
technology to entities in India.  
 
 The United States views India as a growing world power with which it shares 
common strategic interests. There is a strong partnership between the two countries 
and they are expected to continue addressing differences and shaping a dynamic and 
collaborative future. The United States and India seek to elevate the strategic 
partnership further to include cooperation in counter-terrorism, defense, education, and 
joint democracy promotion. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
7 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by an applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
  Applicant’s three brothers, sister, three brothers-in-law, and three sisters-in-law 
are citizens and residents of India. Applicant maintains some contact with her family 
living there. It is on a routine basis and sporadic as to each member. She visits India 
and some of her relatives about every three to four years. Her telephone contact is 
about twice a month to different family members. Applicant’s connections to her 
numerous family members could potentially create a heightened risk of foreign influence 
or potential conflict of interest. The above disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
 The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a 
citizen and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under 
Guideline B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. Applicant has numerous family members who are 
citizens and residents of India. The United States maintains close relations with India. 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant maintains some contact with her family and her husband’s family in India, but 
it is apparent that after the passing of their parents, the contact has been sporadic. She 
does not have steady contact with a specific family member, but rather attempts to 
maintain some contact with each throughout the year. Her contact is infrequent, but not 
casual. Therefore, I find AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply.  
 
All except one brother, who is a judge, soon to be retired, have no known ties to 
the Indian government. I do not find Applicant’s relationship with her family in India or 
her infrequent visits there create a heightened security risk. There is no evidence India 
pressures its citizens to obtain classified information, and it is highly unlikely Applicant 
would have to choose between loyalty to her extended family in India and the United 
States.  
  
 The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or there is a serious 
problem in the country with crime or terrorist. India has a close and friendly relationship 
with the United States. They are the two largest democracies in the world. Although 
India has had some human rights issues and some terrorist incidents, it does not 
appear that these involved exploiting their citizens. India is an active collector of U.S. 
economic intelligence. However, there is no indication that they target or exploit their 
own citizens to obtain it. It is also very unlikely that Applicant would be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and her family in India. Based on India’s 
relationship with the United States, it is very unlikely that intelligence officials would 
attempt to pressure Applicant’s family in an attempt to gather valuable or classified 
information from the U.S through Applicant. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(a) applies.  
 
 Applicant is a devoted American citizen. She has lived in the United States since 
1978 and been a citizen since 1987. There are three generations of her family that are 
United States citizens. She immigrated to the United States because of the opportunity 
it offered her and her family. She and her husband raised their three daughters here 
and have four grandchildren who were born here. Although she has many relatives 
living in India, she equally has many relatives living in the United States. She maintains 
regular and close contact with her U.S. relatives. She has no assets in India. She and 
her husband have accumulated substantial assets in the United States. Her ties to the 
United States are significant. Her contact with her Indian relatives is waning and 
sporadic. It is clear that Applicant’s life and ties to the United States are monumental. 
Applicant has a deep and longstanding loyalty to the United States and she can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor it. Therefore, I find mitigating 
condition AG ¶ 8(b) applies.  
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has lived in the United 
States since 1978 and has been a citizen since 1987. Her husband worked for 30 years 
for the same U.S. employer and retired. Her children are United States citizens, as are 
their husbands, and their children. Applicant and her husband’s assets are all in the 
United States. Although they both have siblings that are citizens and residents of India, 
the family ties that are most important to them live in the United States. There is an 
overwhelming amount of evidence that Applicant is a devoted and loyal American who 
would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the security concerns arising under the guideline for Foreign Influence.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:   For Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
