 
 
 
 
1
                                                             
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
              DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No.  10-00708 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Greg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
  History of Case 
 
On October 26, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B and Guideline C. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 
2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on May 10, 2010, and waived his right to 
a hearing before an administrative judge. On June 23, 2010, Department Counsel 
prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing eight Items and mailed 
Applicant a complete copy the same day. Applicant received the FORM on June 30, 
2010, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional 
information. Applicant timely submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, to which 
Department Counsel had no objections.  On August 6, 2010, DOHA assigned the case 
to me.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Within the FORM, Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take 
administrative notice of certain facts relating to the People’s Republic of China (PRC). 
Attached to the FORM are documents marked as Item 8.  Applicant did not object to my 
consideration of those exhibits, as relating to the PRC. Hence, the facts administratively 
noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not subject to 
reasonable dispute. The facts administratively noticed are set out under the heading 
“People’s Republic of China.”  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations contained in 
Paragraph 1 of the SOR and admitted the allegations contained in Paragraph 2 of the 
SOR. His admissions are incorporated into the findings below. 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. He was born in the PRC. He attended a U.S. university 
from January 1993 to August 1994, when he earned a master’s degree in computer 
sciences. He returned to the PRC in 2006, 2007, and 2008 to visit family and friends. 
He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in December 2008 and obtained a U.S. passport 
in April 2009. In January 2009, he started his current position with a defense contractor. 
Prior to this position, he worked for private corporations. (Item 5.)  
 
 Applicant married his wife in 1989 in the PRC. She was born in the PRC and is a 
naturalized U. S. citizen. They have two children, both of whom were born in the United 
States. Applicant’s parents were born in the PRC and are deceased. He has one 
brother, who is a U.S. citizen and resides in the PRC. His three sisters were born in the 
PRC and reside there. His parents-in-law are citizens and residents of the PRC. (Items 
4, 5.)  
 
 In June 2008, Applicant renewed his PRC passport. It expires in June 2018. 
(Item 5 at 39.) He used it to visit his family in the PRC in September 2008. He did not 
have a U.S. passport at the time. During a December 2009 interview, he stated that he 
does not have dual citizenship because he relinquished his Chinese citizenship when 
he became a U.S. citizen in December 2008. China does not recognize dual citizenship. 
 
 
 
 
3
(Item 4.)  He indicated that he would willingly relinquish the passport. (Item 7 at 2; AE 
B.) In a March 2010 set of Interrogatories, he stated that he could not surrender the 
passport because the Chinese government would not issue a Chinese visa without it. 
(Item 7.) After receiving the FORM on June 23, 2010, he had the passport invalidated 
by the Chinese embassy on or about June 29, 2010. (AE A, B.)  He asserted that he 
never used the passport for travel after he became a U.S. citizen. (Item 7; AE A.) 
Applicant considers the United States to be his home. (Item 7 at 2.) 
 
People’s Republic of China 
 
The PRC is a large and economically powerful country, with a population of over 
a billion people and an economy growing at about 10% per year. China has an 
authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. China has a 
poor record with respect to human rights, suppresses political dissent, and engages in 
arbitrary arrests and detentions, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of 
prisoners.  
 
China is one of the most aggressive countries in seeking sensitive and protected 
U.S. technology and economic intelligence. It targets the United States with active 
intelligence gathering programs, both legal and illegal. As a result, it is a growing threat 
to U.S. national security. In China, authorities routinely monitor telephone 
conversations, facsimile transmissions, e-mail, text messaging, and internet 
communications. Authorities open and censor mail. Its security services have entered 
personal residences and offices to gain access to computers, telephones, and fax 
machines. All major hotels have a sizable internal security presence, and hotel 
guestrooms are sometimes bugged and searched for sensitive or proprietary materials. 
There are several recent cases involving actual or attempted espionage and the illegal 
export of information to China. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the Adjudicative Guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
 
 
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by an applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9:  
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and be 
disqualifying in this case:  
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
 
 
 
5
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
In March 2010, Applicant admitted that he possessed an unexpired passport in 
order to obtain a Chinese visa after becoming a U.S. citizen. Those facts are sufficient 
to raise a disqualification under AG ¶ 10(a)(1).   
After the Government raised a disqualification, the burden shifted to Applicant to 
produce evidence and prove mitigation. AG ¶ 11 provides six conditions that could 
potentially mitigate security concerns raised under this guideline, two of which may be 
applicable: 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
Applicant expressed renouncement of his Chinese citizenship in his Answer, 
which triggered the application of AG ¶ 11(b). Pursuant to his request, the Chinese 
embassy recently invalidated his Chinese passport. AG ¶ 11(e) is applicable.  
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG & 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
 
 
 
6
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.1  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual desire to 
help a foreign person, groups, or country by providing information. 
 
Applicant’s three sisters and parents-in-law are resident citizens of the PRC. His 
brother, a U.S. citizen, resides there. Within the past five years, he visited his family 
three times. His family’s presence in a country that consistently engages in espionage 
against the United States raises a significant security concern and generates a 
heightened risk of exploitation, pressure or coercion of the Applicant. Those 
circumstances could place Applicant in a position of having to choose between his 
family members residing in the PRC and the United States. The Government met its 
burden of production by raising the above disqualifying conditions and shifts the burden 
to Applicant to prove mitigation. 
 
  Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the security 
concerns raised under this guideline: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Because the record does not contain evidence about the nature or scope of 
Applicant’s relationships with his family members or their positions and activities in the 
                                            
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
7
PRC, a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, or coercion remains a 
concern. Hence, AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply. Because he did not provide evidence 
detailing the nature and frequency of his contact and communication with his family 
residing in the PRC, AG ¶ 8(c) cannot apply. 
 
Applicant did not provide persuasive evidence to establish his deep or 
longstanding relationships to the United States, which would warrant the application of 
AG ¶ 8(b). He provided information that he has lived in the United States since 1993, 
has two children who were born here, obtained an advanced degree from a U.S. 
university, and has been employed by private companies and a defense contractor over 
the years. He became a U.S. citizen only two years ago. Those facts are inadequate to 
demonstrate that he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
In cases involving foreign influence, the Appeal Board requires the whole-person 
analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of 
an applicant’s family’s ties to the U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his 
or her ties social ties within the U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given 
case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). In that same decision, the 
Appeal Board commented on the whole-person analysis in ISCR Case No. 03-02878 at 
3 (App. Bd. June 7, 2006), which provides: 
 
Applicant has been in the U.S. for twenty years and a naturalized 
citizen for seven. Her husband is also a naturalized citizen, and her 
children are U.S. citizens by birth. Her ties to these family members are 
stronger than her ties to family members in Taiwan. She has significant 
financial interests in the U.S. and none in Taiwan. She testified credibly 
that she takes her loyalty to the U.S. very seriously and would defend the 
interest of the U.S. Her supervisors and co-workers assess her as very 
loyal and trustworthy.   
 
 
 
 
 
8
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is some evidence tending to 
mitigate the raised security concerns under the whole-person concept.  Applicant is a 
mature person, who has lived in the United States since 1993. His wife and children are 
U.S. citizens. He attended a U.S. university. There is no evidence that he has ever 
taken any action that could cause potential harm to the United States. He has worked 
for a defense contractor since January 2009 and private companies before that. He 
asserted his pride of American citizenship. His Chinese passport was invalidated.  
 
Other circumstances weigh against Applicant in the whole-person analysis.  First, 
China’s government does not conform to widely accepted norms of human rights. More 
importantly for security purposes, China is actively involved in espionage against the 
United States, and may attempt to use émigrés such as Applicant for espionage. 
Second, three siblings are resident citizens of the PRC and another one, a U.S. citizen, 
resides there. Third, he maintains contact with his family as exhibited by his visits there 
over the years. Fourth, he became a naturalized U.S. citizen in December 2008, less 
than two years ago.   
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, and considering my inability to 
observe Applicant’s demeanor or judge his credibility, I conclude he mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign preference, but not those related to foreign 
influence. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
    Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
    Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.d: Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                     
                 
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
