1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
                         )      ISCR Case No. 11-14403
                                                                     )
Applicant for Security Clearance                  )
Appearances
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A., Administrative Judge:
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns arising under Guideline H
(Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The SOR was dated August
22, 2012. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)
implemented in September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 15, 2012. DOHA issued
a notice of hearing on November 2, 2012, scheduling the hearing for November 27,
2012. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted into evidence without objection.
Applicant testified. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on December 4, 2012. Based on
a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
At the hearing, the Government amended SOR 1.j from March to June 2009. Also, Counsel cross-alleged      1
that allegation under Personal Conduct, adding SOR 2.c.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations under
Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) with explanations.
Applicant is a 24-year-old engineer who works for a defense contractor. He
obtained his undergraduate degree in May 2011. At the same time, he also received a
master’s degree. (Tr. 13) He is single and has no children. (Tr. 12) Applicant completed
several internships with government contractors. He has worked for his current
employer since July 2011, and he was hired as a co-op student in 2009. He has held a
security clearance since June 2009.  (GX 1) He has completed two security clearance1
applications. (Tr. GX 1-2 )  
Applicant admitted using marijuana in his senior year in high school and in
college from June 2006 until June 2011. (Tr. 21) He  smoked marijuana with friends
socially in high school and college. From 2008 until 2009, he used marijuana on
multiple occasions, sometimes daily, and he also purchased marijuana.  (Tr. 16) His
use dwindled to perhaps once a month after that time. 
Applicant also acknowledged that he used and purchased cocaine on multiple
occasions from July 2008 until at least August 2008. He experimented with Ecstasy on
one occasion in 2008. (Tr. 20) He used Adderall without a prescription four or five
times. Applicant purchased Adderall from another student in 2007 or 2008. He admitted
to use of LSD once in 2007. (Tr. 21) His last use of any illegal drug was in June 2011.
Applicant explained that he was in college and made mistakes. He has changed
his location to another state. He no longer associates with anyone who uses illicit drugs.
He has no intention of using illegal drugs and would be willing to sign an agreement to
that effect. 
Applicant states that he stopped using illegal drugs because he had a job and
his girlfriend did not like it. He understands that it is a significant risk to his career and to
his livelihood. (Tr. 22) 
When Applicant was an intern in 2008, he took two pre-employment tests for
drug use. He passed the tests. At that time, he knew the use of illegal drugs was
against policy.  However, he continued to use drugs. (Tr. 23) He took approximately
three other drug tests, which he passed. 
Applicant completed an SF-86 security clearance application in March 2009. This
was his first application. In response to Question 23, he disclosed his June 2006 to
November 2007 illegal drug use but did not list the 2007 until 2009 use of illegal drugs
and he omitted any use of LSD. He even noted in the comment section that he
disclosed all of his controlled substance use and hoped it did not weigh against his
3
security clearance eligibility too much. (Tr. 30; GX 1) He admitted that he falsified the
security clearance application. (Tr. 28) His reasoning was that he was nervous about
his prior drug use and intimidated. He was not sure what would happen if he told the
truth.  
During an April 2009 security interview with an OPM investigator, Applicant
stated that he had not used any illegal drugs since November 2007. He explained that
he gave the interviewer information that was consistent with his 2009 security clearance
application.  He did not inform his employer about the falsification. (Tr. 31)
Applicant completed another SF-86 in 2011. At that time, he was applying for a
top secret clearance. (Tr. 31) He believed that he would undergo a polygraph
examination. He stated that he then disclosed the true and correct information
concerning his illegal drug use because he wanted to set the record straight but he also
believed it would be better for him if he presented the negative information instead of it
being uncovered during the polygraph interview. (Tr. 32)
When questioned at the hearing, Applicant admitted that he lied in 2009 about
his drug use because he might not get a security clearance if he told the truth. (Tr. 33)
He also stated that he knew it was wrong and could potentially affect his ability to hold a
clearance in the future. He stated that he is motivated to tell the truth now because he
might lose his job and it might be difficult to find another one. (Tr. 34) 
He believes the assurance that he can give now is based on his large student
debt that is trying to pay. He does not want to lose his job. He also does not associate
with the same people. He wants to start a family and build a future. (Tr. 34)
 Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
4
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .” The burden of proof is something less than a preponderance
of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.   
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Any reasonable doubt
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information. The decision to deny an individual a
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include:
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;
5
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use;
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia;
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician,
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence;
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical
social worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment
program;
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed
by a duly qualified medical professional;
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and,
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.
Applicant admitted his use of illegal drugs, primarily marijuana, from at least
June 2006 until June 2011. He also purchased marijuana and other drugs. Applicant
also admitted that he used and purchased cocaine on multiple occasions from July
2008 until at least August 2008.  Applicant used Ecstasy, LSD, and Adderral, a
prescription drug, without a prescription in 2007 and 2008. He used these illegal drugs
after obtaining a security clearance in 2009. AG ¶ 25(a), 25(c), and 25(g) apply. 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
6
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and,
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation;
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended;
and,
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program,
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional.
Applicant’s last use of any illegal substance was in June 2011. He  states
that he has not used any illegal drugs since that time. He states that has no
intention of using any illegal drugs. Granted, a large part of his use was while in
college. However, he continued the use after applying for and obtaining a
security clearance. He continued to use illegal drugs after taking drug test. His
recent drug use does not reflect good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.
Despite a change in environment, he has not mitigated the security concerns
under this guideline.  None of the mitigating factors apply.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative;
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
7
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information;
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information,
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information;
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace; 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer's time or resources.
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or other group;
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to
the employer as a condition of employment; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
As discussed above, Applicant intentionally falsified his 2009 security clearance
application. He also admitted that he reiterated these false statements when speaking
to the investigator in 2010. In 2011, he was motivated to tell the truth for fear of his
falsifications being discovered during a polygraph. He has shown a pattern of
8
dishonesty. AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(b), and 16(d)(3) apply. His conduct shows a pattern of
untrustworthiness.  
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable
reliability; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules
and regulations.
Applicant admitted that he intentionally falsified his first security clearance
application in 2009 and again lied to the investigator in 2010. The reason he gave for
disclosing the truth in 2011 was fear of being discovered in a polygraph. He did not
make good-faith efforts to correct his omission. His falsifications did not result from
inappropriate advice. The offense is not minor but goes to his integrity. He was holding
a security clearance and had the Government’s trust. He has not presented any other
information to persuade me that he has mitigated personal conduct concerns regarding
the falsification. I have doubts about his judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. After
considering the mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17, I conclude Applicant has not
mitigated the security concern under personal conduct or drug use. 
9
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is a 24-year-old professional who is educated and holds a position that
requires a security clearance. He had several internships from 2009 until obtaining his
current employment in 2011. He admitted that he used marijuana and experimented
with other illegal drugs even after his grant of a security clearance. He admitted that he
intentionally falsified responses in both his 2009 security clearance application and his
OPM interview in 2010. He waited until the possibility of disclosure during a 2011
polygraph to tell the entire truth about his illegal drug use. His regret is that he may lose
his job and his career. He has not acknowledged his poor judgment. 
His recent falsification when considered with his illegal drug use outweighs any
other behavior and is not mitigated. I have doubts about his judgment. Any doubts must
be resolved in favor of the Government. Applicant has not met his burden in this case.
He has not mitigated the security concerns under drug use and personal conduct.
Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a- 1.j: Against Applicant
10
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2a-2c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
