 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 09-06509   
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Michael Bowman, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude 
that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for 
financial considerations and personal conduct. Accordingly, her request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
  
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(Standard Form 86), signed on July 25, 2006, to request a security clearance required 
as part of her employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
 
 
1  
 
 
2  
                                                     
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
On February 25, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG).2 Applicant submitted a notarized Answer to the SOR dated March 18, 2010, in 
which she denied three allegations (1.d., 1.f., and 1.o.) under Guideline F, and admitted 
the remaining 12 allegations. She also requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. On May 20, 2010, the Government amended the Statement of Reasons to add 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Under that guideline, the Government included three 
allegations. On June 8, 2010, Applicant answered the amendment by admitting to 
allegation 2.a., and denying allegations 2.b. and 2.c. (Tr. 8) 
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on June 3, 2010, and the case 
was assigned to me on June 21, 2010. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 25, 
2010, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on July 15, 2010. During the hearing, I 
admitted 13 government exhibits (GE), identified as GE 1 through 13. Applicant testified 
and presented the testimony of three additional witnesses. I severed the documents 
Applicant had submitted as part of her Answer and admitted them as Applicant's 
Exhibits (AE) A through E. Applicant offered four documents at the hearing, which I 
admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) F through I. I held the record open to allow 
Applicant to submit additional evidence. She timely submitted two documents, admitted 
as AE J and K. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on July 23, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the 
SOR, and the evidence presented by both parties, I make the following additional 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant, who is 33 years old, graduated high school in 1995 and completed 
training as a home health aide and a medical assistant. She is single and has a 13-
year-old daughter. She does not receive formal child support, but her daughter’s father 
provides intermittent assistance. She was unemployed from June 2003 to August 2004, 
and again from June 2005 to June 2006. In July 2006, she accepted employment with 
Company A, a federal contractor. She completed her first security clearance application 
and was granted a confidential security clearance in 2006. Applicant was terminated 
from Company A in February 2008. She was unemployed for five months, worked in a 
1  Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which were implemented by 
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The AG supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 
2 to the Directive. 
 
 
 
3  
retail position for two months, and obtained her current employment with a defense 
contractor in December 2008. She completed her second security clearance application 
at that time. (GE 1, 4, 13; Tr. 34-37, 79, 88-89) 
 
 Applicant was employed as a mail scanner with Company A. She testified that 
she had an argument with one of her coworkers in January 2008. When she explained 
what happened to her team leader, the leader reported the disagreement to 
management. Applicant’s supervisor met with Applicant and the coworker; they settled 
the disagreement. Both Applicant and the coworker testified at the hearing that there 
were no ill feelings between them. The coworker testified that they did have an 
argument, and Applicant was yelling at her, but Applicant did not have a box cutter. 
Applicant's coworker also submitted a statement that Applicant was never a threat to 
her. Applicant testified that the events “had been inflated.” She was allowed to take the 
rest of the day off. Later, her supervisor called her and said that she would be contacted 
by a company representative. (AE F; Tr. 79-87, 115-124) 
 
 The altercation had been recorded on videotape. According to a letter from the 
Human Resources (HR) director to Applicant, dated February 13, 2008, the videotape 
showed Applicant “in a visibly agitated, emotional state and [you] were flailing and 
pointing a box cutter in one of your hands in front of another [company] employee.” It 
also stated that Applicant had admitted in her written statement and in a telephone 
conversation with the HR director, that she was angry with another employee and that 
she “did have a box cutter in her possession.” The letter stated that she had been 
suspended without pay on February 8, 2008, while the company investigated the 
incident. Company A terminated Applicant's employment, effective February 13, 2008. 
When officials of the contracting company that had hired Company A to support its 
federal contract viewed the videotape, they prohibited Applicant from working on their 
contract. The federal agency involved revoked Applicant's credentials, and she could no 
longer enter the government building where she had worked. (GE 13)  
 
 In December 2008, Applicant completed her second security clearance 
application. Question 22 asked if she had ever been “(1) Fired from a job; (2) Quit a job 
after being told you’d been fired; (3) Left a job by mutual agreement following 
allegations of misconduct; (4) Left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of 
unsatisfactory performance; (6) Left a job for other reasons under unfavorable 
circumstances.” She answered “No.” Applicant testified that she remembers speaking 
with the HR director before her termination, but does not recall being told she was 
terminated. She remembers her supervisor telling her that she was suspended. She 
testified,  
 
So when she notified me, she said that my services were no longer 
needed. We will grant you your unemployment. You will be able to keep 
your clearance with us. And we will give you unemployment. My 
determination of her giving me unemployment I felt that I was -- they didn't 
terminate me. That's why I chose that answer on my, on the F-86, 
because again, like I said, and if they felt that I was a threat to this person 
 
 
4  
they wouldn't agree to give me any unemployment. They would have just 
denied me. (Tr. 82) 
 
She answered Question 22 negatively because she believed that she could not receive 
unemployment compensation if she had been fired, and because she did receive it, she 
believed she was suspended, not terminated. She also testified that she did not 
understand the questions on the security clearance application, and answering 
negatively was simply a mistake. She stated that the 2008 security clearance 
application was the first one she completed, and she did not have assistance in 
completing it. She sought legal advice approximately one month before the hearing, and 
the attorney explained the questions on the application. She now understands how she 
should have answered the question. (Answer; GE 4; Tr. 28, 31, 79-87, 96-97) 
 
 Applicant has 15 debts, listed in the SOR, that total approximately $28,700. They 
appear in her credit reports of August 2006, April 2009, and January and February 
2010. She has not attended financial counseling. She keeps a “mental budget” but not a 
written one. She does not have a savings or checking account. She provided her pay 
statements for July 2010, which show a gross monthly income of approximately $3,000, 
and net income of $2,378. The expenses she listed total $2,010, leaving a monthly net 
remainder of $368. Applicant believes that her financial difficulties stem from her 
periods of unemployment, and caring for her self, her daughter, and her mother, before 
her mother passed away in 2007. She discussed ten debts with a security investigator 
during her security investigation in 2007, and told him she had a payment plan through 
a debt resolution company. Based on her credit report, the company set up a plan of 
$285 per month, starting in March 2007. She did not make payments because they 
were more than she could afford. (GE 2, 3, 5, 9, 10; AE J, K; Tr. 75-79, 97) 
 
 When Applicant completed her 2008 security clearance application, she 
answered “No” to the financial questions, which asked if she had been more than six 
months delinquent on any debt in the previous seven years, or if she was currently 
delinquent on any debts. She testified that she did not realize the extent of her 
delinquencies, because she had not seen her credit report, she was concerned about 
her mother’s health, and she did not understand the questions. (GE 4; Tr. 62-64) 
 
 The SOR lists the following debts.  
 
Utility debt: Allegation 1.c. ($249) – UNPAID. Gas bill, delinquent since 2008. 
Applicant stated in her Answer that she had arranged a payment plan with the 
creditor that would result in the full debt being paid by April 9, 2010. She testified 
that she has not paid it. (Answer; Tr. 50-52) 
 
Medical debt: Allegation 1.d. ($138) – UNPAID. Delinquent since October 
2007. Applicant testified that she did not have sufficient information to contact the 
creditor to resolve this debt. The three government credit reports list the debt as 
being in collection status, with only the word “medical” and no creditor name, 
address or telephone number. (GE 2, 5, 9, 10; Tr. 52-53) 
 
 
5  
 
Government debt: Allegation 1.f. ($581) – UNPAID. Delinquent since 2005. 
Applicant testified that she did not contact the creditor because she had only 
initials of the creditor, and did not have enough information. It is listed in the 2010 
credit reports as a government debt. The credit report she received from 
Department Counsel in May, two months before the hearing, listed the creditor’s 
mailing address. (GE 5, 9, 10; Tr. 57-59) 
 
Timeshare property: Allegation 1.k. ($23,624) – UNPAID. Delinquent since 
2007. Applicant signed a contract to purchase a vacation property timeshare in 
2007. She knew there would be monthly payments, but thought the payments 
would not begin for six months. She does not remember if she realized the full 
price of the timeshare at the time. She now realizes she should not have bought 
it. When she contacted the creditor recently, she was told it had been foreclosed. 
She suspects the amount still outstanding is the amount in allegation 1.k., but 
she is not certain. (GE 5; Tr. 66-70) 
 
Insufficient funds: Allegation 1.l. ($85) – PAID. Delinquent since January 
2003. Applicant wrote a check to a grocery store but did not have sufficient funds 
to cover the amount. She provided documentation showing that in March 2010, 
she paid $95.85 and resolved this debt. (GE 5; AE C; Tr. 71) 
 
CREDIT CARDS:  
Allegation 1.e. ($703): PAYING. Delinquent since March 2009. In January 2010, 
the creditor for allegation 1.e. reduced the amount of Applicant's balance from 
$703 to $250 and transferred the balance to a new credit card, which she cannot 
use until the balance is paid. She has been paying the minimum monthly 
payment of $26. She expects it will take 20 payments to pay the balance. (GE 5; 
AE D; Tr. 53-56) 
 
Allegation 1.i. ($630): UNPAID. The creditor at allegation 1.i. offered Applicant a 
settlement of $93, if she paid the entire amount immediately. She stated in her 
Answer that she had a payment plan to pay the $93 on March 26, 2010. 
However, she testified at the hearing that she did not have the money to pay the 
$93. (Answer; Tr. 60-62) 
 
Allegation 1.n. ($133): RESOLVED. Delinquent since April 2009. Applicant 
provided a letter from the collection agency showing that it has closed the 
account, and it would inform the credit bureaus to delete the account from 
Applicant's credit reports. (GE 5; AE E; Tr. 73-74) 
 
COMMUNICATIONS:  
Allegation 1.a. ($526): UNPAID. Cell phone debt, delinquent since 2004. In her 
Answer, Applicant stated she received a settlement offer of $400, and would pay 
the debt with two payments of $200 each on April 9, 2010 and May 7, 2010. At 
the hearing, she had not made the $200 payments because she had daily living 
 
 
6  
expenses to pay. She said the creditor would not accept a payment plan for $25 
per month. She discussed this debt with the investigator during her 2007 security 
interview. Applicant testified she did not list this debt on her 2008 security 
clearance application because she did not realize it was more than 180 days 
delinquent and did not understand the question on the application. (Answer; GE 
3; Tr. 38-50) 
 
Allegation 1.b. ($527): PAID. Cell phone debt, delinquent since 2005. The 
record shows Applicant received a settlement offer reducing the balance to $265, 
and that she paid $265 in April 2010. (GE 11; Tr. 50) 
 
Allegation 1.g. ($580): PAID. Cell phone. Applicant provided documentation 
from the collection agency showing that in March 2010, she established a 
payment plan of three payments of $135.27. On April 26, 2010, she made the 
final payment and resolved this cell phone debt. (GE 12; AE A; Tr. 59-60) 
 
Allegation 1.h. ($83): PAID. Cell phone. Applicant provided documentation from 
the collection agency dated March 2010 indicating that this cell phone account 
was settled and had a zero balance. (AE B, I; Tr. 60) 
 
Allegation 1.j. ($176): PAID. Cell phone. Applicant provided documentation from 
the collection agency dated March 2010 indicating that this cell phone account 
was paid. She testified that allegation 1.o. is a duplicate of the cell phone debt in 
allegation 1.j. because they have the same account number. (AE B, I; Tr. 64-65, 
75) 
 
Allegation 1.m. ($485): UNPAID. Cable service, delinquent since January 2009. 
Applicant stated in her Answer that she made a payment plan of $75 every two 
weeks starting April 9, 2010. However, she did not make any payments because 
the monthly payment was more than she could afford. She agreed to the plan, 
knowing that she could not afford it, because she did not want the balance to 
continue to increase. She testified she intended to try to pay whatever she could. 
(GE 5; Tr. 72-73) 
 
 Applicant provided numerous character references that describe her as 
respectful, responsible, dependable, professional, and an asset to her company. She is 
courteous and can be counted on to help wherever needed. Her supervisor noted that 
Applicant has “unparalleled leadership skills” and has received high praise from 
customers for her service skills. In 2009, she received an award for outstanding 
customer service, and was recognized as Employee of the Year by her current 
employer. (AE G, H) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
 
 
7  
                                                     
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. 
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties 
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
 Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
judgment, reliability and trustworthiness to protect the national interests as his or his 
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of 
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the 
Government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern about financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
An individual who is financially over-extended is at risk of having to engage in 
3 Directive 6.3 
 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
6 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
8  
illegal acts to generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead 
to financial crimes including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by 
known sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
 The relevant disqualifying conditions are AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts) and AG ¶19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). The SOR 
alleges more than $28,700 in debts, which started to become delinquent in 2003. Half of 
Applicant's debts remain unpaid. Most of those that are paid were resolved recently, 
after Applicant received the SOR. Applicant has a history of failure to meet financial 
obligations. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c) apply. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following potentially mitigating factors are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Although Applicant's debts started accruing in 2003, they are not in the distant 
past, as many remain unpaid. As of the date of the SOR, she had 15 delinquencies. Her 
debts are both frequent and recent. Her failure to work on resolving her debts before 
she was motivated by the SOR raises questions as to her reliability and judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) applies in part because events occurred that affected Applicant's 
finances, and which she could not control or foresee. Applicant was unemployed for 
about one year between 2003 and 2004, for a year from 2005 to 2006, and for about ten 
months in 2008. She has been employed since December 2008, but before she 
received the SOR, she had done little to deal with her debts. Applicant has not acted 
responsibly to resolve her delinquent debt load.  
 
 Applicant was on notice that delinquent debts were a security concern after she 
completed her security clearance application in July 2006. She was reminded that debts 
were a security concern when she met with an investigator in 2007. At the time, she 
talked with a debt resolution company, but failed to follow through on the plan. She did 
not actually pay any debts until early in 2010. Applicant receives some mitigation in that 
 
 
9  
she did pay several debts this year. However, her financial situation is not under control. 
She has taken no action in regard to her largest debt of $23,624. Moreover, her lack of 
action over the past four years, despite her awareness that her debts were at issue, 
does not support a finding of a good-faith effort. AG ¶ 20(d) applies only in part. 
 
 In all, the partial mitigation available to Applicant under AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) 
are insufficient to outweigh her financial irresponsibility and her failure to follow through 
on resolving her debts, despite promises, over the past four years.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
(a) Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, 
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleges that Applicant was terminated from her job, and that 
she deliberately failed to disclose her job termination and her financial delinquencies. 
The allegations implicate the following disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: …(2) disruptive, violent, or other 
inappropriate behavior in the workplace.  
 
 Applicant engaged in inappropriate conduct at her workplace. The record 
provides conflicting evidence as to Applicant's behavior at her job in January 2008. She 
admitted that she had an altercation with a coworker, and that she possessed a box-
cutter. But both she and the coworker state that she did not threaten the coworker with 
the box-cutter. Ultimately, the company found sufficient evidence to terminate her based 
on her behavior. Applicant did not disclose this termination, despite being told in both a 
 
 
10  
telephone conversation and in writing that she was terminated. She also did not 
disclose her past-due debts on either her 2006 or her 2008 security clearance 
application. The 2008 application was completed after she had discussed these debts 
with an investigator. AG ¶ 16 (a) and (d) apply. 
 
Even if Applicant's testimony that she did not understand the financial questions 
were credible in 2006, it is not credible as to the 2008 application. When she completed 
the application in 2008, she was familiar with it because she had completed one in 
2006. She had also discussed her debts with an investigator during her 2007 security 
interview. Yet she did not disclose her debts in 2008; she submitted a “clean” 
application, giving the government no indication that finances were an issue to be 
investigated further. Moreover, when she submitted her Answer to the SOR, she again 
provided false information to the government by stating that she had payments plans in 
place for several debts, when she knew that she would not be able to follow through on 
these plans. Applicant also falsified her application by failing to disclose her termination 
in 2008. She had been told by HR both by telephone and in writing that she had been 
terminated. It is not credible that she was not aware of her status.  
 
As to mitigation, the following mitigating conditions are relevant under AG ¶17: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
There is no evidence that Applicant informed any authorized government official 
that she wished to correct the answers on her applications. AG ¶17(a) cannot be 
applied. AG ¶17(c) is also inapplicable. Applicant’s conduct cannot be considered minor 
because she failed to be forthright with the government not once, but on numerous 
questions in the 2006 and 2008 applications, and in her Answer to the SOR. Her 
conduct casts doubt on her current trustworthiness.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the relevant circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
 
11  
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the appropriate guidelines, I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case. 
 
 Applicant has accumulated substantial debts over the past seven years. She has 
made some effort over the past few months and has paid some of the debts. Her efforts 
occurred, however, after she received the SOR, and are an eleventh-hour attempt to 
respond to the security clearance process. She has no plan to resolve her largest debt 
of more than $20,000. Applicant has not been candid with the government about her 
delinquencies, or about her termination from a job for inappropriate behavior.  
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows she has not satisfied the doubts 
currently raised about her suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited 
adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.c.   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d – 1.e.  For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.f.   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g. – 1.h.  For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.i.   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.j.   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.k.   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.l.   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.m.   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.n. – 1.o.  For Applicant  
 
 
 
 
12  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.c.  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
