KEYWORD: Guideline J; Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: Judge’s discussion of inconsistent statements by Applicant was not a due process
violation.  Applicant failed to demonstrate bias by the Judge merely by showing that the Judge
and Department Counsel had lunch together.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 07-00966.a1
DATE: 08/24/2009
DATE: August 24, 2009
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for a Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 07-00966
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a
trustworthiness designation.  On October 17, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR)
advising Applicant of the basis for that decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline
J (Criminal Conduct), Guideline H (Drug Involvement), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of
1Tr. pp. 26, 30-31, 42, 45-46, 60-61, 72.
2This incident is the subject of SOR paragraph 1.k, which alleged: “On or about April 15, 2000, you were
arrested and charged with Assault-Intent/Reckless/Injure and Criminal Damage-Deface.”
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On June 5, 2009 after the hearing, Administrative Judge Robert Robinson
Gales denied Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant
to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: (1) whether he was wrongfully prejudiced
by a perception that he wasn’t honest about his past; (2) whether the Judge made inaccurate findings
of fact regarding some of the circumstances surrounding his criminal history; and (3) whether the
Judge was biased.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable decision.
The Judge found, inter alia, that Applicant had a history of drug involvement which
commenced in 1997 and continued repeatedly until at least 2005 with few significant breaks
between incidents.  The Judge found that Applicant was involved in multiple incidents of purchase,
possession, and use of drugs and drug paraphernalia.  In deciding that the case against Applicant had
not been mitigated, the Judge concluded that Applicant had not established a meaningful track
record of drug abstinence or steadfast compliance with the law. 
Applicant states that “[w]e are here today because the prosecution feels that I wasn’t honest
on the SOR that I received some time in November of 2008.”  Although this argument is not
completely clear, Applicant appears to be arguing that, contrary to the evidence, Department
Counsel claimed that Applicant was being less then candid when discussing the allegations
contained in the SOR.  This interpretation of Applicant’s assertion is borne out by portions of the
line of questioning  of Applicant by Department Counsel during the hearing below.1
Absent actions that raise the issue of a denial of due process, the manner in which
Department Counsel develops the government’s case is not usually a relevant inquiry on appeal.
Department Counsel’s mere contention that Applicant was dishonest does not establish that the
Judge erred.  To the extent Applicant is asserting that the Judge committed harmful error by relying
on Department Counsel’s claim of Applicant’s dishonesty for his unfavorable security clearance
decision, Applicant has failed to establish error.  First, there are no SOR allegations in this case
dealing with Applicant’s lack of honesty.  Second, while the Judge does discuss his perception that
Applicant gave vague and inconsistent answers to questions about his past drug and criminal history
and that this affected his assessment of Applicant’s credibility, he did so for the limited purpose of
determining the applicability of two of the Guideline J mitigating conditions.  Credibility
determinations of Judges resulting from hearing testimony are entitled to deference on appeal.
Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  Applicant has failed to carry his burden of establishing that the Judge’s
findings and conclusions on this point are erroneous.
Applicant states that the Judge used evidence of a specific incident in the record2 along with
“a slew of other questionable charges” to form a basis for deciding against him in the case.
Regarding the cited incident, Applicant does little more than offer his version of events.  A party’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different
interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or
reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ADP Case
No. 08-00969 at 2 (App. Bd. May 28, 2009).  
Applicant indicates that he feels that it was impossible for the Judge to make a fair decision
regarding his case, because, after the hearing, he witnessed the Judge and the Department Counsel
walk down the street together and enter a nearby restaurant for lunch.  Applicant asserts that this
contact was inappropriate, and that because of the contact, the Judge could be coerced into making
a decision. 
Accepting Applicant’s description of the contact as true, solely for purposes of deciding the
appeal, Applicant’s assertion that the Judge and Department Counsel walked to a restaurant together
and had lunch is insufficient to raise a colorable claim of bias or improper conduct.  Even if the facts
are as Applicant indicates, one cannot reasonably infer that the Judge and Department Counsel
discussed Applicant’s case.
There is a rebuttable presumption that a Judge is impartial and unbiased, and a party seeking
to rebut that presumption has a heavy burden of persuasion on appeal.  See, e.g., ADP Case No. 07-
06039 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 8, 2008).  Furthermore, there is a rebuttable presumption that agency
officials carry out their duties in good faith, and a person seeking to rebut or overcome that
presumption has the burden of presenting clear evidence to the contrary.  See ISCR Case No. 02-
17609 at 3 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004)(citing National Archives and Records Administration v. Favish,
541 U.S. 157, 174 (2004); reh’g denied, 541 U.S. 1057 (2004)).  Applicant’s speculation about the
Judge and Department Counsel lacks sufficient substance to raise a colorable claim about the good
faith of the Judge and Department Counsel.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-09220 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep.
28, 2004)(Applicant’s claim that the Judge and Department Counsel arrived at the hearing location
together and left that location together was insufficient to raise a colorable claim of lack of good
faith or bias).  Applicant has not demonstrated error.
  After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data
and articulated a satisfactory explanation for his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between
the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States,
371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The Board is also satisfied that Applicant’s procedural rights under the
Directive were adhered to.  The Judge’s ultimate unfavorable trustworthiness determination is
sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a trustworthiness designation is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett        
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Michael D. Hipple       
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody         
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
