 
 1
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-17783 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concern pertaining to financial 
considerations, but has not mitigated security concerns pertaining to criminal conduct, 
drug involvement, and personal conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on January 30, 2006. On September 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines J (criminal conduct), H (drug involvement), F (financial 
considerations), and E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on November 13, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received his response on November 17, 
2008. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 5, 2009, and I 
received the case assignment on February 6, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on March 4, 2009, scheduling the hearing for April 6, 2009. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 14, which were 
received without objection. Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through CC, 
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. I held the 
record open until April 27, 2009, to afford Applicant the opportunity to submit additional 
evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE DD through AE RR. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 15, 2008.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e., 2.a., 3.q., and 3.r. with 
explanations, and denied SOR ¶¶ 3.a. through 3.p., and 4.a. through 4.c. His 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact. 
   
Applicant is a 33-year-old technical service representative, who has been 
employed by a defense contractor since October 2004. GE 1, Tr. 27-28. He testified that 
obtaining a security clearance was a condition of continued employment. Tr. 30. 
 
Applicant did not graduate from high school, but did complete his GED in April 
1996. Tr. 23-24. Although he has no formal education beyond his GED, he has 
completed several work-related courses. Tr. 28-29. He served in the Army from April 
1996 to April 1999, and was honorably discharged as a specialist (pay grade E-4). 
During his Army service, he successfully held a secret security clearance for 11 months 
while deployed to South Korea. Tr. 26-27. He has never married and has no 
dependents. GE 1, Tr. 30. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleged five separate incidents under this concern. The first incident 
occurred in June 1996. The fifth and most recent incident occurred in June 2006. 
Summarized they are: 
 
(1) In June 1996, Applicant was arrested and charged with theft by 
shoplifting. (SOR ¶ 1.e.) Applicant was 20 years old and in the Army. 
Having just completed basic training, he was “feeling out in the world, 
seasoned and invincible.” He went into a department store and “was 
amused at what seemed to be a feeble security system.” He shoplifted 
a $20 item “just to show them,” and got caught. Response to SOR, GE 
5, Tr. 77-80. 
 
 
 3
(2) In August 2003, Applicant was charged with Drive with License 
Suspended/Revoked/Cancelled, Stop Sign Violation, Failure to 
Produce Evidence of Financial Responsibility, and Violation of Promise 
to Appear. He was driving and pulled over for running a stop sign in a 
construction zone, which he said was not there. In October 2003, he 
pled guilty to Drive with License Suspended/Revoked/Canceled and 
the other charges were dismissed. He was sentenced to pay a fine. 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.) He failed to appear because “the court again was pretty 
far away and I didn’t have a ride to it.” Response to SOR, GE 10, GE 
11,Tr. 76-78. 
 
(3) In July 2004, Applicant was arrested and charged with Threatening 
and Intimidating. (SOR ¶ 1.c.) Applicant explained this event occurred 
during “the hardest time in my life. I had no job, no money, living in a 
slum with no air conditioning and facing eviction.” Applicant and his 
former fiancé had a yard sale and raised $80. His fiancé then drove to 
a convenience store and while there mistakenly left her wallet in the 
store. When she returned to retrieve it, all her money was gone. She 
returned home and informed Applicant, who called the store and 
threatened a male clerk answering the telephone, “You better give me 
my $80, you (expletive deleted).” Applicant told the clerk he would be 
at the store in ten minutes and blow his head off if he did not get his 
money back. Applicant called the store a short time later and a told a 
female clerk answering the telephone that he would “blow off that 
(expletive deleted)’s head” if the money was not returned. Both clerks 
were frightened and did not know what the Applicant was talking about 
because the wallet incident occurred before their shift. They called the 
police, the police investigated the allegations, and were unable to 
substantiate that anyone stole the money. Their investigation did, 
however, result in Applicant being arrested. Applicant subsequently 
pled guilty to the charge and was fined $150. Response to SOR, GE 9, 
Tr. 72-78. 
 
(4) In February 2005, Applicant was charged with Drive with License 
Suspended, Failure to Appear and Failure to Produce Evidence of 
Financial Responsibility. (SOR ¶ 1.b.) Applicant’s former fiancé was 
driving the two of them around town at night and she became ill. 
Applicant took the wheel and was pulled over “because my license 
plate wasn’t properly illuminated.” He pled guilty to Drive with License 
Suspended and Failure to Appear. The Failure to Produce Financial 
Responsibility charged was dismissed, and he was fined. Response to 
SOR, GE 8, Tr. 69-72. 
 
(5) In June 2006, Applicant was arrested and charged with Dangerous 
Drugs/Equipment for Manufacturing, a felony. In May 2007, he pled 
guilty to the amended charge of Attempted Possession of Chemicals 
or Equipment, or both, for the Purpose of Manufacturing a Dangerous 
 
 4
Drug, a felony. He was sentenced to two years probation, and a 
$1,000 fine and other costs. (SOR ¶ 1a.) Applicant stated that he read 
an article about the ease of producing methamphetamine, and claimed 
that because of his obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) and not 
having taken his medication (Effexor), he “decided” to collect the 
ingredients to manufacture methamphetamine. “[B]laming” the police 
for his “agonized state of mind,” he decided to embarrass them and 
purchase methamphetamine ingredients on line. He ordered and 
received the ingredients. “[A]bout two months later,” the police arrived, 
questioned him, searched his apartment, and ultimately arrested him. 
Applicant testified and stated in his Response to SOR that he pled 
guilty even though he was not guilty to avoid a possible lengthy prison 
sentence. His defense counsel, a public defender, “suggested” that he 
have a competency hearing, and also offered to get him another 
attorney. Applicant declined both offers and eventually pled guilty “to 
preserve my freedom and get on with my life.” Applicant testified that 
his attorney submitted a request to the court for an early release of his 
probation and reduce his felony charge to a misdemeanor. After his 
hearing, Applicant did submit court documents reflecting that his 
probation had, indeed, been terminated in March 2009, but the 
documents did not reflect his felony had been reduced to a 
misdemeanor. Response to SOR, GE 2, GE 4, GE 6, GE 7, AE CC, 
AE NN, AE OO, AE PP, AE QQ. AE RR, AE PP, Tr. 31, 44-69. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 The allegation under this concern, (SOR ¶ 2.a.), is cross-alleged under criminal 
conduct, (SOR ¶ 1.a.). The facts regarding this allegation discussed supra are 
incorporated under this concern. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges 18 debts approximating $16,700. (SOR ¶¶ 3.a.-3.r.) He 
admitted two of those debts approximating $6,600. (SOR ¶¶ 3.q., 3.r.) At his hearing, 
Applicant did not provide any documentation warranting application of any mitigating 
conditions under this concern. Tr. 96-97. 
 
After his hearing, he submitted documentation that he paid debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a.-1.o. He was unable to locate the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.p., he made payment 
arrangements for the $5,463 debt (automobile loan) of $209 per month for three years 
for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.q., and he is disputing the debt in SOR ¶ 1.r. AE II, AE JJ, AE 
KK, AE LL, AE MM. The majority of debts were medical co-pay amounts that Applicant 
consolidated and settled for a lesser amount. 
 
He submitted a list of monthly expenses supporting the premise that he is living 
within his means. Applicant’s annual salary is $52,000, he is current on all his bills, and 
 
 5
he has low monthly living expenses because he is currently living with his mother. 
Response to SOR, Tr. 96-130, GE 2, GE 3, AE DD, AE EE, AE FF, AE GG. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The allegation in SOR ¶ 4.a. is cross-alleged under criminal conduct, (SOR ¶ 
1.a.). The facts regarding this allegation discussed supra are incorporated under this 
concern. 
 
In his January 2006 e-QIP, Applicant disclosed, as stated in SOR ¶ 1.d., a 
February 2003 driving on a suspended license. He failed to disclose his July 2004 arrest 
for Threatening/Intimidating in response to Section 23, regarding his police record 
(asking whether in the last seven years he had been arrested for, charged with, or 
convicted of any offenses not listed in sections a – e). 
 
In the same e-QIP, Applicant answered “No” to Section 28(a) and 28(b) (asking 
whether in the last seven years he had been 180 days delinquent on any debts, and 
whether he was currently 90 days delinquent on any debts, respectively). SOR ¶ 4.c. 
alleged he failed to list debts as stated in SOR ¶¶ 3.a., 3.c., and 3.p. 
 
When asked by Department Counsel why he failed to provide complete answers 
to Section 23 and Sections 28(a) and (b), he responded, “I forgot, “ and “I forgot that 
too. I didn’t remember some of those things,” respectively. Tr. 131. In his Response to 
SOR, he added that his failure to disclose information supra was not deliberate. 
 
Character evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted numerous e-mails documenting his church involvement, 
genealogy assistance, and assistance provided to church members and non-church 
members. AE A-AE W. He submitted employee performance evaluations from 2004 to 
2008 that indicate he meets or exceeds employer goals and “is a valued member of 
[employer’s] organization.” AE X through AE BB. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
 
 6
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism.  
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
  
Conclusions 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are raised under Guidelines J (criminal conduct), H (drug involvement), F 
(financial considerations), and E (personal conduct) with respect to the allegations set 
forth in the SOR. 
 
 7
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes six conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable 
conditions; 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; 
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program; and 
 
(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a 
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year.  
 
AGs ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) apply. Applicant most recently was convicted of a drug-
related felony in May 2007. He was also convicted of at least four misdemeanors in 
1996, 2003, 2004, and 2005, discussed supra.  
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 8
                                                          
Applicant’s five skirmishes with the law began in 1996 with a shoplifting arrest to 
“test” store security. In 2003, he was arrested for driving-related offenses. In 2004, he 
was arrested for threatening and intimidating a store clerk, and in 2005, he was arrested 
for driving-related offenses. In 2006, he was arrested and convicted of Attempted 
Possession of Chemicals or Equipment, or both, for the Purpose of Manufacturing a 
Dangerous Drug. Although granted an early release from probation in March 2009, he 
still remains convicted of a felony. This coupled with his ten-year history of arrests 
precludes application of any potential mitigating conditions under this concern. 
Applicant’s past conduct clearly calls into question his ability or willingness to comply 
with laws, rules, and regulations, and falls short of what is expected of those entrusted 
with a security clearance. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
[u]se of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight drug involvement-related conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Two drug involvement disqualifying conditions could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this particular case: “(a) any drug 
abuse,”1 and “(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.”  
 
    Applicant’s guilty plea to attempted possession of chemicals or equipment, or 
both, for the purpose of manufacturing a dangerous drug2 warrants full application of 
AG ¶25(c). When arrested, he had ingredients to manufacture methamphetamine. The 
authorities did not accept his explanation that he was “testing” the police and held him 
accountable. Although he was released from probation early, he still remains convicted 
of a drug-related felony.  
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides for potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
1AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
2AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the 
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, 
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other 
similar substances. 
 
 
 9
                                                          
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation. 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  
The evidence does not involve any drug abuse, but rather is limited to attempted 
possession of chemicals or equipment, or both, for the purpose of manufacturing 
methamphetamine. The particular facts of this case preclude application of any 
mitigating conditions involving drug use. 
 
Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), there are no “bright line” rules for determining when 
conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR 
Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana 
occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence 
shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
“changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.”3 
3 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle change and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board 
stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
 
 10
                                                                                                                                                                                          
AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. Applicant’s drug-related arrest occurred in June 
2006, 14 days before he completed his e-QIP on January 30, 2006, and his May 1, 
2007 drug-related conviction was two years before this hearing. Although the drug 
involvement in question is limited to one incident, it was a drug-related felony conviction. 
I consider Applicant’s early release from probation in March 2009, one month before his 
hearing, as recent and an insufficient period of time to evaluate his conduct. 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, and his SOR 
response. At the time of Applicant’s hearing, he had submitted no mitigating evidence. 
Based on evidence presented and Applicant’s admissions, the government established 
the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
the Administrative Judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The Administrative Judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
 11
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
After the hearing, Applicant’s made a concerted effort to clean up his credit 
history and come to terms with his creditors. He apparently was able to contact all of his 
creditors except one, and paid, settled, or arranged payment plans. Such notable efforts 
warrant full application of AG ¶¶ 20(d) and 20(e). The remaining mitigating conditions 
under this concern are not applicable. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and, 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
 
 12
                                                          
Applicant disclosed only one of his criminal offenses—his 2003 arrest and 
conviction for driving on a suspended license. He did not disclose his 2004 arrest for 
threatening/intimidating (SOR ¶ 1.c.). Furthermore, he did not disclose any debts over 
180 days delinquent or currently over 90 days delinquent. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) both 
apply.4 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
4Deliberate and materially false answers on a security clearance application may violate 18 
U.S.C. § 1001. The Supreme Court defined “materiality” in United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 512 
(1995) as a statement having a “natural tendency to influence, or [be] capable of influencing, the decision 
making body to which it is addressed.” See also United States v. McLaughlin, 386 F.3d 547, 553 (3d Cir. 
2004). If Applicant had provided accurate answers on his security clearance applications, his accurate 
answers are capable of influencing the government to deny his security clearance. His criminal offenses 
are sufficiently serious to potentially jeopardize approval of his security clearance. Making a false 
statement under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious crime, a felony (the maximum potential sentence includes 
confinement for five years and a $10,000 fine). In light of my ultimate decision, and the absence of an 
alleged violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 in the SOR, it is unnecessary for me to decide whether or not 
Applicant actually violated 18 U.S.C. § 1001. 
 
 13
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations.  
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant’s explanations for his 
omissions were that he forgot to list them and that his omissions were not deliberate. I 
do not find his testimony or explanations credible regarding his state of mind when he 
completed his security clearance application. I note that he recalled the 2004 
threatening/intimidating incident with great clarity during his testimony and in his pre-
hearing responses. I do not accept his explanation that he forgot to list it on his e-QIP, 
but did remember his 2003 traffic-related arrest. Furthermore, given the state of his 
financial history, I do not find his explanation credible that he forgot to list any 
indebtedness on his e-QIP. Simply put, his statement at his hearing about his reasons 
for not disclosing his arrest history and indebtedness is not credible. He was well aware 
of more than one offense and that he owed creditors money. He knowingly and 
deliberately chose not to disclose full information about the extent of his criminal past or 
his indebtedness. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.     
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
Whole Person Concept. Applicant receives credit for his Army service and having 
successfully held a security clearance for 11 months while in the Army. He has also 
shown significant community service through his volunteer work with his church and on 
his own. His efforts to address his past due bills after his hearing are noteworthy. His 
duty performance with his employer is good. Aside from the SOR allegations, no other 
disciplinary or security-related problems surfaced. His record of favorable employment 
weighs in his favor. There is some compelling evidence of his responsibility, 
rehabilitation, and mitigation. I am convinced that he is loyal to his company, his church 
and his country.   
 
 14
  Applicant’s 2006 felony drug-related arrest and deliberate failure to disclose 
information on his security clearance application are serious, recent, and not mitigated. 
His misdemeanor arrests coupled with his recent felony arrest establish a ten-year 
history of failure to comply with the law. He was not candid about why he failed to 
provide full and complete information on his e-QIP. I have serious questions about his 
current ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude that he has mitigated security concerns 
pertaining to financial considerations, but he has not mitigated security concerns 
pertaining to criminal conduct, drug involvement, and personal conduct.    
 
 I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors” and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has failed to mitigate or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a. through d.: Against Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 2, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
        Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 3, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
         Subparagraphs 3.a. through r.: For Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 4, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
         Subparagraphs 4.a. through c.: Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 15
 
