 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-17074 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert E. Coacher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Drug Involvement concerns; but he has not mitigated 
Criminal Conduct, Alcohol Consumption, and Personal Conduct security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
On February 12, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct; Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption; Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement; and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant provided two answers to the SOR. The first answer was undated; the 
second answer was dated March 10, 2009. He requested a hearing before an 
 
2 
 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 13, 2009. DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing on June 9, 2009, scheduling the hearing for July 7, 2009. The hearing 
was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which 
were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted 
Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were received without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 15, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since September 2006. He is a graduate of a technical school and 
also has an associate’s degree. He has been married and divorced twice. He and his 
second wife have reconciled and are living together but they have not remarried. He has 
a 23-year-old child.1 
 
 Applicant has a history of alcohol-related arrests, drug use, and criminal activity. 
He was arrested in August 1999, and charged with driving under the influence (DUI) of 
liquor/drugs, DUI per se, and unlawful narcotics. The police found psilocybin 
mushrooms, a controlled substance, in his car. Applicant attended alcohol treatment 
between October 1999 and January 2000. In about December 1999, he pled guilty to a 
reduced charge of driving while ability impaired (DWAI) and was fined. He received a 
two-year deferred sentence on his drug charge. Between February 2000 and 
September 2000, he participated in 40 hours of court-ordered alcohol education 
classes.2 
 
 Applicant was arrested in March 2001, and charged with DUI, second offense in 
five years, DUI per se, and negligent child abuse. His 15-year-old child was in the car 
when he was arrested. Applicant was found guilty of negligent child abuse and the 
reduced charge of DWAI. Between June 2001 and June 2002, he participated in 68 
hours of court-ordered alcohol education classes. He violated the terms of his probation 
in July 2001, by drinking alcohol. He was found guilty of contempt of court and 
sentenced to 28 days in jail.3 
 
 Applicant worked for the U.S. Postal Service as a letter carrier from 1973 to 
2001. In November 2001, Applicant stole some of the mail he was carrying. He was 
arrested by postal inspectors for mail theft, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1709. He pled 
guilty in July 2002. He received three years probation. Applicant left his employment at 
the Postal Service shortly after his arrest. He testified that he voluntarily resigned 
because he was afraid that if he remained in the job and was prosecuted, he might lose 
his retirement. He told an investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
on April 12, 2007, that the postal inspectors brought him to the post office where he was 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 49-50; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 33, 50-51; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1-4, 9. 
 
3 Tr. at 34-35, 51-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 5, 9. 
 
 
3 
 
questioned. Applicant had been drinking the day of the incident. His personal items 
were removed from his locker; he was taken home; and he was told he would be 
removed from his position. He later told the investigator that he was terminated from his 
position. A signed statement was not provided but the interview was memorialized in a 
report of investigation (ROI). DOHA sent Applicant a copy of the ROI in an interrogatory 
and asked him if the ROI accurately reflected the information he provided to the 
investigator on the day he was interviewed. He was provided the opportunity to explain 
why the ROI was inaccurate and to add additional information regarding the matters 
discussed during the interview. He answered that the ROI was accurate with some 
minor modifications unrelated to his employment at the Postal Service.4 
 
 Applicant was a sporadic marijuana user during much of his life. He smoked 
marijuana in about March 2003, while he was on federal probation. He was drug-tested 
by the probation department and tested positive for marijuana. There is no evidence of 
any illegal drug use after March 2003.5 
 
 Applicant was arrested in July 2003, for his third DUI. He pled guilty to DWAI and 
was sentenced to six months in jail. In January 2004, his federal probation was revoked 
and he was sentenced to eight months incarceration. Between September 2004 and 
January 2005, Applicant participated in 24 hours of alcohol education classes, as 
directed by the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV).6 
 
 Applicant was arrested for his fourth DUI in November 2006. He pled guilty to 
DWAI and was sentenced to six months in jail. He was also required to perform 
community service.7 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
February 26, 2007. Question 22 of the SF 86 asked:  
 
 Has any of the following happened to you in the last 7 years?  
 
 1. Fired from a job.  
 2. Quit a job after being told you’d be fired.  
 3. Left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of misconduct.  
4. Left a job by mutual agreement following allegations of unsatisfactory 
performance.  
 5. Left a job for other reasons under unfavorable circumstances. 
 
Question 23f of the SF 86 asked, “In the last 7 years, have you been arrested for, 
charged with, or convicted of any offense(s) not listed in response to a, b, c, d, or e 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 38-43; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 8. 
 
5 Tr. at 36-37, 54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2. 
 
6 Tr. at 53-54; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1, 2, 6, 9. 
 
7 Tr. at 27-29, 46-47; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 7, 9. 
 
 
4 
 
above (Leave out traffic fines of less than $150 unless the violation was alcohol or drug 
related.)” Applicant answered “No” to both questions. In response to other questions, 
Applicant listed DWAI convictions in 2001 and 2003. He listed a conviction for 
“[p]ossession of mushrooms” in 1999, and he listed marijuana use on two occasions in 
March 2003. He did not list the mail fraud conviction, nor did he list his DUI arrest in 
November 2006. Applicant admitted that he intentionally did not list the mail theft 
conviction and the loss of his Postal Service job because he did not want his employer 
to know about the incidents.8 
 
 Applicant does not own a car. The DMV requires that any car he drives must 
have a breathalyzer installed, so that he cannot drink and drive. He has not had a valid 
driver’s license since his 2006 arrest. He was in a car accident in November 2007, while 
he had a revoked license. He testified that incident was the only time he has driven 
since the 2006 arrest. Applicant was working overseas for a period. He was arrested for 
the November 2007 incident when he returned to the United States in April 2008. He 
was convicted in October 2008, and sentenced to 15 days in jail. He stated that he 
continues to drink alcohol, but in moderation. He estimated his drinking at about a six 
pack of beer, or less, about once a week.9 
 
 Applicant has worked very hard at learning a new trade. He attended school and 
completed an apprenticeship in the trade. He is now a journeyman. Two of his 
supervisors wrote letters on his behalf. He is regarded as a valued employee whose 
attendance and tardiness record is impeccable. He is described as prompt, dependable, 
reliable, hardworking, and trustworthy. He is recommended for a security clearance.10 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common-sense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 37-38, 43-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
9 Tr. at 23-24; 28-32, 35, 55-56. Driving on a revoked license was not alleged as a basis for the 
denial of Applicant’s security clearance in the SOR and will not be used for disqualification purposes. It 
will be considered in assessing Applicant’s credibility; in the application of mitigating conditions; and in 
evaluating the “whole person.” 
10 Tr. at 47; AE A-G. 
 
 
5 
 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
 
6 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program. 
 
Applicant was arrested and convicted on numerous occasions. He violated the 
terms of his probation on more than one occasion. All of the above disqualifying 
conditions have been established. There is insufficient evidence to support the facts 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, as distinct from the conduct alleged in other allegations. SOR ¶ 1.f 
is concluded for Applicant.  
 
Two Criminal Conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant has a long criminal history. He intentionally provided false information 
on his SF 86 in February 26, 2007, which constituted a federal crime. His most recent 
conviction was in October 2008, for a November 2007 incident. His criminal acts cast 
doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 32(a) is not 
applicable. His education, job training, and good work record with his current employer 
are positive signs of rehabilitation. However, insufficient time has elapsed since his last 
criminal offense for a finding that he is successfully rehabilitated. AG ¶ 32(d) is partially 
applicable.  
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21:   
     
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 
 
7 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
Applicant has multiple alcohol-related arrests and convictions. AG ¶ 22(a) is 
applicable. SOR ¶¶ 2.b through 2.e allege that Applicant participated in an alcohol 
treatment program and alcohol education classes. That is mitigating evidence and does 
not raise a disqualifying condition. SOR ¶¶ 2.b through 2.e are concluded for Applicant. 
SOR ¶ 2.e alleges that Applicant “continues to consume alcohol.” Consuming alcohol, 
standing alone, does not raise a disqualifying condition. SOR ¶ 2.e is also concluded for 
Applicant. 
 
Three Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant’s last alcohol-related arrest was in November 2006. He has attended 
several court-ordered alcohol programs. He continues to drink alcohol, but indicated 
that he no longer drinks and drives and he only drinks in moderation. There is no 
favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical social 
worker. Based upon Applicant’s extensive history of substance abuse, there is 
insufficient time without an alcohol-related incident for a finding that Applicant has his 
alcohol use under control. None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  
 
 
 
8 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG ¶ 24:   
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medical direction.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 25. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant’s drug possession and use are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) 
as disqualifying conditions.  
 
Two Drug Involvement Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant has used illegal drugs in more than six years. 
Applicant has established an appropriate period of abstinence. AG ¶ 26(b) is applicable.  
 
 
 
9 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
Applicant intentionally falsified his SF 86 in February 2007. AG ¶ 16(a) is 
applicable as a disqualifying condition.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
 
10 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant discussed his federal arrest for mail theft and the loss of his job at the 
Postal Service when he was interviewed by an OPM investigator in April 2007. That 
does not constitute a prompt, good-faith effort to correct the falsification before being 
confronted with the facts. While he receives credit for being honest with the investigator, 
it is insufficient to establish a mitigating condition. I find that no mitigating conditions are 
applicable.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s hard work 
at becoming certified as a journeyman in his trade. I also considered the very favorable 
comments about his job performance and character from his supervisors. However, 
Applicant has a long history of substance abuse and criminal offenses. He has at least 
four alcohol-related driving convictions. He lost his longtime job with the Postal Service 
because he stole mail. He lied on his SF 86. I continue to have serious doubts about his 
judgment, honesty, and trustworthiness.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated Drug Involvement concerns; but he has not mitigated 
Criminal Conduct, Alcohol Consumption, and Personal Conduct security concerns. 
 
 
11 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.g-1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.b-2.f:  For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 3, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.b:  For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 4, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 4.a-4.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
    
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
