DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February1
20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative
guidelines (RAG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department
of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
XXXXXXXX, Xxxxxx Xxxxxx, Xxx )       ISCR Case No. 08-08663
SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: John F. Mardula, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
On 10 December 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guideline F.  Applicant answered the SOR 19 January 2009, requesting a hearing.1
DOHA assigned the case to me 17 February 2009, and I convened a hearing 19 March
2009. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 27 March 2009.
 
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant denied the SOR allegations, except for 1.a., 1.f., and 1.g. He is a 45-
year-old managing consultant employed by a defense contractor since March 2007. He
has not previously held a clearance.
The SOR originally alleged, and government exhibits confirmed, eight delinquent
debts totaling just nearly $68,000. However, record evidence revealed that the debt at
1.b. was a duplicate of 1.h. and the debt at 1.e. was a duplicate of 1.f. Consequently, I
find 1.e. and 1.h for Applicant, and the resulting debt to be discussed is six debts
totaling over $43,000. Applicant initially admitted three debts totaling over $12,000. He
now admits four debts totaling nearly $30,000. Except for his denial of 1.d.—which he
claims is not his account—his initial denials were based on his disputing the amount
owed, not disputing that he owed money to the listed creditor.
Applicant had no financial problems until he was laid off from his job in May
2002. He was one of the last employees hired by his company, and thus was one of the
first let go when the company had a reduction in force. He was making about $73,000
per year at the time. He remained unemployed until December 2005 when he moved to
another state to obtain employment. His new job paid about $85,000 per year. His
current job pays about $112,000 per year, plus an anticipated bonus.
Applicant’s finances collapsed while he was unemployed. He sold his house,
voluntarily surrendered his car, and was homeless for a few days until he moved in with
his mother. He fell behind in his child support payments, incurred liens for back taxes,
and fell delinquent on numerous credit accounts.
When he regained employment, Applicant first caught up with his child support
payments. He then paid his back taxes. Finally, he paid his mother back for his share of
housing expenses. He also began working with a credit counselor back in his home
state. The counselor helped Applicant establish a budget and devise a plan for dealing
with his delinquent debts. The first phase of the plan was for Applicant to pay creditors
to whom he owed less than $1,000. Record evidence shows that Applicant paid a
number of such debts in early 2007, and Applicant’s credit reports reflect an improving
trend with his finances.
Except for the debt at 1.a., the debts alleged in the SOR are all over $1,000.
Record evidence shows Applicant paid the debt at 1.a. three days before the hearing
(A.E. E). Applicant’s plan for the remainder of the debts alleged in the SOR was to
consolidate them into a single payment plan through his credit counselor. However,
Applicant had some difficulty identifying the correct creditor or successor-in-interest on
some accounts. He was also unwilling to establish a payment plan with a creditor until
he could get a firm number on the balance owed. But because of interest charges, he
discovered that the balance given to him in telephone conversations with the creditor
was not the same balance listed when the creditor sent settlement proposals.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).2
3
Consequently, at hearing, Applicant did not have a plan for addressing his remaining
debts, but more like a plan for a plan.
Applicant’s post-hearing submission (A.E. F) contains a current budget and a
proposed repayment plan that would pay his acknowledged creditors in full by April
2011 (beginning in April 2009). The proposed repayment plan assumes both that the
creditors will agree to the proposed monthly payment and that the creditors will waive
further interest and fees. Applicant proffers that the proposed schedule is a conservative
one; that he may be able to accelerate payments over the two years repayment period.
Applicant’s character references, both of whom have known him many years,
consider him honest and trustworthy and recommend him for his clearance. The record
contains no work references.
Policies
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (RAG) list factors to be considered in
evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for access to classified information. Administrative
Judges must assess both disqualifying and mitigating conditions under each issue fairly
raised by the facts and circumstances presented. Each decision must also reflect a fair
and impartial commonsense consideration of the factors listed in RAG ¶ 2(a). The
presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative for or
against Applicant. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a
case can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing the
grant or denial of access to classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and
the evidence as a whole, the relevant, applicable, adjudicative guideline is Guideline F
(Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an Applicant’s security clearance. The government
must prove, by something less than a preponderance of the evidence, controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. If it does so, it establishes a prima facie case against access
to classified information. Applicant must then refute, extenuate, or mitigate the
government’s case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the Applicant
bears a heavy burden of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.2
I have excluded the disputed debt at 1.d. from my analysis despite the fact that multiple credit reports show3
it to be Applicant’s individual account and he has documented neither a potential basis for disputing the
account nor success in getting it removed from his credit report.
¶ 19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.4
¶ 20.(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that5
it is  unlikely to recur .
¶ 20.(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and6
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.
¶ 20.(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications7
that the problem is being resolved or is under control.
¶ 20.(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.8
4
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not fully mitigate the security concerns. While Applicant documented
significant efforts to rehabilitate his finances since regaining employment in December
2005, he still did not have a plan in place to address over $30,000  in delinquent debt.3 4
Without question, Applicant’s significant period of unemployment caused his financial
difficulties. But after several years of progress with his delinquent debts, he seems to
have stalled without justification or credible explanation.
Applicant partially satisfies several of the mitigating factors for financial concerns,
but not enough to overcome the negative inferences of those problems. His financial
difficulties are both recent and multiple.  The debts were almost entirely due to5
circumstances beyond his control, and while he initially acted responsibly in addressing
his debts, his follow through on his remaining debts has been inadequate.   Although,6
he sought credit counseling and made significant initial progress on his debts, too much
remains unsettled to conclude he has brought the problem under control.  He has7
outlined a plan that would address the remaining debts in a reasonable period of time,
but without agreement by the creditors, and an established track record of payments, it
remains to be seen if Applicant will put his financial problems behind him. He has the
means, but does he have the will. Put another way, there is nothing in Applicant’s post-
hearing submission that could not have been accomplished long before the SOR was
issued. Further, the record reflects a good-faith effort to satisfy the debts that were not
alleged in the SOR, but only belated efforts on the debts that were alleged.  I conclude8
Guideline F against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a-d: Against Applicant
5
Subparagraph e: For Applicant
Subparagraph f-g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph h: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
