                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-08222 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to drug involvement and 
personal conduct. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on February 13, 2008. On March 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guidelines H (drug involvement) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 31, 2009. DOHA received the 
response on April 3, 2009, and Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
11, 2009. On May 13, 2009, the case was assigned to me. On May 14, 2009, DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing for June 5, 2009.  The hearing was 
held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were received 
without objection. Applicant did not offer any exhibits at his hearing, but did testify on his 
own behalf. I held the record open until June 19, 2009 to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE A through C, 
which were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
June 18, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. His admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact. Applicant testified on his own behalf and I found his testimony to be 
credible.  
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old senior secure systems engineer, who has been 
employed by a defense contractor since August 2008. His current employer acquired 
the intellectual property and staff of his previous employer where he had been 
employed since August 2001. GE 1, Tr. 20-21. He is pursuing a security clearance to 
enhance his flexibility to work on different projects within his company, and to 
“contribute and serve my country.” Tr. 12, 21-26.  
 
Applicant graduated from a prestigious high school in June 1981, and went on to 
attend an equally prestigious university for one semester in the fall of 1981. He did not 
pursue formal education beyond his one semester of college and described himself as 
“essentially self-educated.” Tr. 16-17. He learned his trade by “exploring the system and 
the functionality and learning about it by practicing.” Tr. 17. He also worked as a 
research associate for seven years in the computer science department of the university 
he attended for one semester. Tr. 17. 
 
Applicant is not married, but has been involved in an ongoing 22-year 
relationship with the same woman, who is the mother of their two-year-old daughter. He 
describes this woman as his “partner,” who is a university anthropology professor. Tr. 
15-16, 18.  
 
Applicant has never been charged with any felony, firearms, or explosives 
offense. He has not been charged with any minor or misdemeanor-type, non-traffic-
related offenses in the last seven years. In the last seven years, he has not had any 
debts delinquent over 180 days, bankruptcy petitions, unpaid judgments, or unpaid 
liens. GE 1. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 The underlying basis of Applicant’s past drug involvement is derived from his 
self-disclosure and is not disputed. Summarized, his past drug use consists of: (1) from 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
February 2001 to December 2007, he used marijuana approximately 20 to 30 times; (2) 
in August 2001, he used ecstasy once; (3) until approximately August 1992, he used 
LSD five times; (4) and until approximately July 1997, he used mushrooms 
approximately four times. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.) Applicant’s use of drugs 
essentially ended in the mid-1990s except for his most recent use of marijuana in 
December 2007. Tr. 27-29. He credibly and fully disclosed the surrounding 
circumstances of past drug use. 
 
 Except for one occasion since his partner became pregnant with their daughter, 
Applicant has not used any form of drugs, “although opportunities have presented 
themselves in the 18 months since that event.” Tr. 28-29. Even before Applicant’s 
partner became pregnant, his interest in using drugs diminished: 
 
And, as I have grown older, it’s not something that is appealing or 
interesting for me as it was when I was younger. And, in the last three 
years, essentially, since the impending birth of my daughter, I would say 
that I, you know, certainly during the period that my partner was pregnant, 
you know, I also – and she was, you know, taking off from drinking, and 
smoking, and things like that, as well, I followed. And, at that point, more 
or less, you know, the illegal drug usage which, at that point, was just 
marijuana, was also something that I essentially, no longer did. Tr. 29-30. 
 
Additionally, to comply with the requirements of a holding a security clearance, 
Applicant stated he does not now use drugs nor does he intend to use drugs in the 
future. Tr. 31-32. Since December 2007, he has declined all opportunities to smoke 
marijuana or use illegal drugs, and “ha[s] no trouble doing so.” Tr. 32.  
 
After his hearing, Applicant submitted a signed, sworn statement of intent, dated 
June 5, 2009, to continue abstaining from any drug abuse or other illegal use of drugs 
both presently and in the future, with the understanding that any drug violation will result 
in the automatic revocation of clearance. AE A. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
The SOR cross-alleged his past drug use under Guideline E (personal conduct). 
(SOR ¶ 2.a.) SOR ¶ 2.b. alleged that Applicant intentionally failed to register for the 
Selective Service. Applicant stated his 18th birthday was in December 1981, and it was 
around that time he stopped attending his university. He added: 
 
And, it was a fairly emotional time for me. The college experience had not 
gone well. And, I was not sure what direction I wanted to take with my life. 
At the time, I was also unhappy with the direction that the United States 
Government was going in. I was a much younger and, I would say, more 
naïve individual 27 years ago than I am now. 
 
It was a choice that I made not to register, based on my feelings at the 
time. As I mentioned in my response, from most of my friends from high 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
school and college, the decision to register or not register was the one 
where, quite effectively, if they didn’t, they would not be eligible for any 
financial aid as students. As I was no longer a formal student, that was not 
an issue that came up for me. 
 
And, as a result, I would say that, you know, after having made this choice 
at age of 18, it was something that I didn’t even think about or reflect upon 
at all after the age of 19, as my life continued. It wasn’t something that I 
really thought about. 
 
As I got older and, you know, my opinions on perhaps what the 
appropriate choice would have been, you know, it reached the – I reached 
an age, I believe at 25, where they won’t even accept your registration any 
more, as you’re no longer eligible, within the eligible age. So, there was 
really no opportunity or possibility of rectifying that. 
 
In some ways, I would say that, to some small degree, the process of 
applying for the security clearance is some way, you know, for me, 
personally, it doesn’t, as I said, provide a significant and meaningful 
benefit, but it does increase my ability to serve my country. And so, in 
some way, were I to be approved for a security clearance, that would 
allow me to, in some way, rectify that choice that I made as a young man. 
Tr. 37-38. 
 
Applicant’s employer, co-workers, and partner are aware of the underlying basis 
of the security concerns in the SOR. Tr. 47-48. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s mother is deceased, and his father is suffering from Alzheimer’s 
disease and is living in an assisted living facility. Tr. 45. In addition to his full-time job, 
and his responsibilities to his family, Applicant also assists his brother in managing the 
ownership of a family-owned building in a major metropolitan area. Tr. 45-46. 
 
A close friend of Applicant’s father, who has known Applicant since 1997, 
submitted a reference letter on his behalf. She observed him “grow and evolve into the 
capable and mature man he is now.” She noted that she along with Applicant and his 
brother are caring for his father. She also stated Applicant is a very trustworthy and 
responsible person, and recommended him for a security clearance. AE B. 
 
Two work-related employees of Applicant’s company submitted reference letters. 
The first was a senior secure systems engineer, and the second was a principle secure 
systems engineer. They collectively noted Applicant’s diligence as an employee and his 
future potential in the defense industry. They spoke very highly of him as an employee 
and of his moral character. They strongly recommend him for a security clearance. AE 
C, AE D.  
 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines H (drug involvement) and E (personal conduct) with 
respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The government established its case under Guideline H through Applicant’s 
admissions and the evidence presented. He fully disclosed his drug abuse in his 
Response to SOR and at his hearing.  
 
 A review of the evidence supports application of two drug involvement 
disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 25(a): “any drug abuse (see above definition);”1 and AG ¶ 
25(c) “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, 
sale, or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia.” 
Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find application of 
drug involvement mitigating conditions AG ¶ 26(a) “the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;” and AG ¶ 26(b): “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation form drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of 
abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for 
any violation.”  
 
1 AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medication direction. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), there are no “bright line” rules for determining when 
conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the record within the parameters set by the Directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR 
Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana 
occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence 
shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” 
then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time demonstrates 
“changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or 
rehabilitation.”2 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) applies. Applicant’s last drug use was December 2007, about 18 
months before his hearing. His overall illegal drug use occurred primarily in his early 
years and tapered off as he matured, and ceased altogether when he became a father. 
The absence of evidence of more recent or extensive drug use, and his promise not to 
use illegal drugs in the future eliminates doubts about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment with respect to abstaining from illegal drug use.3   
   
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. With maturity and new found responsibilities of fatherhood, he 
has broken or reduced the prevalence of his patterns of drug abuse, and he has 
 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle change and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board 
stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
3In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an 
unfavorable security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use 
was not mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
changed his own life with respect to illegal drug use. He has abstained from drug abuse 
for about 18 months and has no problem in doing so. AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies.  
 
His reference letters and statements from senior company representatives show 
Applicant’s work behavior has not been indicative of his having a drug problem. He is 
viewed as a valuable employee, who is reliable, dependable, and professional. His 
value to the defense industry is supported by senior company officials, who know him 
personally and professionally, and by his own credible testimony and evidence 
presented. At his hearing, Applicant acknowledged that future drug abuse is 
incompatible with his future career and family plans, and manifested a steadfast 
commitment to continue lifestyle changes consistent with total abstinence of marijuana 
or any other drugs.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
With respect to the personal conduct concerns involving Applicant’s past drug 
abuse and failure to register for the Selective Service, the pertinent disqualifying 
conditions are AG ¶ 16(d)(3), a pattern of rule violations and AG ¶ 16(e)(1), which 
states, “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in 
activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community 
standing.” Certainly, past drug abuse and failure to register for the Selective Service 
violated the law in our society, and is conduct a person might wish to conceal, as it 
adversely affects a person’s professional and community standing. 
 
The mitigating condition outlined in AG ¶ 17(e), “the individual has taken positive 
steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress” 
applies to Applicant’s past drug abuse and failure to register for the Selective Service. 
Applicant’s employer, government representatives, friends and family are well aware of 
his past. Applicant has taken the positive step of disclosure, eliminating any vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation or duress. I do not believe Applicant would compromise 
national security to avoid public disclosure of these past missteps. Any personal 
conduct security concerns, pertaining to past drug abuse and failure to register for the 
Selective Service, are mitigated.   
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Whole Person Concept 
  
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
Applicant has been and is willing to maintain conduct expected of one entrusted 
with a security clearance. His employer, friends, and family support him. He has a 
history of stable employment and a strong work ethic. This support and self-
introspection should ensure his continued success. Applicant demonstrated the correct 
attitude and commitment to remaining drug free. Considering his demeanor and 
testimony, I believe Applicant has learned from his mistakes, and his questionable 
behavior is unlikely to recur. In sum, I find Applicant has presented sufficient evidence 
of rehabilitation.  
 
In short, Applicant is living a lifestyle consistent with someone who wishes to 
remain drug free. He remains committed to his life partner and is embracing the 
responsibilities and joy of fatherhood, and is a responsible and contributing member of 
society.  
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the security concerns raised. Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable clearance decision. I take this position based on the law, as set forth 
in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the 
whole person factors”4 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors 
under the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the 
Guidelines. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified 
information.  
 
 
 
 
4See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
   Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
         Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.b.  For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
