  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08760 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had 13 debts that totaled in excess of $24,000. Payments on his 
mortgage were also $17,000 delinquent. He paid two debts totaling $750 and included 
another debt in a repayment plan. Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s 
security concerns under financial considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
  
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
  
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on March 2, 2008, detailing security concerns about his 
finances. 
  
 On March 23, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated May 12, 2009. The FORM contained ten 
attachments. On May 19, 2009, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with 
notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Responses to the FORM are due 30 days after receipt of the FORM. Applicant’s 
response was due on June 18, 2009. As of July 31, 2009, no response had been 
received. On August 6, 2009, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the factual allegations related to the 
mortgage debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.n. He admitted the remaining debts. Applicant’s 
admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. After a thorough review of 
the record, pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 40 years and has worked for a defense contractor in procurements 
since December 2007, and is seeking to obtain security clearance.  
 
 In June 2008, Applicant entered into an agreement with a company to assist in 
paying his delinquent debts. He agreed to pay a $249 fee plus make monthly deposits 
of $156. Included in the monthly installment fee is a $49 maintenance fee. Applicant 
also agreed that twenty-five percent of the difference between the amount demanded by 
a creditor and the amount a creditor agreed to take in settlement will be paid to the 
company as an additional settlement fee. (Item 8, page I 19) If Applicant pays the entire 
amount of the debt, the company will receive five percent of the amount paid as a fee. 
(Item 8, page I 19)  
 
Applicant acknowledged that any amount between what he originally owed on a 
debt and the amount the debt settles for will be reported to the IRS as ordinary income. 
(Item 8, page I 18) Only one (SOR ¶ 1.i, $2,125) of the 14 SOR debts is included in the 
agreement. (Item 8, page I 21) On June 16, 2008, he paid the company $253.95 and 
made $160 payments on October 1, 2008, October 17, 2008, and November 17, 2008. 
(Item 8, pages I 23 and I 26) There is no documentation to establish that payment has 
been made on any debt or payment made to the company after November 2008. 
 
 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
  
3 
 
 
In December 2008, Applicant answered written interrogatories related to his 
finances. (Item 8) He indicated the $1,700 debt (SOR ¶ 1.k), $1,508 debt (SOR ¶ 1.g), 
$738 debt (SOR ¶ 1.j), and the $1,294 debt (SOR ¶ 1.l) were also included in the 
agreement. However, debts listed in the repayment agreement were not the names of 
the creditors listed in the SOR. (Item 8, page I 24) Applicant’s January 2009 credit 
bureau report (CBR) indicates these four accounts were transferred or sold. Applicant 
failed to establish they were sold to the creditors listed in his agreement with the debt 
company.  
 
In his response to interrogatories, Applicant disputed the amounts owed on three 
accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b, $3,500, 1.c., $1,862, 1.d, $10,765) with the same creditor. He 
stated that the debt management company was working with the creditor to resolve the 
matter. Applicant asserted the accounts were related to a failed business, for which he 
provided no additional information. (Item 8, page I 15) Applicant disputed charges 
added to the accounts after July 2007. Applicant failed to document which charges were 
incurred before notifying the creditor of the failed business and which occurred after July 
2007.  
 
Applicant asserted he consolidated accounts with the creditor listed in SOR ¶ 1.f. 
($506) He asserted this was a family business account with a consolidated balance of 
$23,875. (Item 8, page I 13) The debt was settled and paid in the amount of $4,701. 
(Item 8, page I 14) However, there is no evidence the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.k was part 
of the consolidation. The account numbers do not indicate a consolidation.  
 
Applicant paid the $280 telephone debt (SOR ¶ 1.a). (Item 8, pages I 9, I 10, I 
11) Applicant had two loans with a mortgage lender, a $256,000 conventional first real 
estate mortgage and a $57,571 second mortgage. (Item 8, page I 7) Applicant’s 
January 2009 CBR lists $16,199 past due on the first mortgage and $1,178 past due on 
the second mortgage. (Item 9, page C 8) Applicant provided a letter from his ex-wife 
which stated she was paying the mortgage and would, at some future date, refinance 
the mortgage and have Applicant’s name removed from the mortgage loan. There is no 
evidence the mortgage loan has been refinanced, nor is there evidence Applicant is not 
liable on these mortgages. Applicant asserts his wife is responsible for the $60 
telephone bill listed in SOR ¶ 1.e. 
 
The record fails to indicate when the divorce occurred. As of March 2008, when 
Applicant completed his Questionnaire for National Security Positions, Standard Form 
(SF) 86, he was still married. (Item 4, pages 9 and 10 of 14) He indicated he had been 
separated since June 2007. (Item 4, page 10 of 14) Under additional comments in his 
SF 86, he referrs to his “ex-wife” as sole owner of the home. (item 4, page 7 of 8) 
 
The FORM put Applicant on notice that he had failed to provide proof regarding a 
number of his debts or assertions. Additionally, he was notified that his repayment plan 
did not include a number of the SOR debts. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. 
Therefore, no additional documentation was received related to his debts.  
  
4 
 
 
A summary of the 14 SOR debts and their current status follows:  
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Account placed for 
collection for a telephone 
company.  
$244 Paid. (Item 8, page I 10) 
b Credit card account. The 
same creditor is listed in 
SOR ¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d.  
$3,500 
 
Unpaid. Applicant is disputing the 
amount owed. (Item 8, page I 15) 
c Credit card account. $1,862 Unpaid. See SOR ¶ 1.b. 
d Credit card account. $10,765 Unpaid. See SOR ¶ 1.b. 
e Telephone bill. $60 Unpaid. Applicant asserts his ex-wife is 
responsible for this debt.  
f Credit card account. $506 Settled. Applicant consolidated $23,875 
of debt with this credit and settled it for 
$4,701. (Item 8, pages I 13, I 14) 
g Credit card debt. 
 
$1,694 Unpaid. Applicant asserts it is part of his 
debt agreement. 
h Credit card debt. $600 Unpaid. 
i Jewelry store account.  
 
$2,125 Included in debt agreement. (Item 8, 
page I 21) 
j Credit card debt. $807 Unpaid. Applicant asserts it is part of his 
debt agreement. 
k Debt. $1,700 Unpaid. Applicant asserts it is part of his 
debt agreement. 
l Department store credit 
card account.  
$1,294 
 
Unpaid. Applicant asserts it is part of his 
debt agreement. 
m medical service debt.  $171 Unpaid. Applicant stated he was 
unaware of this account and would look 
into it. (Item 8, page I 6) 
n Mortgage debt was 
denied by Applicant.  
$256,000 Past due. As of January 2009, $17,377 
was past due. (Item 9, page C 8) 
 Total debt listed in SOR $281,328 $25,328 excluding the mortgage. 
 
 
 
  
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
  
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns 
relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. He has 11 unpaid debts totaling 
approximately $24,500. Additionally, as of January 2009, his first and second 
mortgages were more than $17,000 past due. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
7 
 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; or 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His 
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, and they occurred under 
circumstances likely to recur. He failed to demonstrate that his debts were largely due to 
circumstances beyond his control, or that he has acted responsibly in addressing his 
debts. Further, he has not sought credit counseling or otherwise brought the problem 
under control as his circumstances permitted.  
Applicant asserts five SOR debts are included in a debt payment agreement, but 
only one (SOR 1.i) is listed in the creditor’s list. The other four accounts have been sold 
or transferred and might be the accounts listed in the creditor’s list, but Applicant failed 
to document they are the same debts. Applicant failed to show any payments to the 
plan after November 2008.  
 
 Applicant states his ex-wife is owner of the home and asserts she is responsible 
for the mortgages. The fact Applicant may have relinquished ownership in the home 
does not have any legal effect on his obligation to repay the mortgage. Applicant’s ex-
wife submitted a letter stating she intended to refinance the mortgage notes and have 
Applicant removed from the loans. Such an agreement may be binding on Applicant and 
his wife, but it has no binding effect on the creditor.  
 
At some future time, the mortgages may be refinanced and Applicant relieved of 
liability. The creditor would have to agree to the release. The creditor is unlikely to 
release Applicant from liability while the mortgages remain more than $17,000 past due.  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because the debts are numerous and remain unpaid. 
Applicant has failed to provide sufficient documentation to establish that AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies. Applicant mentioned a family business which failed in 2007 and indicated he 
had been separated since June 2007. These are normally conditions beyond a person’s 
control. However, he failed to provide any documentation as to why the business failed 
or the impact of the failure on his finances. Additionally, he failed to establish how his 
finances were impacted by his separation.  
 
  
8 
 
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply because Applicant has not received financial 
counseling, nor is there an indication his financial problems are under control. 
 
AG & 20(d), a good-faith effort to repay creditors, applies to two debts he paid 
(SOR ¶ 1.a and ¶ 1.f). This good-faith effort also applies to the jewelry account listed in 
SOR ¶ 1.i, which is included in the debt repayment agreement. However, Applicant 
failed to document that the four other SOR debts he asserts are part of the debt 
agreement are included in that agreement. There is no documentation establishing that 
the four creditors listed in the SOR are part of the debt repayment agreement.  
 
Additionally, Applicant has failed to establish that any of his creditors have 
received payment under this debt repayment agreement. He entered into this 
agreement and paid the company more than $700. However, there is no showing that 
any creditor received payment pursuant to the agreement. Nor has Applicant 
established he is still making payments to the plan. Other than the three debts 
previously addressed, Applicant has not established he has paid, is making payments 
on, or is no longer liable on the remaining 11 debts. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Because Applicant chose to have this matter handled administratively, I am 
unable to evaluate his demeanor or form a positive determination as to his truthfulness. 
From the record, I am unable to find Applicant was sincere, open, and honest. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances available in the record of this case. Applicant is 40 years old and should 
be sufficiently mature to make prudent decisions about his finances. Applicant has 
numerous debts and has only paid two. He gave up ownership in the home and asserts 
  
9 
 
 
his ex-wife is responsible for the mortgages on that property. The first and second 
mortgages are more than $17,000 past due. His mortgage lender is not bound by the 
arrangement between Applicant and his ex-wife.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b—1.e:  Against Applicant    
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g and 1.h:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j—1.n:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
