                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-08711 
SSN: ----------------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Thomas Coale, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 28, 2008, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On February 9, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR in writing. Applicant did not date the answer.  He 
submitted his answer from his assignment in a foreign country.  Applicant requested his 
case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
 
 
 
 
 
2
On May 26, 2009, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written case.  
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the Applicant. 
He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.  Applicant received the file on July 1, 2009.  Applicant filed a 
Response to the FORM on July 1, 2009, within the 30 day time allowed that would have 
expired on July 31, 2009. I received the case assignment on July 21, 2009.  Based 
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his undated Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in 
&& 1.a to 1.e. He denies the factual allegations in ¶ ¶ 1.f to 1.o of the SOR, with 
explanations.   
 
Applicant is 44 years old, divorced in 1993, has two children, and works for a 
defense contractor. He has worked for the same employer since March 2008. He earns 
more than $200,000 annually, with a gross monthly income of $16,324, and a net 
monthly income of $6,669. Applicant is working in a foreign country until January 2010. 
(Items 4, 7) 
 
Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 2001. He was discharged in 
bankruptcy in September 2001. Subsequent to the bankruptcy discharge, Applicant 
incurred other delinquent debt. (Items 4 to 7) 
 
Applicant has 14 delinquent debts totaling $58,376. He admits $18,599 and 
denies $39,787 of the debts. (Items 4 to 7) 
 
1. and 2. Applicant owes two education loans for college courses he took in 2005 
and 2006 (SOR subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c). The loans total $13,438. As of March 
2009, Applicant owed $11,171.97 after making $5,000 in payments at the rate of $1,000 
monthly. Applicant in his Response to the FORM states his payments are current and 
the loans are in rehabilitation status. The balance owed is $8,299.80. The November 
2008 credit report lists these debts under “closed accounts.” These debts are resolved 
by installment payments. (Items 3-7, Response) 
 
3. Applicant owes $5,161 on a credit card debt (SOR subparagraph 1.d). This 
debt was resolved with a settlement amount. The debt was owed on an automobile loan 
for which Applicant did not make all his payments. The car was repossessed. The 
account was charged off by the creditor after the settlement was made. According to the 
credit report of November 2008 submitted by Applicant, the account is resolved. (Items 
3-7) 
 
4. Applicant owes unpaid child support payments in the amount of $34,249 (SOR 
subparagraph 1.e).  Applicant had his arrearage payments increased in March 2008 to 
 
 
 
 
 
3
$2,700 monthly to reduce the amount owed for the past child support. In the 16 months 
since that arrangement started, Applicant would have paid $43,200, more than enough 
money to resolve that debt. The November 2008 credit report shows a zero balance 
owing on his child support. The November 2008 credit report lists these debts under 
“closed accounts.”  The debt is resolved. (Items 3 to 7, Response) 
 
5. Applicant owed $1,907 to a collector (SOR subparagraph 1.f). It has been 
transferred to another collector. Applicant intends to make two payments. He submitted 
a document dated March 2009 that shows the debt was paid. The account numbers on 
the document and in the April 2008 credit reports for this account are the same. The 
debt is resolved by a settlement on March 2, 2009. (Items 3 to 7) 
 
6. Applicant paid the dental bill listed in the SOR at subparagraph 1.g for $50.  It 
was paid on March 27, 2009. The creditor letter states the debt was paid in full. (Items 3 
to 7) 
 
7. Applicant owes $386 on a credit card (SOR subparagraph 1.h). He paid this 
debt in two installments. The first payment was $231.43 paid on August 20, 2008, plus a 
$5.00 charge for payment by telephone. The second payment was made on November 
4, 2008, in the amount of $155.76, plus a $5.00 telephone service charge. Applicant 
submitted extracts from his checking account statement verifying the payments. This 
debt is resolved by payment. (Items 3-7) 
 
8. Applicant owes $776 on a cellular telephone debt (SOR subparagraph 1.i).  
This debt has been owed since February 2002, which is the oldest delinquent debt 
shown on Applicant’s credit reports. Applicant claims in all the documents he submitted 
that the debt was paid, but he does not have proof of payment. This debt does not 
appear on Applicant’s November 2008 credit report, but did appear on his April and 
September 2008 credit reports. The status of the debt is unclear, but may have been 
resolved by payment because it does not appear on the latest credit report available. 
(Items 3-7) 
 
9. Applicant owes $139 on a satellite television account (SOR subparagraph 1.j).  
This account has been owed since May 2003. This debt appears on the April 2008 
credit report, but not the September and November 2008 credit report. Applicant denies 
owing this money to this creditor. The debt is unresolved because of its unknown status. 
(Items 3-7) 
 
 10. Applicant owes $964 to a collector on a bank credit card (SOR subparagraph 
1.k). The debt arose originally from a prepaid credit card Applicant obtained after his 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. This debt was paid in the amount of $736.70 on July 9, 2008.  
Applicant submitted a letter from the collector verifying the payment. This debt was 
resolved by payment. (Items 3 to 7) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
11. Applicant owes a storage company $58 for fees (SOR subparagraph 1.l).  
The debt appears on the April 2008 credit report, and not on the two subsequent credit 
reports. Applicant claims his former wife incurred the storage charges, and he is not 
obligated to pay the charges. His Answer contends the creditor has no record of his 
debt. The debt remains unresolved because of the absence of any proof of payment or 
non-obligation by Applicant. (Items 3 to 7)  
 
12. Applicant owes $775 to a collector (SOR subparagraph 1.m). This account 
appears on the April 2008 credit report, but not on the two subsequent reports 
contained in the FORM. Applicant denies responsibility for the debt, which originated in 
2007. He claims the original creditor was “elusive,” and they could not confirm any 
information on their system about him. The debt remains unresolved because of 
Applicant’s lack of information about it.  Applicant has not submitted any documents 
showing he disputed the debt in writing. (Items 3 to 7) 
 
13. Applicant owes an insurance company $148 (SOR subparagraph 1.n).  
Applicant claims to have contacted the company, and it has no record of any debt.  He 
stated he has insurance with the company at the present time. This debt appears on the 
April 2008 credit report, but not the two subsequent reports. Applicant had no copies of 
correspondence with this creditor to show he contacted them, or that he asked them to 
remove the debt from his credit reports. He did not submit correspondence showing he 
asked the three credit agencies to remove this debt, or that he filed a dispute with the 
agencies. This debt remains unresolved. (Items 3 to 7) 
 
14. The final delinquent debt listed in the SOR at subparagraph 1.o is $335 owed 
to another cellular telephone company. This debt was paid in full on July 2, 2008.  
Applicant submitted a letter from the collector verifying the debt was paid. This debt is 
resolved by payment. (Items 3 to 7) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
 
 
 
5
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns.  From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the 
facts found in this case: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially 
disqualifying; and,   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated $58,376 in delinquent debt from 2002 to the present time 
that remains unpaid.  Applicant had 14 delinquent debts, including past child support 
and an unpaid debt on a repossessed car.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties.  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and, 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
Of these six conditions, only one is applicable. AG ¶ 20 (d) provides that if a 
person starts a good-faith effort to repay or resolve in some manner his delinquent 
debts, then the security concern can be mitigated. Applicant, even though he is living 
and working overseas, took the initiative to investigate and repay nine of his delinquent 
 
 
 
 
 
7
debts.  He is able to make payments, including $2,700 monthly for the purposes of 
paying past due child support, because he is now receiving a large salary for his work.   
  
There are only five debts which may be unresolved from the original 14 debts.  
Applicant claims they are paid, or they do not appear on the records of the creditors 
listed in the three credit reports in the file. Those debts are set forth in SOR 
subparagraphs 1.i, 1.j, 1.l, 1.m, and 1.n.  The amount owed on these debts is $1,896.  
This amount is miniscule, and could be resolved definitively by Applicant with further 
diligent work when he returns from his foreign assignment.  Some of these debts do not 
appear on the latest credit report, such as the $776 contained in SOR subparagraph 1.i.  
If the debt is paid, then Applicant only owes $1,120 on the remaining four debts. If what 
the creditors told him is true, then he would not owe any of these five debts.  If the debts 
continue to appear on his credit reports, he could dispute them with the credit reporting 
agencies and possibly have them removed from his credit reports. Or, Applicant could 
pay the debts in one month from his salary, thereby removing them from his credit 
record.  His problem may be that if the creditors truly have no record of any debt, he 
might not be able to get them to accept the payments. Nonetheless, Applicant has 
resolved the larger debts.  It is likely he will resolve these five minor debts even before 
he returns to the United States. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recentcy of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. As an adult, he has worked diligently and consistently to repay or 
resolve in some way his delinquent debts. The oldest debt started in 2002, and that debt 
may have been paid. He changed his behavior and resolved these debts. There is no 
 
 
 
 
 
8
potential for coercion because the debts remaining unresolved amount to less than 
$2,000. With his large salary, there is no likelihood of recurrence of his previous 
spending pattern. Applicant now has a steady and well-paying job, and can pay his 
debts as he incurs them. Applicant accepted responsibility for his debts and paid them. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or substantial doubts 
as to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  I conclude the “whole person” concept for Applicant.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a to 1.o:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
