 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-06982 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tom Coale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines J (Criminal 
Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on January 21, 2008 
(Government Exhibit (GX) 4). On March 17, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its 
preliminary decision to deny his application, citing security concerns under Guidelines J 
and E (GX 1). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 2
 Applicant received the SOR on March 20, 2009; answered it on March 31, 2009; 
and requested determination on the record without a hearing. DOHA received his 
response on April 3, 2009. Department Counsel submitted the government’s written 
case on April 28, 2009. On April 29, 2009, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the government’s 
evidence. Applicant received the FORM on May 5, 2009, but he did not respond. The 
case was assigned to me on August 12, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.e, and he denied the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.f and 2.a. His admissions are 
incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old senior staff software engineer for a federal contractor. 
He has worked for his current employer since May 2007. He is a college graduate. His 
security clearance application states he received a security clearance while working for 
a previous employer, a defense contractor (GX 4 at 28). The record does not reflect 
whether he currently holds a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant was married in August 1974. He and his wife have a 28-year-old 
daughter, a 26-year-old son, and a 20-year-old daughter.  
 
 Applicant admitted in his answer to the SOR that he was arrested for disorderly 
conduct in May 1990 and was fined. In a response to DOHA interrogatories in 
September 2008, Applicant explained that this incident arose as a result of an argument 
between his spouse and a neighbor about rock-throwing incidents involving their 
children (GX 8 at 3).  
 
Applicant also admitted he was arrested in September 1995 and charged with 
assault. He explained to a security investigator that this incident arose out of a domestic 
argument. While he was driving, his wife began punching him in the arm with her fist, 
and he accidently backhanded her in the face while trying to deflect the blows (GX 5 at 
3). 
 
Applicant admitted he was the subject of a domestic disturbance incident report 
in September 2005 and two domestic disturbance incident reports in September 2006. 
In response to DOHA interrogatories in September 2008, he explained that these 
incidents arose from arguments with his younger daughter. Both had undiagnosed 
bipolar disorder and would engage in loud arguments with occasional physical contact, 
causing Applicant’s wife to summon the police. Both Applicant and his daughter are 
receiving psychiatric care and responding well to medication (GX 6 at 2). His daughter 
no longer lives them (GX 6 at 3).  
 
 3
Court records reflect that Applicant was arrested in September 2007 after a 
domestic disturbance, and he was charged in December 2007 with criminal damage 
and disorderly conduct (GX 7). This incident occurred when Applicant intentionally 
broke his wife’s cell phone during an argument. Both Applicant and his wife were 
charged with disorderly conduct. Court records reflect that he pleaded guilty pursuant to 
a plea agreement (GX 8), and the finding of guilty based on his plea was deferred. He 
was placed on unsupervised probation for 24 months, ordered not to possess alcoholic 
beverages, and required to obtain 52 weeks of psychological and alcohol counseling 
(GX 9). His psychiatrist certified that he has been “compliant” with his treatment, is 
making progress, is more pleasant, and has maintained sobriety (GX 3 at 3). He will be 
on probation until January 25, 2010. 
 
 On his security clearance application, Applicant answered “no” to question 23f, 
asking about charges or arrests not covered elsewhere on the form (GX 4 at 26). He did 
not disclose his arrest in September 2007 and charges of criminal damage and 
disorderly conduct that were preferred in December 2007 (GX 7). In his answer to the 
SOR, he admitted he was notified by mail on December 19, 2007, that a complaint had 
been filed against him for the September 2007 incident and he was required to appear 
in court on January 25, 2008. He stated he answered “no” to the question because he 
thought he was not “charged” until he was arrested or appeared in court. When he was 
interviewed by a security investigator on March 11, 2008, he disclosed the details of the 
incident and the disposition of the charges. He told the investigator he did not disclose 
the incident on his security clearance application because he was never arrested and, 
at the time he submitted his application, he did not know if he would be charged (GX 5 
at 3). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 4
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges an arrest for disorderly conduct in May 1990 (SOR ¶ 1.a), an 
arrest for assault in September 1995 (SOR ¶ 1.b), three domestic disturbances in 2005 
and 2006 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e), and an arrest and charges of criminal damage and 
disorderly conduct in September 2007 that resulted in 24 months of unsupervised 
probation that will run through January 25, 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.f). It also alleges Applicant 
intentionally omitted the latest charges from his security clearance application (SOR ¶ 
2.a).  
 
 5
 The concern raised by criminal conduct is that it “creates doubt about a person's 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a 
person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” AG ¶ 30. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include “a single 
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” and “allegation or admission of criminal 
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, 
or convicted.” AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c). A disqualifying condition also may be raised if “the 
individual is currently on parole or probation.” AG ¶ 31(d). Applicant’s criminal record 
raises AG ¶¶ 31(a), (c), and (d), shifting the burden to him to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the government. See 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated if “so much time has 
elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 32(a). The neighborhood argument 
that occurred in May 1990 happened long ago. Applicant has not been involved in any 
similar incidents, and it is not likely to recur. The domestic violence in September 1995 
also happened long ago, but it is part of a pattern of recurring domestic violence that 
continued through September 2007. Now that Applicant’s younger daughter no longer 
lives at home, recurrence of violence with her is unlikely, but the evidence does not 
justify a conclusion that recurrence of the domestic violence with his wife is unlikely. He 
is still on probation for the latest incident, and it is too soon to determine whether he will 
adhere to the therapy to control his bipolar disorder. I conclude AG ¶ 32(a) is 
established for the May 1990 incident but not for the remaining incidents. 
 
 Security concerns based on criminal conduct also may be mitigated if “there is 
evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time 
without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” AG ¶ 
32(d). As noted above, too little time has passed since the latest criminal conduct, and 
Application is still on probation for that conduct. He has presented no evidence of his 
employment record or community involvement. The evidence from his psychiatrist 
contains no prognosis for the future. I conclude AG ¶ 32(d) is not established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant intentionally failed to disclose the arrest and charges 
related to his domestic violence incident in 2007 (SOR ¶ 2.a). The concern under this 
guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 6
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a). When a 
falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the government has the burden of 
proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove an applicant’s state of mind 
when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence 
as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning 
an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 
at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 Applicant’s explanation is that he did not know he had been charged, even 
though he was informed in writing that a complaint had been filed and he was required 
to appear in court to answer it. He is a mature, well-educated adult. He is not a 
neophyte regarding the criminal justice system. I find his explanation implausible and 
not credible. I am satisfied he knew he was pending charges but chose not to disclose 
it. I conclude AG ¶ 16(a) is raised. 
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). Although Applicant entered his guilty plea and was placed on 
probation four days after submitting his application, there is no evidence he attempted 
to correct his omission until he was confronted by a security investigator two months 
later and questioned about his failure to disclose the arrest and charges on his 
application. I conclude AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns based on personal conduct can be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). Applicant’s 
falsification of his application was serious because it tended to undermine the integrity 
of the security clearance process. It was recent, did not happen under unique 
circumstances, and casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I 
conclude AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns based on personal conduct also can be mitigated if “the 
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the 
behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or 
factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(d). During his security interview in March 2008 
and in his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the omission from his application, but 
 7
he has not acknowledged that it was intentional. He is receiving counseling from a 
psychiatrist, but the psychiatrist’s report, while generally favorable, stops short of a 
favorable prognosis. His behavior is constrained by the fact that he is still on probation. 
Too little time has passed to warrant a conclusion that his behavior is unlikely to recur. I 
conclude AG ¶ 17(d) is not established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines J and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant has a long history of domestic violence and disorderly conduct. As a 
condition of his ongoing probation, he is receiving treatment, but it is too soon to 
conclude that he is rehabilitated. His lack of candor on his security clearance application 
raises serious doubts about his reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines J and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on criminal conduct and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
 8
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J (Criminal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.f:    Against Applican 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
