 
 
1
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
          )  ISCR Case No. 08-07339  
                     ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude 
that Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
financial considerations. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
  
Applicant signed and submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF 86) on May 
30, 2007. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, 
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to 
 
 
2
                                                
make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
On February 24, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).2 In his Answer to the SOR, signed and notarized on March 31, 2009, 
Applicant admitted with explanation all five allegations. He also requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. 
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on April 29, 2009, and the case 
was assigned to me the following day. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on May 7, 
2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 27, 2009. 
 
During the hearing, the government offered four exhibits, marked as Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted. Applicant testified, did not offer 
exhibits, and presented the testimony of four witnesses. I held the record open to allow 
Applicant to submit documents. Applicant timely submitted nine documents. Department 
Counsel forwarded the documents, without objection, and I admitted them into the 
record as AE A through I.3 DOHA received the transcript on June 4, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the Statement 
of Reasons, and the record evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 60 years old, holds an associate’s degree in applied science and 
general education. He married in 1973, divorced in 2001, and has a 29-year-old son 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the 
President on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 
to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR 
was issued on or after September 1, 2006.  
 
3 Applicant's post-hearing submission contained nine items marked numerically. To avoid confusion with 
the government’s exhibits, I will identify the items as follows: AE A-Applicant's plan to pay debts; AE B 
and C-pay stubs for two weeks in December 2008 and two weeks in May 2009, respectively; AE D-
December 2007 letter re Department of Veterans Affairs benefit increase; AE E-1099-R forms for 2008 
retirement pay; AE F-Applicant's resume; AE G-receipts for bills paid in December 2008; AE H-list of 
checks paid June 2008 – June 2009; AE I-June 2009 letter re rental lease. 
 
 
3
                                                
who does not live with him. He is currently in a long-term relationship with a woman, but 
she does not contribute financially (GE 1; Tr. 27, 29-30, 74-75).  
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Army from 1973 to 1993 and reached the rank of 
Chief Warrant Officer (CW3). He held a security clearance during his service. He was 
employed as an information technology technician from 1995 to July 2000. At that point, 
Applicant started his own computer-services business in Puerto Rico. After September 
11, 2001, the Puerto Rican economy suffered, as did Applicant's business. He lost 
approximately $80,000 during the years he operated this business. He used credit cards 
and his pension account funds to pay his bills. After approximately three years, he 
closed the business4 and returned to the United States with about $30,000 to $35,000 
in debt. He held a series of short-term jobs between 2004 and 2007, most lasting one to 
four months. He had two periods of unemployment: one month in 2004, and a total of 
six months in 2005. Applicant testified that although he is highly employable, he is 
usually offered low salaries. At one point, he received unemployment compensation, 
just before he began his current position in November 2007 (GE 1, 2; AE F; Tr. 18-20, 
27-28, 42-44). 
 
During his periods of short-term employment and unemployment, Applicant was 
unable to earn enough money to pay his debts. He applied for personal loans several 
times so that he could consolidate the debts, but was rejected. He was unable to pay 
the amounts offered by creditors to settle some debts. He has been making payments 
on one bank credit card that is not alleged in the SOR, and he has paid the balance on 
another debt. However, as his delinquencies continued, the interest rates and balances 
owed increased. Applicant testified that some of the SOR debts are charged off on his 
credit bureau report. He is uncertain whether or not he still owes these debts (GE 3, 4; 
AE G, H; Tr. 21-22). He testified,  
 
…Now, to me, charge-off means that it’s cleared, okay, that they’ll 
take the loss on it for business purposes and write it off. 
 
They don’t -- they have never said that the payment had to be 
made again, so here the card shows as charged off.  Like [credit card 
company 1] and [credit card company 2], they were charged off as 
bad debt, so does that constitute a debt to me still?  
  
 I mean, if possible, I’ll pay them off, but it’s not going to be right 
away (Tr. 21). 
 
 
4 The evidence indicates a discrepancy in the dates Applicant was self-employed. GE 1 and GE 2 
indicate he closed the business in 2004. However, Applicant's resume (AE F) shows he was employed 
at a business with the same name until November 2006. 
 
 
4
                                                
Applicant also believes that if he waits one year, he will be able to arrange 
settlement agreements with the creditors, or the companies might charge off the debts: 
 
I’ve used those time limits in order to try and get the lowest possible 
payback that I have to return, but in order to do that, I have to have the 
money available to me, and that is my problem.  
 
Only last month am I being able to start accumulating a little bit of extra 
money so I can go to these credit companies.  On a $10,000, they’ll 
probably ask for $2,000, okay, or 70 percent I think they take off of the 
debt, and if I have to pay just 30 percent of the debt, I can clear that out, 
and that’s to my advantage, and that’s what I’m trying to do (Tr. 81). 
 
Applicant believes that the interest rates charged by the creditors are exorbitant, and if 
he can pay a lower amount, which is closer to what he actually owes, then he will try to 
pay that lower amount (Tr. 80-84).5 
 
In 2005, Applicant used a consumer counseling agency, but was required to pay 
the agency more than it paid on his debts, so he ended the program after about one 
month. He considered filing for bankruptcy, and completed the online financial 
management classes that are required by those filing a petition. About one year ago, he 
retained an attorney but “decided not to fill [sic] bankruptcy because of my pride.” In 
addition, he learned that he is “in the gray area of qualifying for bankruptcy due to the 
new laws.” He plans to continue to consult with the attorney (GE 2; Tr. 75-79). 
 
Applicant’s starting salary in 2007 was $80,000, and after subsequent increases, 
he now earns an annual gross income of $86,000. His net income is approximately 
$50,000, or $4,000 net monthly. Applicant's additional income includes monthly 
payments of $1,647 in retirement income, which amounted to $25,000 in 2008, and 
about $120 per month in veteran’s benefits. When all three sources are taken together, 
Applicant’s monthly income is approximately $5,767. He pays approximately $4,000 in 
monthly expenses, and $1,417 in debt payments, leaving a monthly net remainder of 
approximately $350 (GE 2, 3; AE B, C, D, E; Tr. 55-58). 
 
The Statement of Reasons alleges five debts, totaling approximately $55,200. 
The delinquent accounts include four credit cards with balances of $14,545; $13,767; 
$7,056; and $17,566, as well as one unsecured loan with a balance of $2,346. These 
debts became delinquent between February 2006 and September 2007. In his Personal 
Financial Statement (PFS), Applicant listed a monthly payment on one of the SOR 
 
5 Applicant Exhibit A includes explanations of the terms “debt settlement,” and “charge off.” The source 
of this information is unclear. As I cannot determine its reliability, I will not rely on it in reaching my 
conclusions. The exhibit also includes Applicant's plan to address his debts, and I will consider this 
information (AE A).  
 
 
5
                                                
debts (allegation 1.e.). However, in his action plan, he listed a higher unpaid balance for 
this debt than is shown in the SOR, and also noted that he would start paying it off in 
September 2009. Therefore, it is unclear from the evidence whether he has, in fact, 
been paying the monthly payment on this debt that he listed in his PFS. He did not list 
any payments on the other four SOR debts. Applicant testified that only within the 
month before the hearing did he become financially capable of paying his delinquent 
debts at a faster rate (GE 2, 3, 4; AE A; Tr. 22). 
 
Following the hearing, Applicant submitted a document titled, “Plan of Objectives 
and Actions to Repay Debt.” The plan includes five debts listed in the SOR, and one 
debt not alleged in the SOR. Starting in August 2009, Applicant plans to save funds for 
approximately four months, contact one creditor, obtain a settlement for 70 percent of 
the balance owed, and pay the settlement. Using this plan, Applicant hopes to pay the 
five SOR debts sequentially by April 2011 (AE A). 
 
Applicant's four witnesses have all known him approximately 1.5 years. His 
current supervisor and company operations officer is aware of Applicant's financial 
problems, and testified that his character is above reproach. The three co-workers who 
testified are also aware that Applicant has financial problems stemming from his 
business venture. They testified that he is a team player who has a serious attitude 
about his work, and has shown honesty and integrity in his performance. One co-
worker, who holds a high-level clearance, testified that Applicant's long military service, 
during which he held a security clearance, shows that he can be trusted with classified 
material (Tr. 90-122). 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and common-sense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).6 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole 
person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition under a 
Guideline does not determine a conclusion for or against an Applicant.  However, 
specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information.  In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). 
 
 
6 Directive. 6.3. 
 
 
6
                                                
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest7 to grant an applicant access to 
classified information. The government bears the initial burden of producing admissible 
information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny a security clearance. The 
government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the 
government meets its burden, it falls to an applicant to refute or mitigate the 
government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant 
bears a heavy burden.8 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust. Therefore, the government 
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability and trustworthiness to protect the national interests as his or her own. The 
“clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of reasonable 
doubts about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.9 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
 The facts presented support application of AG ¶19(a) (inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts) and AG ¶19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). 
Applicant owes approximately $55,000 in delinquent debt that started accruing in 2006. 
These debts remained unpaid as of the date of the hearing, indicating that both 
disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
8 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
9 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7
 The financial considerations guideline also includes factors that can mitigate 
disqualifying conditions. The following mitigating conditions are relevant:  
 
AG ¶20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control [e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation], and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s debts are numerous, amounting to approximately $55,000, and they 
are recent, as they currently remain unpaid. They did occur under circumstances that 
are unlikely to recur – a failed attempt to operate his own business – and it is unlikely 
that he will initiate such a venture again. However, Applicant has not tried to resolve 
these debts over the past year and a half, since he obtained steady employment. His 
inaction casts doubt on his good judgment in relation to his financial obligations. AG 
¶20(a) does not apply.   
 
The key element in mitigating condition AG ¶20(b) is that the factors that caused 
the financial problems were beyond an applicant’s control. Applicant's delinquencies 
stemmed from several years of trying to operate a failing business, his use of credit 
cards to pay his bills during that period, and his inability to pay these debts because of 
subsequent short-term, generally low-paying jobs. The after-effects of September 11 
contributed to the failure of Applicant's business, which was beyond Applicant's control. 
However, over the past approximately one-and-one-half years, Applicant has been 
employed full-time, with a good income from his employment, his military pension, and 
veteran’s benefit. Despite having a monthly remainder of more than $300, Applicant 
has made little effort to deal with his significant debt during this time. Without evidence 
of efforts that Applicant attempted to resolve his financial situation, I conclude that he 
has not acted responsibly, and this mitigating condition cannot be applied.  
 
 AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) relate to efforts to resolve debts. Applicant has not sought 
financial counseling. He considered bankruptcy, and retained an attorney, but has not 
followed through on that plan. He initiated contact with a debt consolidation company, 
but also decided not to use that method. There is no evidence that Applicant has paid 
any of the five SOR debts or made consistent payments on any of them. Applicant's 
 
 
8
plan to pay the debts in the future is simply a promise. A promise of future payment, 
without documentation to substantiate a track record of consistent payments, does not 
constitute a good-faith effort to pay debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and (d) do not apply. Overall, 
Applicant remains substantially indebted, and has not taken documented steps to 
resolve his financial obligations. I resolve Guideline F against Applicant. 
 
Whole Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 At the time his debts started to become delinquent in 2006, Applicant was a 
mature and experienced adult approximately 57 years of age. He has done little since 
obtaining steady work to resolve his indebtedness, despite earning an income that 
would have allowed him to make some effort toward setting up payment plans and 
initiating payments. Finally, his plan to pay his delinquencies in the future does not 
constitute a track record of documented effort to resolve his debts. Overall, the record 
evidence fails to satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from the cited guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a through 1.e.  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
9
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
