 
 
 
 
1
                                                              
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR No. 08-00662 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: T. Lawrence Hicks, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record as a whole, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
  History of Case 
 
On March 12, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 
 
 
2
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 2, 2009, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on June 4, 2009, and 
issued a Notice of Hearing on June 16, 2009, scheduling the hearing for July 9, 2009. I 
convened the hearing on said date. Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 4 into evidence, which were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B into evidence, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
July 20, 2009.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
Motion to Amend 
 
During the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend Paragraph 1.c of the 
SOR to read as follows: “Your half-sister is a citizen of Afghanistan and a resident of 
Pakistan.” Applicant had no objection. The motion was granted. (Tr. 49) 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Afghanistan and Pakistan. The request and the attached 
documents pertaining to Afghanistan are included in the record as Afghanistan Hearing 
Exhibits (AHE) I through VIII. The request and the attached documents pertaining to 
Pakistan are included in the record as Pakistan Hearing Exhibits (PHE) I through VIII. 
The parties stipulated to the introduction of said documents. (Tr. 8) Hence, the facts 
administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not 
subject to reasonable dispute. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the 
Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant admitted the factual allegations set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.d. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. He was born in Afghanistan and attended high school 
there. In 1977, he earned a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering. He later took 
additional courses in management training and sales. While in college, he became 
friends with some of his American professors and tutored their children in Dari. As 
required by the Afghanistan government, he served in its army for six months after 
completing his college education. Applicant speaks Dari, Pashto, Urdo, and Arabic, all 
Middle Eastern languages. (Tr. 57) 
 
 After the Afghanistan government was toppled by the Russian government in 
1979, Applicant left Afghanistan in May 1980 and immigrated to the United States. He 
initially stayed with his brother, who had left in 1968 and had become a naturalized U.S. 
citizen. In 1984, Applicant married his wife, an American citizen.  He became a 
 
 
 
 
3
naturalized U.S. citizen in October 1985. They have two children who were born in the 
United States. 
 
 Applicant’s parents were born in Afghanistan. They are deceased. He has a 
sister and brother, two step-sisters, and one step-brother from his father’s previous 
marriage. All were born in Afghanistan. His sister is a citizen and resident of 
Afghanistan. His brother became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1987 and resides in the 
United States. This brother is a translator for the U.S. Coalition Forces (Forces) and has 
been deployed to Afghanistan at least five times. One of his step-sisters is 83 years old 
and lives in Pakistan, but remains a citizen of Afghanistan. His other step-sister was 
living in Pakistan when she died in 2006. Both step-sisters fled to Pakistan when the 
war broke out in Afghanistan. (Tr. 55) His step-brother became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 1979 and resides in the United States. He has nieces and nephews who are 
citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
  
  After arriving in the United States in 1980, Applicant worked for an electronics 
company for three years. He then joined an insurance company as a sales 
representative. He has since become a licensed insurance agent and works as an 
independent broker. (Tr. 59) 
  
 Applicant learned of translator opportunities with the Coalition Forces through his 
brother. In October 2004, he applied for a position with a federal contractor and 
completed a security clearance application. (GE 2) He was hired with an interim 
clearance and served the Forces in Afghanistan from July 2005 to March 2006. He then 
returned home and resumed his work in the insurance industry. (GE 4 at 2) 
 
 Applicant speaks with his sister, residing in Afghanistan, once or twice a year by 
telephone. She is a housewife and her husband is a construction worker. Their children 
are students.  None of the family members work for the government. He has not seen 
her since 1997. She is aware of his work with the Forces.  (Tr. 40; GE 4 at 4) He speaks 
to his step-sister and their families once or twice a year by telephone. (GE 4 at 4) He did 
not speak to or visit them while he was deployed to Afghanistan because he does not 
want to jeopardize their well-being. (Tr. 46-47) He visited his sisters in Pakistan in 1991 
and 1997, who were living in refugee camps at the time. He continues to speak to his 
step-sister once or twice a year. (Id.)  Sometimes he and his brothers send money to 
their  sister and step-sister. (Tr. 49) 
 
 Applicant owns a home in the United States and has U. S. bank accounts. (Tr. 
57-58)  His two children attend college. (Tr. 19) There is no derogatory information in 
the record concerning his police or financial records. He has never been fired from a 
job. He has never been arrested. He has never used illegal drugs or been involved in an 
alcohol-related incident. (GE 1 and 2) 
 
 Applicant submitted two exhibits, setting forth his accomplishments while working 
in Afghanistan. His team leader for seven months wrote: “Much of our mission is 
dependent on the translation skills of our interpreters. I have [Applicant] to thank for my 
 
 
 
 
4
successes in my role in tracking down and capturing insurgents, whose goals were to 
upset the fine balance of the new transitional government of Afghanistan.” (AE A)  
Applicant’s Commanding Officer from November 2005 to March 2006 believes Applicant 
is one of the best interpreters with whom he has worked. He stated that Applicant’s 
“work in an extremely sensitive position has been nothing short of spectacular. He is 
trusted by the chain of command and more importantly by the citizens of two provinces.” 
(AE B)   
 
 Applicant credibly and sincerely asserted his pride of U.S. citizenship.  He stated: 
 
 I left Afghanistan. I’m not a citizen of that country. I don’t have any loyalty. 
I have nothing left there except my two sisters. I have my family here, 
back in America. And as you can see, the size of my family here in 
America, and I’m proud of my family. And I’m proud to be an American 
citizen. And I will uphold the law and the Constitution of the United States 
of America. (Tr. 62) 
 
Afghanistan 
 
I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Afghanistan Hearing 
Exhibits.  Afghanistan is a country in southwestern Asia. Pakistan borders it on the east 
and the south.  Iran borders it on the west and Russia in the north.  It is a rugged and 
mountainous country which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. It 
has about 18 million people. Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic that has had a 
turbulent political history, including an invasion by the Russians in 1979.  After an 
Accord was reached in 1989 and Russia withdrew from the country, fighting continued 
among the various ethnic, clan and religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban 
rose to power and controlled 90% of the country, imposing aggressive and repressive 
policies. In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in 
the country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
Government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, terrorists 
and the Taliban continue to assert power and intimidation within the country. The 
country’s human rights record remains poor and violence is rampant. According to 
recent reports from the U.S. Department of State, insurgents continue to plan attacks 
and kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. Travel warnings are 
ongoing. No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence. (AHE V)  
 
Pakistan 
 
 I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Pakistan Hearing Exhibits.  
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic, created in 1947 after British India was 
partitioned when the British government granted India its independence.  Pakistan was 
created for the Moslem population of the Indian sub-continent. Its population is about 60 
million. It has a coalition government led by a prime minister and president elected in 
2009.  After September 11, 2001, Pakistan reassessed it relations with the Taliban and 
supported the U.S. and international coalition in its efforts to remove the Taliban from 
 
 
 
 
5
power.  Many Islamic extremists and terrorists are known to inhabit parts of Pakistan, 
leading to a growth of their insurgency.  Although Pakistan has intensified its efforts to 
deal with the violence and terrorists, the country continues to experience serious 
problems. The U.S. Department of State confirms that many borders are known as safe  
havens for terrorists. Numerous suicide bombings and kidnappings have taken place 
over the past couple years. Human rights violations continue to be a significant problem, 
as killings, torture, and disappearances remain prevalent. The Pakistani government 
maintains domestic intelligence services.  The U.S. government warns Americans 
against travel to Pakistan.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
 
 
 
6
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions adverse to an 
applicant shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concerns relating to the guideline for foreign influence are set out in 
AG & 6:       
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign county in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;1 and, 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
                                            
1 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of 
law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an 
applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign 
influence and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Since leaving Afghanistan, Applicant periodically telephones his two sisters, one 
residing in Afghanistan and the other residing in Pakistan. Both are citizens of 
Afghanistan. He also speaks to his nieces and nephews periodically.  One of his sisters 
knows that he worked for the U.S. government in Afghanistan. Applicant’s connections 
to his family in Afghanistan and half-sister in Pakistan could create a potential conflict of 
interest between his security obligations and desire to help them, only in a situation 
wherein they were taken hostage or otherwise threatened with harm if he did not 
cooperate with terrorists or their governments. None of his family members have 
positions in which they could otherwise benefit from his access to sensitive information 
or technology. However, under either disqualifying condition, security concerns in this 
case could arise in connection with the potential that hostile forces might seek protected 
information from Applicant by threatening harm to his family members in Afghanistan or 
Pakistan.  
  
  The Government produced substantial evidence of these disqualifying conditions, 
and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation of the 
resulting security concerns. AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Those with potential application in this case are:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;   
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
The current positions and activities of Applicant’s family members in Afghanistan 
and Pakistan do not involve the government or military and they would have no interest 
in acquiring protected information. Only their physical presence creates the potential 
that their interests could be threatened to the point that Applicant would confront a 
choice between their interest and those of the United States. Hence, AG ¶ 8(a) has 
some application.   
 
Applicant produced significant evidence establishing AG ¶ 8(b). Based on his 
relationship and depth of loyalty to the United States, he can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States. He has lived in the United States since 
 
 
 
 
8
1980 and did not return to Afghanistan until his employment with the U. S. Coalition 
Forces in July 2005. However, he did visit Pakistan in 1991 and 1997. His wife and 
children are U.S. citizens, residing in the United States. He owns property and holds 
bank accounts in the United States. He is a licensed insurance agent and has owned 
his own insurance agency for a number of years. There is no evidence that he owns 
property in Afghanistan or Pakistan.  He has limited contact with his two sisters and 
their families, living in Pakistan and Afghanistan. While in Afghanistan, he has willingly 
risked his life to support the U.S. efforts. There is no evidence that he has connections 
or contact with any people other than his family members. He refers to himself as an 
“American.” 
 
Applicant maintains ongoing, albeit sporadic, communication with his sisters and 
other relatives in both countries. Hence, AG ¶ 8(c) cannot apply, as those contacts are 
sufficiently frequent and not casual.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. The Appeal Board 
requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an applicant’s personal 
loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family ties to the U.S. relative to his [or 
her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; and many others 
raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 
2007).   
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Three circumstances weigh against 
Applicant in the whole person analysis.  First, there is a significant risk of terrorism and 
human rights abuses in Afghanistan and Pakistan. More importantly for security 
purposes, terrorists are hostile to the United States and actively seek classified 
information. Terrorists and friendly governments could attempt to use Applicant’s 
 
 
 
 
9
siblings and family to obtain such information. Second, he had numerous connections to 
Afghanistan before he immigrated to the United States in 1980. Following his birth, he 
spent his formative years there. He was educated at an Afghanistan college. Third, one 
sister and her family are citizens and residents of Afghanistan, and his step-sister is a 
resident of Pakistan.  
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. He is a mature person, who has lived in the United States for 29 years, and 
has been a naturalized citizen for almost 24 years. His spouse and children are U.S. 
citizens. Both of his brothers are naturalized U.S. citizens and residents. Out of his 
sense of patriotism for the United States in its endeavors in Afghanistan, he worked for 
the U.S. Forces as a translator. His brother holds a similar position. His ties to the 
United States, which he refers to as his country, are much stronger than his ties to his 
siblings or families living in Afghanistan and Pakistan. There is no evidence he has ever 
taken any action that could cause potential harm to the United States. He takes his 
loyalty to the United States seriously, and he has worked diligently and impressively for 
three years in an important capacity for the U.S. efforts. His supervisors and colleagues 
assess him as loyal, trustworthy, conscientious, and responsible, giving him excellent 
evaluations and praising his dedication to the cause of freedom in Afghanistan. He is a 
good family member and U.S. citizen. After leaving Afghanistan in 1980, he never 
returned until he worked with the U.S. forces in 2005.  
 
 No witnesses recommended denial of Applicant’s security clearance. There is no 
derogatory information about him in the record. There is evidence that he has 
successfully worked in high-risk circumstances and made significant contributions to the 
United States in its efforts in Afghanistan. He credibly asserted his allegiance to the 
United States. 
 
Applicant held an interim security clearance during his tenure in Afghanistan 
without any indication that he breached security policies or procedures. While that fact 
is not normally to be considered a factor in granting a clearance, the Appeal Board 
noted in ISCR Case No. 05-03846 as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s 
prior history of complying with security procedures and regulations 
significant probative value for purposes of refuting, mitigating, or 
extenuating the security concerns raised by the applicant’s more 
immediate disqualifying conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case 
No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 
5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
May 30, 2006). However, the Board has recognized an exception to that 
general rule in Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by 
credible, independent evidence that his compliance with security 
procedures and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution 
to the national security. See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. 
 
 
 
 
10
July 14, 2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to 
an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, 
and report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person, including Applicant’s commendable 
performance as a translator and advisor in Afghanistan, I conclude Applicant has fully 
mitigated the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence.2 Overall, the record 
evidence leaves no doubt as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns 
arising under Guideline B.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                             ________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
                                            
2I conclude that the whole person analysis weighs heavily toward approval of his security 
clearance. Assuming a higher authority reviewing this decision determines the mitigating conditions 
articulated under AG ¶ 8 do not apply and severs any consideration of them, I conclude the whole person 
analysis standing alone is sufficient to support approval of a security clearance in this case. 
