                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-04232
SSN: -------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
August 4, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on November 27, 2007.  (Government Exhibit 1).  On December 31, 2008, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR)
detailing the security concerns under Guidelines G, J and E for Applicant. The action
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel; Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by
the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on January 8, 2009.  He answered
the SOR in writing on January 27, 2009, and requested a hearing before an
Administrative Judge.  The case was assigned to another Administrative Judge on
March 5, 2009.  A notice of hearing was issued on April 8, 2009, and the matter was
scheduled for hearing on May 20, 2009.  The Applicant did not appear at the hearing
due to a failure to receive notice of the hearing.  A continuance was granted.  The case
was assigned to the undersigned Administrative Judge on May 26, 2009.  A notice of
hearing was issued on June 2, 2009, and the matter was scheduled for June 24, 2009.
At the hearing, the Government presented four exhibits, referred to as Government
Exhibits 1 through 4, which were received without objection. The Applicant called one
2
witness and presented nine exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through I,
which were received without objection. The Applicant also testified on his own behalf.
The record remained open until July 8, 2009, to allow the Applicant to submit additional
documentation.  The Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing exhibit, consisting of eight
enclosures that was admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing (Tr.) on July 2, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits,
and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 49 years old.  He has a Bachelor of Science Degree in Material
Logistics Management.  He is employed by a defense contractor as a Software
Engineer, and is applying for a security clearance in connection with his employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses intoxicants.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he engaged in criminal conduct.
The Applicant began consuming alcohol in 1980, at the young age of eighteen
while attending his first year of college.  At first, he drank socially.  As time passed, his
circle of friends were heavy drinkers, and his desire to fit in caused him to drink
excessively and engage in criminal conduct.  On many occasions, over the past twenty-
nine years, he has driven a vehicle while intoxicated and was not arrested.  On six
separate occasions, he was arrested and convicted for Driving Under the Influence
(DIU).  Each of those arrests are discussed below.    
In March 1985, the Applicant had been drinking beer with friends at a bar.  While
driving home, he was pulled over by the police.  He was arrested and charged with DUI.
He pled guilty and was fined.  A year later, in April 1986, he was arrested again, and
charged with DUI.  Again, he had been drinking beer with friends at a bar.  He
remembers consuming between two and four beers before driving.  This time, he was
driving to the airport when he was pulled over by police.  He pled guilty and was
sentenced to a fine and community service.  Two months later, in June 1986, he was
arrested and charged with DUI.  He pled guilty and was sentenced to an Educational
Alcohol Awareness class and was fined.  Four years later, in March 2000, he was
charged with (1) DUI with Alcohol/Drugs and (2) DUI with .08 or More.  The Applicant
explained that he had attended his fathers birthday party where he drank too many
beers.  As he was driving home, he was attempting to stop at a stop sign when he
bumped a car.  He pled Nolo Contendere to Count (2) and was sentenced to five years
probation, 180 days confinement, suspended, a first offender special alcohol program,
and a fine.  (Government Exhibits 3(b) and 4).  
3
At this point, the Applicant did not believe that he was alcohol dependent or that
his drinking was abusive.  He just thought that he was unlucky.  Although he stopped
drinking alcohol for several months following this arrest, he  eventually started drinking
again.  (Tr. p. 67-68).  Three years later in May 2003, the Applicant was arrested and
charged with (1) DUI with Alcohol/Drugs and (2) DUI with .08 or More.  The Applicant
explained that he had been at a bar consuming alcohol with a friend.  On his way home,
he did not have his car lights on and was pulled over by the police.  He pled No Contest
to Count (2) and was sentenced to 365 days confinement, 361 days suspended, five
years probation, a fine, and an alcohol counseling program for a year. 
In July 2003, the Applicant was arrested and charged with (1) Lewd Act to a
Child, (2) Indecent Exposure, (3) Giving False Information to a Peace Officer (4) Cruelty
to a Child by Endangering Heath, and (5) DUI with Alcohol/Drugs, Prior DUI within 7
years.  The Applicant explained that he had been consuming alcohol for much of the
day and was intoxicated when he walked into a public restroom that is known for
“cruising”.  (Tr. p. 27).  In the restroom, he patted a minor on the buttocks.  He then
drove home.  Sometime later, the police arrived at his home to arrest him.  (Tr. p. 73).
The Applicant pled guilty to Counts (4) and (5).  He was sentenced to five years
probation, 120 days confinement, Substance Abuse Assessment, Multiple Conviction
Program and a fine.  Counts (1), (2) and (3) were dismissed.  (Government Exhibits 3(a)
and 4, and Applicant’s Exhibit A).  
At this point, the Applicant realized that he had to do something about his
excessive drinking and driving.  He attended Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) meetings for
eighteen months and completely abstained from alcohol during this period.  (Tr. p. 85).
He testified that he found the counseling to be helpful but eventually went back to
consuming alcohol in 2005.  (Tr. p. 92).  He contends that he has not been intoxicated
since his last arrest.   
The Applicant completed each of the sentences imposed by the court as a result
of each conviction.  Each time, he attended some type of alcohol awareness or alcohol
counseling program.  (Tr. p. 90).  Despite this, he still continues to consume alcohol.
He testified that he enjoys drinking with friends about once or twice a month and has a
glass of wine with dinner on occasion.  He indicates that he no longer drinks to the point
of intoxication.  (Tr. p. 54).  He states that he has severed his friendship with his heavy
drinking friends, and now regularly associates with tennis players, who do not partake in
the habit.    
On June 19, 2009, the Applicant sought out and obtained an alcohol and drug
evaluation.  The results of the report indicate that the Applicant does not meet the
diagnostic criteria for alcohol dependence.  It states,  
His typical drinking pattern prior to 2003 was to drink 1 or 2 times a week
on weekends.  When he did drink, he typically drank more than four drinks
per occasion.  Since 2003, he has not had any further problems with
alcohol.  He has changed his social network so he no longer socializes
with heavy drinkers.  In the previous 12 months he reports no alcohol
binges, where a binge is defines as more than 4 drinks on one occasion.
He also reports that he normally drinks per occasion about four times per
4
week which is within the not-at-risk limits recommended by the National
Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA).  He also reports that
this has been his typical drinking pattern since his last DUI in 2003....
Based on the clinical interview and testing, Mr. Pilarski meets the lifetime
criteria for a diagnosis of alcohol abuse but not for alcohol dependence.
Since his drinking has been non-problematic for more than 5 years, his
current diagnosis is alcohol abuse in sustained full remission. 
(Applicant’s Exhibit D).  
Paragraph 3 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he intentionally falsified material aspects of
his personal background during the clearance screening process.
The Government alleges that during an interview with a DoD contract investigator
on January 31, 2008, the Applicant deliberately omitted material facts and revealed only
that he was arrested for a Lewd and Lascivious act with a minor in July 2003, and was
offered to pled guilty to a DUI instead.  He did not reveal that he was charged with
Cruelty to a Child by Endangering Health.        
The Government also alleges that when the Applicant completed his
Questionnaire for National Security Positions dated November 27, 2007, he deliberately
falsified material facts.  In response to Question 23 which asks whether the Applicant
has ever been charged with or convicted of any felony offenses, the Applicant
responded that “a L and L act charge in July 2003 was dropped”.  He did not disclose
that he pled guilty to a Cruelty to a Child by Endangering Health charge.    
It is not credible to believe that the Applicant deliberately omitted the lesser
charge of Cruelty to a Child by Endangering Health, a misdemeanor, when he revealed
the more serious felony charge of Lewd and Lascivious act with a minor that was
dropped.  Clearly he did not deliberately attempt to conceal any material information
from the Government concerning the arrest during his interview with the DoD
investigator or in his responses on the security clearance application.  Accordingly,
Guideline E is found for the Applicant.
Mitigation.
A long time neighbor and friend of the Applicant testified that he considers the
Applicant to be upright and honest.  The witness has seen a dramatic change in the
Applicant.  Specifically, a change in his circle of friends and that he does not consume
alcohol as much as he used to.  The Applicant now plays tennis, works out at the gym
and bikes.  (Applicant’s Exhibits G and H).    
A letter of recommendation from the Section Vice President of the company
indicates that the Applicant is regarded as a key team member by the client.  He is
considered reliable and stable and his work ethic and job performance have been
outstanding.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B).
5
Character references from coworkers, friends and neighbors of the Applicant
consider him responsible, honest and trustworthy and completely deserving of a
security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C and Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit).  
Performance appraisals of the Applicant for the rating periods from May 2000
through March 30, 2007, reflect that his work performance consistently either “far
exceeds” or “exceeds most” in every category.  (Applicant’s Exhibit F). 
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption)
21.  The Concern.  Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
22. (a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of
concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent;
22. (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or
alcohol dependent;
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)
30.  The Concern.  Criminal activity creates a doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple offenses;
31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.
6
Condition that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
Guideline E (Personal Conduct)
15.  The Concern.  Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 16-17,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a. The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation
 c. The frequency and recency of the conduct
d. The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct
e. The extent to which the participation is voluntary
f. The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes
g. The motivation for the conduct 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress
i. The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicted
7
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSION
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in alcohol abuse, criminal conduct and/or dishonesty that
demonstrates poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in alcohol abuse (Guideline G), dishonesty (Guideline E), and
Criminal Conduct (Guideline J).  This evidence indicates poor judgment, unreliability and
untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of the scope and nature of the
Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his security
clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guidelines G and J of the SOR.
The Applicant’s twenty-nine year history of alcohol abuse and criminal conduct
includes at least six arrests and convictions for Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol.
Although his most recent arrest occurred in 2003, over six years ago, he continues to
consume alcohol, which has been at the root of his criminal problems.  He has tried on
numerous occasions to abstain from the use of alcohol, but has always returned to
using it.  Although his recent alcohol assessment does not diagnose him with alcohol
8
dependence, his past history of alcohol abuse clearly demonstrates that there has been
a serious problem.  
Under Alcohol Abuse, Guideline G, Disqualifying Conditions 22(a), alcohol-
related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting,
child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 22(c)
habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless
of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent and,
22(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, clinical
psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence apply.  None of
the mitigating conditions are applicable.
Under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, Disqualifying Conditions, 31.(a) a single
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses and 31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  
Despite participating in a number of alcohol awareness programs, regular AA
meetings, and their recommendation that he completely abstain from the use of alcohol,
the Applicant continues to consume alcohol.  It is not clear from his past record that he
will not again return to his old ways.  Based upon his long history of alcohol abuse and
criminal conduct, its related negative effects on the Applicant are such that I am unable
to find him sufficiently trustworthy to safeguard classified information.  Accordingly
Guidelines G and J are found against the Applicant. 
Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, I do not find that the Applicant deliberately
omitted, concealed or falsified any material facts during his interview with the DoD
investigator or on his security clearance application.  Accordingly, I find for the Applicant
under this guideline. 
I have also considered the “whole person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is a 49 year old, intelligent,
successful, well respected, and a long time employee of the defense industry.  Under
the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth above when viewed
under all of the guidelines as a whole, support a whole person assessment of poor
judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, an unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly
safeguard classified information.  
I have considered all of the evidence presented, however it does not come close
to mitigating the negative effects of his excessive alcohol abuse and his criminal
conduct and the effects that it can have on his ability to safeguard classified information.
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
9
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the SOR.  Paragraph 3 is found for the
Applicant.
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
                                    Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.g.: Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 2: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  2.a.: Against the Applicant.
Paragraph 3: For the Applicant.
        Subpara.  3.a.: For the Applicant.
    Subpara.  3.b.: For the Applicant.
CONCLUSION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
