                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09899 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tom Coale, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 18, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant responded in writing to the SOR in an undated answer received on 
April 6, 2009, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on July 13, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on July 14, 2009. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on August 6, 2009. The Government offered 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. Applicant did not object and they were admitted. The 
Government also offered a demonstrative exhibit that was marked as HE I. Applicant 
testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through I, which were admitted without objection. 
The record was held open until August 13, 2009, to allow Applicant an opportunity to 
provide additional exhibits, which he did, and they were marked as AE J through U. The 
Government did not object and they were admitted.1 DOHA received the transcript of 
the hearing (Tr.) on August 11, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR, except ¶ 1.b. His admissions 
are incorporated herein. In addition, after a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old and has worked for different federal contractors since 
1994. He has two associate’s degrees. He married in 1981 and has two grown children, 
one of whom resides with him. His wife earns approximately $100 a month.2  
 
 Applicant purchased a home in 1997. He used credit cards and loans to furnish 
the home. He made minimum payments on the credit cards. He realized that by making 
only the minimum payments the debt would be very difficult to pay off with the additional 
interest accruing. He was also paying for a leased car at the time. He returned the car 
and filed for bankruptcy. He initially filed under Chapter 13 to keep from losing his 
house. He had difficulty maintaining the payments under the Chapter 13 and it was 
converted to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Applicant had approximately $35,000 in debt 
discharged in bankruptcy. The mortgage company worked with Applicant to “short sale” 
his residence. It was sold and Applicant believes there was approximately a $25,000 
loss that the bank agreed to write off. The bankruptcy discharge and the short sale of 
his house were completed in 2001.3  
 
 In 2004, Applicant purchased a home for approximately $225,000.4 In 2006, 
Applicant bought two residential rental properties for $80,000 each, with no down 
payment. He was not hesitant to purchase the property because he viewed the 
investment as a way to earn extra income. He did not have the properties inspected and 
1. Department Counsel’s memorandum in response to the additional exhibits is HE II. In AE J, 
Applicant requested an unspecified extension in time. His request was denied. HE III. 
 
2 Tr. 35-41. 
 
3 Tr. 29-33, 41-59; GE 6; AE A. Applicant provided a document that shows his attorney was later 
disbarred for misconduct. Applicant alleges that his attorney, without his permission, later changed his 
bankruptcy filing to a Chapter 13 and forged his name. Applicant’s mortgage counselor arranged for the 
filing to be dropped. The attorney’s actions ultimately did not have a bearing on Applicant’s bankruptcy. 
This information pertains to SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
4 Tr. 56-59. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
later realized it would take a lot of money to get the properties up to standards so he 
could rent them. He stated:  
 
The property wasn’t beat up at the time, it just had—the person who sold 
the house basically had covered up a lot of things. He put new carpet in 
and he painted to make the place look good when you came in. But I had 
plumbing problems, I had electrical problems, I had problems with the 
structures of the house. I had, you know, problems that you wouldn’t 
necessarily see just walking in the door.5 
 
His monthly mortgage payment on the two properties was $1,300. He estimated that he 
spent approximately $16,000 within the first three months to rehabilitate the properties. 
He charged the expenses to credit cards. He eventually rented both properties, but had 
difficulty with the tenants. In 2007, one tenant broke the lease and had damaged the 
property. The other tenant rented for a year, but then left and also damaged the 
property. Applicant estimated that it cost him another $15,000 to repair both properties. 
He again charged the expenses to credit cards. He fell behind in paying his credit cards. 
One property remained vacant for more than a year. He stopped making his mortgage 
payments on one of the properties in February 2008 and on the other in October 2008. 
The properties were foreclosed in February 2009. He testified that he does not owe any 
remainder on the foreclosed property. The credit report shows one of the properties has 
a zero balance and the other states the “foreclosure process started.” Applicant did not 
provide documented proof that he does not owe anything on the property in the process 
of foreclosure.6  
 
 In October 2007, Applicant contacted a debt elimination company. He deposits 
$700 a month into an account. From that account the company automatically withdraws 
$325 a month in fees for 15-months. The remaining $375 is placed in a savings account 
that Applicant is free to access as he desires. When he accumulates enough money in 
his savings account, he contacts the company and requests them to negotiate a 
settlement for one of his debts. He testified that he has completed paying the 15-month 
fee, so all the money now goes to settle his debts.7  
 
 Applicant’s debts consist of two foreclosure properties ($69,585 and $71,391, 
(see above), credit cards, and personal loans. He stated that beginning in 2004 he had 
approximately 18 credit cards.8 He stated he used these credit cards to maintain his 
5 Tr. 63-64. 
 
6 Tr. 33-35, 55-70, 104-105; GE 3 at page 3; GE 4 at page 3. 
 
7 Tr. 72-84, 105-107; GE 6. 
 
8 Tr. 78 84, 100-104, 129-134. Applicant opened some accounts in his name, some in his wife’s 
name and some jointly. He admitted his applications for some of the credit cards were declined. He also 
admitted he is the primary wage earner and it is from his income that the bills are paid. It appears that 
Applicant likely has more delinquent debts than are alleged because some of the credit cards are in his 
wife’s name alone and she does not earn enough money to pay them. I will only consider the debts 
 
4 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
investment property. The debt alleged in SOR 1.j ($1,203) is for jewelry he purchased. 
He stated he purchased jewelry before he filed for bankruptcy and stopped making 
payment when he filed for bankruptcy in 2001. His credit report shows he opened this 
account in September 2005 and the last activity on the account was November 2007. I 
did not find him credible. He provided AE U to show there is an offer by the creditor to 
settle this account. However, it appears that the original creditor is different and this 
document does not support his position. He did not provide any documentation to show 
he accepted the offer on this debt and paid it.9  
  
 Applicant stated that he has paid six credit cards and still owes on three credit 
cards. He did not provide proof of payment or explain which credit cards were paid.10 
He provided a spread sheet that lists 25 credit card and bank debts. Ten of the debts 
listed are for ten separate accounts with the same credit card company. He annotated 
some of the debts as having been paid or that he is paying, but did not provide any 
documented proof that the debts have been paid.11 He also provided a spread sheet 
from his debt elimination company that lists 20 debts. On it there are handwritten 
annotations that are illegible.12 He provided letters from creditors offering to settle his 
debts. He did not provide any proof that he agreed to the settlements and paid them.13 
Based on the number of debts and the fact that many of the debts are to the same 
creditor, but for different accounts, it is unclear as to which debts the offers apply. He 
provided one settlement offer that notes he made a $100 payment on May 22, 2009, on 
a credit card account that has a balance of $8,096. He explained that the debt 
elimination company plan was not able to settle directly with the creditor, so he dealt 
with them and pays the creditor directly. He did not provide proof of any additional 
payments. He believed the total amount he owes on all of the debts is $40,000.14 
 
 Applicant stated that AE I, a settlement offer, applies to SOR 1.o. He did not 
provide proof of payment. He was afforded additional time to provide a document to 
 
alleged in the SOR for disqualifying purposes. I will consider all of the delinquent debts that are included 
in his documents, when analyzing Applicant’s overall financial situation and when analyzing the whole 
person. 
  
9 Tr. 79-83, 112-115; GE 2 at page 10. 
 
10 Tr. 74-75. 
 
11 AE B. 
 
12 AE C. 
 
13 AE D, E, F, H, I. 
 
14 Tr. 76-90, 98-102; AE G. It is unclear if this debt is alleged in the SOR. Applicant could not 
provide details whether this account is included in the SOR. He has numerous accounts from the same 
creditor and explained he cannot tell which account this document applies.  
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
show he accepted and paid the settlement. The additional document he provided, AE Q, 
is the same as AE l.15  
 
Applicant stated AE D applies to one of his credit card accounts, but he does not 
know which one in the SOR. He stated he paid it on July 13, 2009, but did not provide 
supporting documents. He provided AE O, which is the same document as AE D.16  
 
 Applicant stated he settled a debt to a creditor in the SOR and the document in 
AE E is the settlement offer. There are two creditors with the same name listed in the 
SOR. It is unclear which debt he believes is paid. There is no proof of payment.17  
 
 Applicant stated that the document in AE F is for a debt in the SOR, but could not 
provide specific information as to which debt. It is a settlement offer on a credit card 
account. He also offered AE T which reflects a one-time payment of $50 made in June 
2009. It appears there is approximately a $1,000 balance remaining. 
 
 Applicant did not provide any documents to support that any of his debts have 
been paid. There are other debts listed in the documents he provided that appear to be 
additional debts that were not alleged in the SOR. They could be the same debts as 
alleged in the SOR or they could be duplicate debts, or they could be additional debts. 
Applicant was unable to provide an explanation. 
 
 Applicant was provided additional time to submit documents to support his 
statements that he paid certain debts. AE K, L, M, N, P, R, and S are letters from 
creditors on accounts in his wife’s name and are not debts alleged in the SOR. AE K, L, 
and M reflect that the accounts noted have been settled. AE N, O, and P are settlement 
offers, but there is no proof of payment. AE R is a settlement letter acknowledging a 
$100 payment made on July 22, 2009, on an account with a balance of $8,033 still 
owed. AE S is a settlement offer to his wife, dated October 23, 2008, accepting an 
agreement that Applicant would pay $125 a month beginning in November 2008 on a 
debt with a balance of $950. I have not considered these matters for disqualifying 
purposes, but have considered them when analyzing Applicant’s credibility and overall 
financial health. 
 
 In December 2007, Applicant and his family took a one-week cruise to the 
Bahamas. He explained it was part of a package deal where they received the cruise for 
participating in a time-share informational package. He stated he paid about $600 for 
the week and he was required to pay the airfare.18  
15 Tr. 87-91. 
 
16 Tr. 91-93. 
 
17 Tr. 93-96. 
 
18 Tr. 115-123; GE 6. Applicant initially could not remember the cruise and then remembered it 
being a different year. Department Counsel refreshed his memory with GE 6. It was then Applicant 
 
6 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 Applicant stated he has approximately $1,500 in his checking account and 
$1,500 in his saving account. He does not have a separate savings account for his debt 
elimination plan. He has not participated in financial counseling.19  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common-sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
remembered the cruise was in December 2007. I found Applicant to be evasive and his testimony not 
credible. 
 
19 Tr. 123-124. 
 
7 
 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant had $35,000 in credit card and other debts discharged in bankruptcy in 
2001. He again accumulated substantial credit card debts that he could not pay. He 
purchased two rental properties that he could not maintain and they were foreclosed. I 
find both disqualifying conditions have been raised.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 20 and especially considering the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
8 
 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s behavior is recent because he still owes the debts alleged. I find 
mitigating condition (a) does not apply. Applicant bought a house he could not afford 
and then attempted to furnish it by using credit cards and loans. He filed for Chapter 7 
bankruptcy and had $35,000 in debt discharged. The house was sold as a “short sale” 
and the bank wrote off the deficiency. He then bought two rental properties. He did not 
inspect the properties and later found they were in need of repair. He financed the 
repairs with credit cards. He had difficulty renting the property. When he did, one tenant 
broke the lease early and defaced the property. The other completed the term of the 
lease, but also defaced the property. Applicant again financed these repairs with credit 
cards. He subsequently could not find tenants and defaulted on the mortgages and the 
properties were foreclosed. On the credit report one property (SOR 1.l) shows a zero 
balance owed. I find this debt is resolved. Applicant made poor business decisions 
when he purchased property without having it inspected. He also took on a great deal of 
debt without having sufficient capital to pay for expected and unexpected repairs. He 
hoped to make money. He did not. Deciding to become a landlord, with all the 
responsibilities that go with it was within his control. As a landlord, having to perform 
repairs after tenants leave, or having tenants vacate early is somewhat expected when 
one acts in that capacity. However, to a certain extent these things were not within his 
control, but it should not have been totally unexpected. Therefore, I find mitigating 
condition (b) only partially applies.  
 
 It appears Applicant has set up a debt elimination plan. However, it also appears 
that he has more delinquent debt than is alleged in the SOR, because in addition to 
applying for credit cards in his own name, and jointly, his wife also obtained credit cards 
to finance the repairs on his rental property. He is the wage earner in the family and was 
expected to pay her credit cards too. He did not provide sufficient evidence to show he 
is addressing all of his delinquent debts. It appears he has approximately 20 to 25 
different credit cards and loans. He does not know which ones have been paid and 
which he still owes. It is likely he has paid some of the credit cards completely. 
However, he does not have a firm grasp on all of his debts. I do not have confidence 
that his financial problems are being resolved or are under control. I find mitigating 
conditions (c) and (d) do not apply.  
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant overextended his finances 
when he bought a house he could not afford and then financed its furnishings with credit 
cards and loans. His house was sold and he had $35,000 in delinquent debts 
discharged in bankruptcy in 2001. He repeated the same mistake several years later 
when he purchased two rental properties and financed the repairs through credit cards 
and loans. Applicant saw this as an opportunity to make money, but failed to consider 
the potential problems with owning rental property. The properties were foreclosed and 
he has approximately 20 to 25 credit cards and loans. He did not provide sufficient proof 
that he does not owe any amount on one of the foreclosed properties. Applicant may 
have paid some of the credit card debts, but he was unable to provide proof as to which 
ones were paid. Even if I considered the evidence in the light most favorable to 
Applicant and conclude he has paid some of his debts, it is not sufficient to conclude he 
has mitigated the security concern raised by his finances. Applicant has a history of 
running up debts and either having them discharged in bankruptcy, defaulting on them, 
or settling them for less than the amount actually owed. I also found that when 
questioned about other expenditures not related to the rental property, Applicant was 
evasive and not candid. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
Financial Considerations.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs  1.a-1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.l:     For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.m-1.q:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly not in the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
