 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )
SSN: -------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-08263
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, Applicant’s
request for a security clearance is granted.
On January 30, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for her job with
a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued to Applicant a set of interrogatories  regarding information in her background.1
Based on the results of the background investigation and her response to the
interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary affirmative
finding  that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request2
 The revised Adjudicative Guidelines were approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and were3
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.
2
for access to classified information. On February 20, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts which raise security concerns addressed in
the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline F (financial considerations).3
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on May 7, 2009. I convened a hearing on June 10, 2009, at which the
parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented five exhibits (Gx. 1 - 5),
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, proffered five exhibits (Ax. A -
E), which were admitted without objection, and presented one witness. DOHA received
the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on June 30, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the government alleged Applicant owes approximately
$50,107 for 20 delinquent or past due financial obligations. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.t) Applicant
admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.l, but denied the other 18 allegations. In addition to the facts
established through her admissions, and after reviewing the pleadings, the transcript,
and exhibits, I have made the following findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 31 years old. She has been employed by a defense contractor since
January 2008. She served in the U.S. Army from October 1997 until December 2003.
Applicant was administratively separated from the Army with an honorable discharge
after her marital separation and pending divorce left her as a single parent with no
options for child care should she be deployed away from home. Applicant and her
husband met while both were serving in the Army. They were married in June 2000 and
their divorce was finalized in October 2004. They have one child, who was born in 2002.
Her ex-husband, who was physically and verbally abusive during their marriage, has
never paid any child support. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Tr. 54) 
At the time of their separation, they were both assigned to an overseas Army
post. When they separated in late 2003, and once Applicant was “chaptered out” of the
military, she and their child returned to the United States. She left most of their marital
assets, such as a car, furniture and appliances, with her ex-husband. From January
2004 until October 2005, Applicant worked in a variety of jobs before being hired as a
corrections officer. She worked in that job until January 2008, when a former Army
supervisor recruited her to join the company where she now works. That supervisor is
now her civilian supervisor. He regards Applicant as his best worker and speaks very
highly of her reliability, trustworthiness, and overall character. Several other co-workers
and associates have echoed his sentiments and observations. (Gx. 1; Gx. 2; Ax. C; Tr.
82 - 87)
When Applicant was asked to complete her e-QIP in January 2008, she obtained
a copy of her credit report. She was surprised to see several delinquent and past due
accounts attributed to her in the report. She listed all of them in response to financial
3
questions in the e-QIP. Many of the debts were incurred with her ex-husband. Their
divorce decree ordered Applicant and her ex-husband to finalize an agreement about
the division of assets and liabilities. However, after they separated, he was deployed to
Iraq three times and was unavailable. He has since left the Army, but he is unemployed
and has not made himself available to work this out. Applicant has been trying, since
early 2008, to resolve debts for which she is liable and/or to correct entries in her credit
history that are not properly attributable to her. (Tr. 62 - 63) 
Of the debts alleged in the SOR, Applicant has established she is not liable for
and/or is trying to resolve, the following:
- SOR ¶ 1.b (Ford Credit, $7,642): This debt is for a car financed in both her and
her ex-husband’s names. The car remained with him overseas when the
marriage ended and she has no information about what happened to it.
Nonetheless, she has been trying for more than a year to negotiate a settlement.
(Tr. 41 - 42; Ax. A; Ax. D; Gx. 2)
- SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d (two Sprint accounts totaling approximately $1,423):
Applicant has never had a Sprint account. These debts have been deleted from
her credit history. (Tr. 43 - 44; Ax. A; Ax. D; Gx. 2)
- SOR ¶ 1.f (Washington Gas Light, $825): Applicant has never had an account
with this creditor and the debt has been removed from her credit history. (Tr. 44 -
45; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. D)
- SOR ¶ 1.g (University of Phoenix for #61): This is a debt for unpaid tuition for
on-line college courses Applicant took while assigned overseas. The account
was paid through Applicant’s GI Bill benefits. The debt has been removed from
her credit history. (Ax. A; Ax. D; Gx. 2; Tr. 46 - 48)
- SOR ¶ 1.h (Verizon, $242): Applicant had an account with this creditor, but she
asserts it was paid. She has disputed the validity of this debt, which the creditor
is not actively collecting, and it has been deleted from her credit history. (Tr. 48;
Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. D)
- SOR ¶ 1.i (AFNI-Bloom for $1,021): This is a collection account for a now-
defunct mobile phone carrier. Applicant brought her account current in 2007.
Because the company no longer exists, she has been unable to have the
account deleted from her credit history. (Gx. 2; Ax. B; Ax. D; Tr. 34 - 35, 48 - 49)
- SOR ¶¶ 1.j and 1.k (two AaronRents accounts totaling approximately $3,043):
Applicant has never had an account with this creditor and the debts have been
removed from her credit history. (Tr. 34, 48 - 49; Ax. A; Ax. D)
- SOR ¶ 1.m (USA Discounters, $3,049): This debt is for furniture she and her
ex-husband financed. He retained the furniture at their overseas assignment
when they separated. She does not know what happened to the furniture.
4
Nonetheless, she has been trying to negotiate a settlement with this creditor. (Tr.
35 - 36; Ax. A; Gx. 2)
 - SOR ¶ 1.n (civil judgment in favor of Henderson Webb, Inc., for unpaid rent
totaling $756): Applicant never failed to pay rent while living in the apartment
complex in question. She completed the full term of the lease before vacating the
apartment. The clerk’s office at the courthouse where this judgment was entered
now says there is no record of any judgment against Applicant. This debt has
been removed from her credit report. (Tr. 54 - 56; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. D; Gx. 2)
- SOR ¶ 1.o (Zenith Acquisition / ArcCertegy for $110): Applicant has been
unable to find out what this debt is for and has received no information confirming
the debt is hers. (Tr. 58; Gx. 2; Ax. A)
- SOR ¶ 1.p (Beneficial / HFC for $7,022): This is a loan her ex-husband obtained
using both their names. It has been paid. It has been deleted from her credit
history. (Tr. 58 - 59; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. D)
- SOR ¶ 1.q (NCO Med Clr for $447): This is a collection account for a medical
debt; however, even during two brief periods of unemployment after she left the
Army, Applicant has had medical insurance. This debt has been removed from
her credit history. (Tr. 59 - 60; Ax. A; Ax. D)
- SOR ¶ 1.r (Pioneer ML GA for $3,305): This is another loan her ex-husband
obtained using both their names. Applicant does not know if this debt has been
paid. It has been deleted from her credit history. (Tr. 60; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. D)
- SOR ¶ 1.s (United Compuc for $170): Applicant does not remember what this
debt was for. It has been removed from her credit history. (Tr. 60; Gx. 2; Ax. A;
Ax. D)
Of the remaining debts alleged in the SOR, Applicant has acknowledged she is
liable for them, but that she has either paid them or is working with the creditors to
resolve them. Applicant disputes the amount of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a (Ashford at
Atwood for $4,909). This is a debt for unpaid rent after Applicant broke her lease early
to keep her ex-husband from finding her. Applicant insists she owes only about $1,400.
(Tr. 37 - 40; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. E) The debt alleged in ¶ SOR 1.e (Woodland Grove for
$6,010) is also for unpaid rent. Applicant co-signed a lease for her mother in 2007.
However, her mother became unable to work and defaulted on the lease when she
moved out. Applicant has a settlement offer pending with the collection agency handling
the account. (Tr. 33, 44 - 46; Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. E)
The debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.l (Toyota Mtr for $9,130) is the remainder after resale
of a car Applicant had voluntarily repossessed. In 2006, she financed at a high interest
rate the purchase of a used car for $16,000. After about a year, she realized she would
not be able to pay the note as agreed. She has been negotiating with the creditor to
establish a repayment plan for a lesser amount in satisfaction of the loan. (Tr. 51 - 53,
79 - 80; Gx. 2) Finally, the debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.t (ROI for $642) is an unpaid medical
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
 Directive. 6.3.5
5
bill for treatment she received at a hospital in the state where she was living before she
took her current job. Applicant has made arrangements to pay this debt. (Tr. 60 - 61;
Gx. 2; Gx. 5)
Applicant’s current finances are sound, as shown by a positive monthly cash flow
of about $1,000 after expenses and debt payments. She has sent her child to live with
her mother pending resolution of this matter. As a result, her current expenses include
about $700 she sends her mother to care for the child. However, Applicant has cut her
monthly rent by $450 and her food and other expenses by about $100 each month. (Tr.
64 - 68) She is meeting all of her current obligations and is living well within her means;
however, her ability to repay her debts sooner has been hampered by unexpected
expenses related to the deaths of two family members in 2008, two brief periods of
unemployment, the costs of her divorce, and a November 2007 burglary in which she
lost several personal belongings and about $1,100 with which she intended to pay the
rent. Applicant also sought financial counseling in May 2008. (Gx. 2)
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to4
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies5
in the revised Adjudicative Guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the
factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole
person” concept, those factors are:
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative
factors addressed under AG ¶ 18 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations). 
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.6
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).7
6
The government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an
applicant. Additionally, the government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute,
extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security
clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.  A person who has access6
to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the government based
on trust and confidence. Thus, the government has a compelling interest in ensuring
each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one
who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the
national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an
applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.7
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The government presented sufficient information to show, as alleged in SOR ¶¶
1.a - 1.t, that Applicant owed $50,107 for 20 delinquent or past due financial obligations.
The debts were unpaid or past due for up to five years. The resulting security concern
about Applicant’s finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that:
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, the record requires application of the disqualifying conditions listed at
AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations).
By contrast, Applicant has shown that many of the debts alleged were either not
hers, were likely her ex-husband’s responsibility when her marriage ended, or have
been resolved. Applicant also established that she was acting to resolve her financial
problems long before DOHA adjudicators issued the SOR. As of the hearing, Applicant
had paid, resolved, or successfully disputed as invalid all but four of the debts alleged
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e, 1.l, and 1.t) totaling $20,691. Of these debts, she likely owes only
about $1,400 for SOR ¶ 1.a and will be able to settle for less than 50% the remaining
debts. Combined with her reduction of expenses to free up funds to pay her past
obligations, and her current positive cash flow, her remaining debts are not likely to
cause her to act contrary to the national interest to resolve his past delinquencies. 
 See footnote 5, supra.8
7
Until she began the clearance application process, Applicant was unaware of the
full extent of debt attributed to her in her credit history. However, she fully disclosed in
her e-QIP all of the adverse financial information she found when she took it upon
herself to get a credit report so she could accurately complete that document.
Thereafter, she aggressively went about the task of disputing inaccurate information
and resolving her obligations, a process that began about a year before the SOR was
issued. Applicant also sought financial counseling and has, more recently, greatly
reduced her monthly expenses while she resolves her debts. Applicant actually is
responsible for about 40% of the more than $50,000 debt alleged in the SOR. Further, it
is reasonable to conclude that she will be able to pay or resolve her remaining debt in
the next two years.
All of the foregoing requires application of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 20(a)
(the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) (emphasis added), AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's
control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency,
or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances), AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control), and AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts). On balance, Applicant’s information is sufficient to
mitigate the Guideline F security concerns established by this record. 
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a 31-year-old single
mother. Through the actions she has taken to resolve her financial problems, and
through her solid performance at work, has demonstrated she is a mature, responsible
adult. Her financial problems represent only a brief portion of her background, and she
did not intentionally or knowingly mismanage her finances. There has been no
misconduct here. Applicant has been forthright and candid about the adverse
information about her finances, and her testimony about her finances was credible.  In
view of the good health of her current financial circumstances, it is unlikely she will
experience such problems in the future or that she will act contrary to the national
interest to resolve her remaining delinquencies. A fair and commonsense assessment8
of all available information bearing on Applicant’s finances shows she has mitigated the
security concerns raised by the government’s information.
8
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.t: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for security clearance is
granted.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
