KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s material findings are based on substantial evidence or constitute
reasonable characterizations or inferences that could be drawn from the record.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 08-0190.a1
DATE: 08/19/2009
DATE: August 19, 2009
In Re:
---------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-08190
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On December 8, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
2
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On May 27, 2009, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Matthew E. Malone
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive
¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
On appeal, Applicant raises the following issue: whether the Judge’s decision is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.
 
The Judge made the following relevant findings of fact: The SOR alleged that Applicant
owes approximately $17,500 for 16 delinquent debts, and Applicant admitted those debts.  Applicant
became aware of the extent of his debt when he was interviewed as part of his background
investigation.  Applicant’s wages were garnished in 2005 to satisfy a child support arrearage.
Applicant satisfied the arrearage and is now current on his child support obligation.  Applicant
resolved a debt for unpaid rent which was incurred by his ex-wife.  Other than those two obligations,
Applicant has not documented any steps to resolve his delinquent debts other than hiring a company
which will resolve his debts over a period of time after Applicant pays them a fee.  As of the time
of the hearing, Applicant could not document that the company had resolved any of his debts.
Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to periods of unemployment and to marital problems
in his first marriage.  Applicant is highly regarded by his employer.  
In his appeal brief, Applicant discusses aspects of his financial situation, and he appends two
recent letters of recommendation from his employer and a letter from the debt resolution company.
To the extent that any of that information is new evidence that was not provided at the hearing, the
Board cannot consider it.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  
The Appeal Board’s review of the Judge’s findings of facts is limited to determining if they
are supported by substantial evidence—“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept
as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”
Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  “This is something less than the weight of the evidence, and the possibility
of drawing two inconsistent conclusions from the evidence does not prevent an administrative
agency’s finding from being supported by substantial evidence.”  Consolo v. Federal Maritime
Comm’n, 383 U.S. 607, 620 (1966).
After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge’s material findings are based
on substantial evidence, or constitute reasonable characterizations or inferences that could be drawn
from the record.  Applicant states that the Judge misunderstood the terms of his agreement with the
debt resolution company.  To the extent that the Judge misstated the terms of the agreement, the
error is harmless, since the Judge discussed the agreement only to indicate that Applicant had not
made any progress in reducing his delinquent debts through his agreement with the company as of
the date of the hearing.  The record supports that conclusion.  Applicant  has not identified any
harmful error likely to change the outcome of the case.  Considering the record evidence as a whole,
the Judge’s material findings of security concern are sustainable.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-01105
at 2 (App. Bd. Dec. 15, 2008).
3
Applicant argues that the Judge should have given more weight to his efforts to improve his
financial situation.  Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden
shifts to the applicant to establish mitigation.  Directive  ¶ E3.1.15.  In his Findings of Fact, the
Judge referred to Applicant’s testimony of mitigating circumstances.  Decision at 5-6.  However,
the presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable
security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and
decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable, or vice versa.  An applicant’s
disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different
interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or
reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 07-05632 at 2 (App. Bd. May 13, 2007).
A review of the record indicates that the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by
Applicant against his financial history and considered the possible application of relevant mitigating
conditions and factors.  Decision at 5-6.  The Judge reasonably explained why the evidence
Applicant had presented in mitigation was insufficient to overcome the government’s security
concerns.  Id.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by
Applicant is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4,  2007).  The Judge examined the
relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for his decision,  “including a ‘rational
connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United
States, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck
Lines v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general standard is that a clearance may be
granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” Dep’t of the Navy
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Accordingly, the Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Jean E. Smallin       
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields      
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
Signed: James E. Moody       
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
