                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ADP Case No. 08-03721 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jonathan M. Andes, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate Guideline F (Financial Considerations) security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted her Public Trust Position Application (SF-85P) on July 27, 
2007. On February 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) for Applicant.  
 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, as amended (Regulation), 
and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on 
December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued 
after September 1, 2006.  
1 
 
2 
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 6, 2009. She answered the 
SOR in writing on March 17, 2009, and requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. DOHA received the request on March 23, 2009. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on May 18, 2009, and I received the case assignment on May 21, 
2009.  
 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 29 2009, scheduling the case for June 
9, 2009. The hearing was held as scheduled. The government offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on 
her own behalf, and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through and P, which were 
received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 17, 
2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. Her admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old customer service representative, who has been 
employed by a defense contractor since July 2007. GE 1, Tr. 47. She seeks to retain 
access to sensitive information in conjunction with a public trust position, which is a 
condition of her employment. Tr. 47-48. 
 
 Applicant attended a business school from September 1975 to April 1976, and 
was awarded a secretarial degree in April 1976. GE 1, Tr. 43. She has been married 
since April 1984. Applicant and her husband have one child, a 13-year-old daughter. GE 
1. 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation and 
included the review of her July 2007 SF-85P, her September 2008 Answers to DOHA 
Interrogatories, and her September 2008 and August 2007 credit reports. GE 1 – 4. 
 
The government alleged in the SOR and established by Applicant’s admissions 
and or evidence presented that she has seven delinquent debts totaling $314,753. The 
debts consist of five charged off accounts, one judgment, and one foreclosure 
proceeding. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.g.)  
 
Applicant attributes her financial difficulties to several factors to include being out 
of work for “about a month” after an injury, her husband’s cumulative two and one-half 
years of unemployment beginning in 2005, and the unscrupulous practices of a lender. 
Tr. 12, 18-20, 25. Shortfalls in income led to Applicant getting behind on her bills, and 
using credit cards to pay living expenses. Ultimately, her lender foreclosed on their 
home. Applicant and her husband used the services of a debt consolidation company 
until her husband lost one of his jobs. Applicant and her husband attempted to work with 
their mortgage company, but “they weren’t willing to work with us.” Tr. 21-24. 
 
3 
 
Applicant and her family are now renting a house for $1,000 per month. She 
drives a late model minivan with high mileage in need of repair, Tr. 21, 24. Applicant 
estimates, based on her current combined salary with her husband after monthly 
expenses, she has net remainder of “[m]aybe $100.” At her hearing, she stated she had 
“[p]robably $100” in her savings account and typically had a checking account balance 
of “[p]retty close to none.” She described her situation as, “[w]e really live paycheck to 
paycheck trying to do better.” Tr. 29-32.  
 
Applicant and his wife are unable to pay the debts alleged. They consulted with a 
bankruptcy attorney and on February 9, 2008, signed a retainer agreement for him to 
represent them in a chapter 7 proceeding. The agreement requires them to pay their 
attorney $2,050 plus a $299 filing fee before he will initiate bankruptcy proceedings. GE 
2. As of the hearing date, they had only paid their bankruptcy attorney $400 towards his 
fee. Tr. 36-37. Applicant’s financial recovery plan is to file chapter 7 bankruptcy as soon 
as she and her husband are able to pay the remainder their bankruptcy attorney’s 
required fee. Their ability to pay the balance of attorney fees has recently been 
hampered by expensive automobile repair bills for her husband’s late model sedan after 
the “motor blew up.” Tr. 38. 
 
Applicant summarized her position as, “We’re trying to do the best we can and, 
provide for our daughter and keep a roof over our head.” Tr. 46. As of her hearing date, 
her financial recovery plan was to pay her bankruptcy attorney his fee when able, and 
file chapter 7 bankruptcy. Tr. 48-49.  
 
Applicant submitted 16 reference letters. Collectively, these letters convey a 
powerful message that Applicant is hard working, honorable, trustworthy, wonderful 
wife, mother and friend, and a most caring and giving person. The authors of these 
letters included childhood friends, co-workers, relatives, members of her religious 
organization, and her personal representative. AE A – AE P. This characterization was 
consistent with how she presented herself at her hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
5 
 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The Guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.  
Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns. Applicant accumulated seven delinquent accounts, totaling 
$314,753 as noted supra. Her indebtedness began as early as 2005 and has been 
ongoing. The evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions, 
requiring a closer examination. 
 
The Guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties. Applicant experienced an 
injury causing her to miss work for a brief period, but more significantly her husband 
was unemployed cumulatively for two and one-half years beginning in 2005. This loss of 
income lead to significant financial problems that have been ongoing. Two potential 
mitigating conditions apply under this concern. 
 
Under AG & 20(b), it may be mitigating where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ As noted, Applicant was 
out of work for a brief period due to an injury, and her husband was unemployed for 
significant periods of time. With the loss of income, Applicant and her husband lost their 
home to foreclosure and accumulated other debts as noted in the SOR. 
 
I note that Applicant’s financial problems are not recent and have been ongoing 
for several years. The record is clear that Applicant and her husband experienced some 
conditions beyond their control as discussed supra, which lead to their current dilemma, 
and attempted to work with their creditors. For this reason, I am able to apply partial 
credit under mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
AG & 20(d) applies where the evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.@ Unfortunately, 
Applicant has been unable to initiate a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors. Her 
current strategy is to declare chapter 7 bankruptcy, but cannot do so until she pays her 
bankruptcy attorney fees. As of her hearing, she had paid $400 towards a $2,050 
attorney fee and $299 filing fee. Since she executed her retainer agreement with her 
attorney, she has a remaining balance of at least $1,949 and remains in arrears with 
debts totaling at least $314,753. Moreover, Applicant has no definitive ongoing plans 
that will allow her to move forward with bankruptcy, which will allow her to obtain a fresh 
start and establish a track record of financial responsibility. Given the significant amount 
of unresolved debt leveraged in favor of Applicant, I am unable to apply mitigating 
condition AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
 
6 
 
                                                          
The objective of a trustworthiness determination is the fair-minded, 
commonsense assessment of a person’s trustworthiness and fitness for access to 
sensitive information. Indeed, the “whole person” concept recognizes we should view a 
person by the totality of his acts and omissions. Each case must be adjudged on its own 
merits, taking into consideration all relevant circumstances, and applying sound 
judgment, mature thinking, and careful analysis. 
 
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this 
case, the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the 
Directive, and the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant has 
not mitigated the financial considerations concern. She has not overcome the case 
against her and satisfied her ultimate burden of persuasion.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from her 
financial considerations.  
 
In fairness to the Applicant, this decision should not be construed as a 
determination that she cannot or will not attain the state of financial stability necessary 
to justify the holding of a public trust position. To the contrary, her mitigating evidence 
and whole person analysis suggests a sound potential for positive reform and 
outstanding accomplishments in the defense industry. Were it merely a matter of 
favorable character evidence alone, Applicant would prevail. Given the amount of 
Applicant’s indebtedness, greater progress is required in her debt resolution. Should 
Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a public trust position in the future, 
she may well demonstrate persuasive evidence warranting a favorable result. 
 
  I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”1 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude she is not eligible for access to a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.g.:  Against Applicant 
 
 
1 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
