 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09918 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP) on March 26, 2008. On April 10, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concern 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On May 18, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 9, 2009. 
The case was assigned to me on June 11, 2009. On June 18, 2009, a Notice of Hearing 
was issued, scheduling the hearing for July 14, 2009. The case was heard on that date. 
The Government offered five exhibits which were admitted as Government Exhibits 
(Gov) 1 – 5. The Applicant testified and offered five exhibits which were admitted 
without objection as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A-E. The record was held open until July 
 
2 
 
 
28, 2009, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents.  He timely submitted a 42-
page document that was admitted as AE F. Department Counsel’s response to AE F is 
marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant submitted a 10-page document that was 
admitted as AE G. Department Counsel’s response to AE G is marked as HE II. The 
transcript was received on July 30, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old vice president of operations with a Department of 
Defense contractor seeking to maintain his security clearance. He has been employed 
with this company since June 2009. Prior to accepting this position, he worked for 12 
years as a senior program manager for another defense contractor. From October 1977 
to January 1, 1998, he served on active duty in the United States Air Force. He retired 
as a Lieutenant Colonel. He has held a security clearance for over 30 years with no 
security violations. He has been married three times. He and his second wife had four 
children, ages 24, 23, 22 and 19. They separated in March 2003 and were divorced in 
March 2006. He remarried in June 2008. (Tr at 4-7, 33-34, 56; Gov 1; AE A)  
 
On March 26, 2008, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) in order to apply for a security clearance. A 
subsequent background investigation revealed that Applicant has financial issues. The 
SOR alleges 12 delinquent accounts totaling approximately $59,078. Of that amount, 
$34,054 is related to a second mortgage on a home that was foreclosed, and $15,038 is 
the amount owed after Applicant’s ex-wife surrendered her car to the dealer during the 
divorce.   
 
Applicant had financial problems during the end of his second marriage. His 
divorce decree indicates Applicant and his second wife owed federal income taxes for 
tax years 2002 and 2003 as well as state income taxes for tax year 2001. The total 
amount owed was $8,600. Applicant has paid the back taxes. (AE F at 2) The back 
taxes owed are not alleged in the SOR but are relevant with regard to Applicant’s 
financial history. 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated that at the time of his separation 
from his second wife, they owned two properties in two different states. At the time of 
separation, all bills and home loan mortgage payments were current. In 2004 per court 
order, he began paying $5,382 per month total in spousal support ($2,951) and child 
support ($2,431). The temporary support order held him responsible for one of the 
mortgage payments in the amount of $1,528, a $377 debt, and his $687 truck payment. 
His wife was responsible for the remaining bills, which amounted to $4,177. His wife 
stopped making payments on the bills in 2005 when she decided to move to another 
 
3 
 
 
state where her childhood home was located. Ultimately, both homes owned by 
Applicant and his second wife went to foreclosure. (Answer to SOR) 
 
 In late 2005, Applicant and his second wife reached a court settlement. The 
judge recommended both Applicant and his wife file for bankruptcy. His second wife 
filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy during the same timeframe of the divorce. The divorce 
decree mentions that Applicant intended to file for bankruptcy as well due to the 
substantial debts of the marriage. (See AE F)  
 
Applicant’s divorce was final in March 2006 and the temporary support order 
became final. Applicant was ordered by the court to continue to pay $2,951 in monthly 
spousal support and $2,431 in monthly child support. Spousal support payments end on 
June 18, 2010. The child support payment remains the same until Applicant’s youngest 
child reaches age 21 or June 29, 2011. (Gov 2 at 4; AE F at 16-21) He also agreed to 
be responsible for a $1,528 mortgage payment, a $377 second mortgage payment and 
a $687 payment for his truck. He agreed to let his daughter use a car which is titled in 
his name. He agreed to make the $425 monthly car payments until she turns 21. (AE F 
at 5-6, 20-21) 
 
Although not legally required to pay under the terms of the divorce agreement, 
Applicant gives his daughter $200 a month to help with her student loan payments. He 
paid his daughter’s monthly rent, $435 a month, when she was in college. He pays his 
19-year-old son’s truck payment which is $440 a month. The court-ordered monthly 
support obligations as well as the additional voluntary payments to his children made it 
difficult for him to meet his monthly expenses.  (Tr at 29-30, 32, 35; Gov 2 at 2)  
 
Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy on October 5, 2007. He listed total 
assets of $372,200. He listed total liabilities of $414,913. His non-priority unsecured 
debt totaled $88,913. Most of the unsecured debts were credit cards (19 credit card 
accounts). His gross monthly income was listed as $14,059.21. His net monthly income 
was $10,005. His annual income was listed as $168,710.52. On January 10, 2008, the 
bankruptcy court dismissed the case for abuse because Applicant earned too much 
income to meet the threshold of filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. (Gov 5) A recent 
change in the bankruptcy law made it more restrictive to file under Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
at the time Applicant filed.  
 
After the Chapter 7 bankruptcy was dismissed, Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney 
advised him to wait for the creditors to contact him and he could deal with them on an 
individual basis. (Tr at 28) 
 
In his written closing statement provided during the hearing, Applicant stated that 
his priorities since his separation and divorce from his second wife has been the well-
being of his children.  From August 2005 to July 2007, he paid an additional $650 a 
month to pay for his daughter’s room and board at college. He admits this priority has 
delayed his financial recovery. He comments: “If asked why I would risk my livelihood, 
 
4 
 
 
my response is that I don’t want my children starting out life with a huge debt from a 
college loan note.” (AE E)  
 
The current status of the delinquent accounts are: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b, $118 medical account placed for collection in July 2007. Paid as of 
April 2009. (Tr at 39; AE G at 3; Gov 4 at 3) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c, $260 medical account placed for collection in January 2008. Paid as 
of July 22, 2009. (Tr at 39; AE G at 5; Gov 3 at 1) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d, $336 medical account placed for collection in November 2006. 
Applicant claims paid. No proof submitted at the close of the record. (Tr at 40, Gov 2 at 
6; Gov 3 at 1; Gov 4 at 3; AE B) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e, $1,195 credit card account that was charged off in December 2003. 
The account has not been resolved. Applicant has not contacted the company for 
several years. (Tr at 41-42; Gov 2 at 6; Gov 3 at 1-2; Gov 4 at 4; AE B; AE G at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f, $1,561 department store credit card account that was charged off in 
August 2004. Applicant claims the account was paid.  After the hearing, he provided a 
letter, dated July 27, 2009, indicating he formally disputed the account with the credit 
reporting agencies. (Tr at 44; Gov 2 at 6; Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 8, 15; AE G at 6) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g, $2,611 credit card account that was charged off in November 2003. 
Applicant has made no efforts to pay this account because it is charged off. He has not 
contacted the company in years. Debt unresolved. (Tr at 42-43; Gov 2 at 6; Gov 3 at 2; 
AE B; AE G at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h, $15,038 amount owed after ex-wife’s automobile repossessed during 
the divorce. Date of last action on the account was November 2002. Applicant settled 
for $4,537. Debt paid with a credit card. (Tr at 44-45; Gov 3 at 3; Gov 4 at 13, 15; AE B; 
AE G at 8-9) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.i, $1,952 account that was charged off in March 2003. Applicant claims 
this account successfully disputed with credit reporting agencies. No proof submitted at 
the close of the record. (Tr at 46; Gov 2 at 6; Gov 3 at 3; Gov 4 at 5; AE B; AE G at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j, $34,054 second mortgage, home foreclosure that was charged off in 
April 2005. Applicant claims the home was foreclosed and resold. At the hearing, he 
was not aware if he owed any money on the second mortgage as a result of the sale. 
After the hearing, Applicant contacted his attorney. His attorney told him that the state 
law where the home was located indicates that all debts are cleared upon repossession. 
His attorney is contacting the company who owned the second mortgage to obtain a 
letter that the company will not pursue further actions against Applicant. (Tr at 47; Gov 3 
at 3; Gov 4 at 7, 15; AE B; AE G at 2) 
 
5 
 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k, $368 cable bill placed for collection in April 2005. Debt was resolved. 
(Tr at 49; Gov 2 at 7; Gov 4 at 14; AE D)     
  
SOR ¶ 1.l, $348 account placed for collection in June 2007. Applicant claims the 
debt was paid. No receipt was provided. Post hearing submission indicates he is in the 
process of removing the entry from his credit report. (Tr at 49; Gov 2 at 7; Gov 4 at 15; 
AE G at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.m, $1,237 account placed for collection in May 2005. Applicant intends 
to dispute this account. On July 27, 2009, he formally disputed the account with the 
credit reporting agencies. (Tr at 49; Gov 2 at 7; Gov 4 at 16; AE B; AE G at 10) 
 
In response to interrogatories, Applicant provided a copy of monthly budget 
dated February 3, 2009. He listed his net monthly salary as $7,303.05. His Air Force 
monthly retirement income is $3,503. His total net monthly income is $10,806. His 
current wife’s net monthly income is $2,549. Their total net monthly income is $13,355. 
Their monthly expenses total $11,435.47. After expenses, they have approximately 
$1,920 left over each month for discretionary spending. (Gov 2 at 5) During the hearing, 
Applicant indicated that his income has decreased about a $1,000 each month with his 
new job. (Tr at 50)  
 
In February 2009, Applicant and his current wife purchased a home. Applicant 
was unable to qualify for a mortgage because of his poor credit history. He borrowed 
approximately $170,000 from a personal friend and business associate in order to 
purchase the home. (Tr at 54) 
 
During the hearing, Applicant provided a chronology of his 30-year history of 
holding a security clearance.  The chronology includes his Air Force career and his 
career as a defense contractor. (AE A)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
 
6 
 
 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
7 
 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); FC DC &19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations); and FC DC ¶ 19(e) (consistent spending beyond one’s means, 
which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
encountered financial difficulties as early as 2001. He and his second wife owed state 
income taxes for 2001 and federal income taxes for tax years 2002 and 2003. The two 
homes they owned went to foreclosure at the time of the divorce. Schedule E of his 
bankruptcy listed $88,913 in unsecured debts. While Applicant claims the debts were 
being paid prior to separating from his second wife, the amount of their unsecured debt 
indicates that they were spending beyond their means and headed towards financial 
issues regardless of whether they stayed together or separated. The SOR alleged 12 
delinquent accounts, an approximate total balance of $59,078. 
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. September 22, 2005)).  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply. 
Applicant has had financial problems for several years. He recently started to resolve 
several of his delinquent accounts. At the close of the record, he provided proof that 
four of the delinquent accounts were resolved. However, eight accounts remained 
unresolved at the close of the record. Applicant is still in the midst of his financial 
problems. Applicant’s failure to address his financial issues raises questions about his 
reliability and good judgment.    
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies, in part, due to Applicant’s divorce 
which accelerated Applicant’s financial problems. The second prong of this mitigating 
condition asks whether the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.  After 
Applicant’s Chapter 7 bankruptcy was dismissed, he did nothing to resolve his 
delinquent accounts for years. Although, he claims that his attorney advised him to 
passively wait until the creditors contacted him, considering his extensive history of 
holding a security clearance, he should have recognized a potential security concern 
was raised pertaining to his finances. He had options. He could have filed for 
bankruptcy under Chapter 13. He could have consulted with a credit counseling agency 
 
8 
 
 
to establish a plan to resolve his debts. He chose to ignore his delinquent debt until he 
discovered that it may have an adverse effect on his security clearance. 
 
 Instead of resolving his delinquent financial obligations, he used the money that 
should have been applied towards his debts to pay his daughter’s car payment and her 
rent while she was in college. He continues to pay her $200 a month to apply towards 
her college loans. He pays his youngest son’s car payment of $440 a month.  While it is 
understandable that Applicant wants to support to his children, it was poor judgment to 
do so at the expense of his other financial obligations. Cars are luxuries as opposed to 
necessities. I cannot conclude Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
For this reason, FC MC ¶ 20(b) is given less weight.   
 
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. Applicant has not attended financial counseling. While Applicant 
resolved some accounts, the majority of the delinquent accounts remain unresolved.   
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies with respect to the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.h, and 1.k.  However, the remaining debts are unresolved. Applicant has 
had no contact for several years with many of his creditors. Eight of the accounts 
remain unresolved at the close of the record. Applicant took no steps to resolve many of 
the accounts until after he learned they would be a security issue. Overall, Applicant has  
not made a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts.  
 
FC MC ¶20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue) does not apply. Although at the close of the record, Applicant provided evidence 
that he formally disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f, I.i, 1.l, and 1.m, the status of 
Applicant’s disputes are pending. It is premature to conclude there is a reasonable basis 
to dispute the legitimacy of the debts.  
 
While Applicant encountered financial problems as a result of his divorce, he 
ignored his delinquent debts after his Chapter 7 bankruptcy was dismissed. He did not 
begin to resolve his delinquent accounts until recently. He had the income to resolve the 
delinquent debts but chose to provide extra support to his children. While one can 
understand a parent’s desire to provide support to their children, it was irresponsible to 
ignore his other financial obligations. Most of the delinquent accounts remain 
unresolved. It is too soon to conclude that he has mitigated the concerns raised under 
Guideline F.    
   
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
9 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 20 years of 
honorable service as an Air Force officer. I considered his 12-year employment history 
with defense contractors. I considered his 30-year history of holding a security 
clearance. I considered the financial problems which occurred during his second 
marriage which were aggravated by his separation and divorce. I considered the large 
amount of court-ordered spousal and child support payments. However, having been 
entrusted with a security clearance for over 30 years, Applicant should have been 
aware that his financial situation would raise a security concern. His divorce was final in 
March 2006. He ignored his delinquent debts for years. He did not take steps to honor 
his financial obligations until recently. While there is some mitigation in this case, 
Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  He did not mitigate the concerns raised under financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
