 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-09182 
 SSN: ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Michael D. Segler, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing  
(e-QIP) on March 18, 2008. On April 27, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 
2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 
1, 2006.  
  
 On May 15, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 5, 2009. 
The case was assigned to me on that same date. On June 18, 2009, a Notice of 
Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for July 14, 2009. The case was heard on 
that date. The Government offered five exhibits which were admitted as Government 
Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 5. The Applicant testified and offered 14 exhibits which were admitted 
without objection as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A - N. The record was held open until July 
 
2 
 
 
28, 2009, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents.  She timely submitted a 
five-page document that was admitted as AE O. Department Counsel’s response to AE 
O is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The transcript was received on July 30, 2009.  
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admits all of the SOR allegations.  
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old systems engineer with a Department of Defense 
contractor seeking to maintain her security clearance. She has been employed with her 
company since January 1998. Her highest level of education is a master’s degree in 
applied computer science. She has worked for various defense contractors during her 
career and has held a security clearance since 1980. She is married and has three adult 
children and three adult stepchildren. (Tr at 72, 100; Gov 1)  
 
On March 18, 2008, Applicant completed an e-QIP as part of a periodic 
reinvestigation to maintain her security clearance. She listed that she was behind on a 
first and second mortgage on a home that she previously lived in. She and her husband 
were in the process of negotiating a short sale. (Gov 1, section 28(b)) The short sale 
was unsuccessful. On September 22, 2008, the home went to foreclosure. The two 
allegations in the SOR involve a $90,734 debt owed to the mortgage company that held 
a second mortgage on the property (SOR ¶ 1.a) and a $340,000 debt owed to the 
mortgage company that held the first mortgage on the property. (SOR ¶ 1.b) 
 
Applicant married her current husband while both were working for a defense 
contractor in the southeastern part of the United States. They married in December 
2004. Applicant’s husband owned a home in the area. After their marriage, he added 
Applicant’s name to the deed. Only his name is on the mortgage. Applicant’s daughter 
and future husband lived with Applicant and her husband.  The project that Applicant 
and her husband were working on terminated after 11 months. They were both 
transferred to a location in the mid-Atlantic region of the United States. They moved in 
late April 2005. (Tr at 15-19) 
 
When they moved, they did not put the house on the market. Applicant’s 
daughter and her husband continued to live in the house. They could not afford to pay 
the full mortgage payment. Applicant and her husband agreed to let them pay $650 a 
month towards the mortgage. The mortgage payment was $1,588. Applicant and her 
husband would pay the remainder. The plan was for Applicant’s daughter and son-in-
law to eventually buy the house. Applicant’s son-in-law claimed that he had a lawsuit 
pending and would receive some money. They would then be able to buy the house. (Tr 
at 20) 
 
From May 2005 to August 2006, Applicant’s daughter and son-in-law paid no 
rent. Applicant and her husband initially did not push the issue because Applicant’s 
 
3 
 
 
daughter had just had a baby. (Tr at 26) Applicant and her husband eventually put the 
house up for sale, but Applicant’s son-in-law refused to let the real estate agent in the 
house or allow people to look at the house. Applicant’s son-in-law and her daughter 
refused to move out of the home. On August 16, 2006, Applicant and her husband filed 
eviction proceedings against her daughter and son-in-law. (AE A) Their son-in-law 
countersued. Applicant and her husband hired an attorney. A court date was scheduled 
for April 3, 2007. Applicant and her husband appeared in court with witnesses. 
Applicant’s daughter and son-in-law did not appear. Instead, they moved out of the 
home to another state. Prior to moving out, they caused significant damage to the 
home. On April 3, 2007, a judgment was awarded to Applicant and her husband in the 
amount of $36,563 against her daughter and son-in-law. (AE B) They doubt that they 
will receive money as a result of the judgment.  They repaired the home and put it up for 
sale. The home sold in November 2008.  Applicant and her husband paid the mortgage 
payments from May 2005 to November 2008. They paid the utilities from April 2007 to 
November 2008, after Applicant’s daughter and her husband moved out. They spent 
approximately $67,000 to maintain the property from May 2005 to November 2008. (Tr 
at 20 – 36)  
 
After transferring to their new job location, Applicant and her husband purchased 
a new home in June 2005.  The house cost $439,000. The first mortgage was for 80%  
of the purchase. The second mortgage was for 20% of the purchase price. The house 
payment on the new home was approximately $4,000 a month. Applicant and her 
husband were able to pay the mortgage payments on both homes with their combined 
incomes. (Tr at 19, 31) 
 
The situation involving Applicant’s daughter and son-in-law caused a lot of 
stress. Applicant believed that she could deal with the situation better if she lived closer 
to where their former residence was located. She also did not like the area and the 
weather of her new job location. Applicant started to look for another job and eventually 
found one. In October 2006, she moved back to the southeastern part of the United 
States and accepted a job with another defense contractor. Her husband planned to 
stay behind until their new home sold or until he found a job in the area near Applicant’s 
new job.  He soon found a new job and moved in November 2006. (Tr at 36-37; Gov 2 
at 3) 
 
In October 2006, the house with the 80/20 mortgage was listed for sale. They did 
not receive sufficient offers on the home to cover both mortgages on the home.  In June 
2007, Applicant and her husband purchased a home near their new location. The 
mortgage payment was $2,500.  They paid the mortgages on three homes totaling 
approximately $8,000 for one month until Applicant lost her job in July 2007. Applicant’s 
salary at the time she was laid off was $117,000 a year. She was unemployed for 
approximately seven months. She and her husband could not pay all three mortgages 
on his salary alone. After several attempts at a short sale, the home with the 80/20 
mortgage went to foreclosure in September 2008. (Tr at 37 – 43, 81)  
 
 
4 
 
 
On February 11, 2009, Applicant and her husband’s foreclosed home sold at a 
sheriff’s sale. (AE F) Applicant and her husband were never contacted about a 
deficiency judgment after the sale. Local law requires that an action for deficiency shall 
be commenced within three months from the date of the sale. (AE O at 4) Applicant and 
her husband are not aware of the existence of any deficiency judgment. Applicant 
recalls that her real estate attorney told her that the obligation had been satisfied 
because the first mortgagor received the deed to the house. She does not believe she 
owes any more money on the first mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.b). (Tr at 84-85) 
 
For the second mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.a), Applicant understands that references to 
the second mortgagor were deleted from the judgment, which means that she and her 
husband do not have a legal obligation towards the second mortgage.  She is still 
contacting the second mortgagor to inquire about a possible settlement. On July 9, 
2009, she offered a $10,000 settlement on the $90,000 mortgage. She intends to work 
with the second mortgage company if this settlement offer is not accepted. (Tr at 86-87; 
AE K) 
 
Applicant’s net monthly income is approximately $5,146. (AE I; AE J) Her 
husband’s net monthly income is approximately $5,190. He retired from the United 
States Navy as a lieutenant commander and receives approximately $2,083 in military 
retirement. (AE L at 4). Their total net monthly income is $12,419.  Their total monthly 
expenses are approximately $7,246. Their total income left over after expenses are 
$5,173. (Tr at 91; AE L)  
 
Before their recent home foreclosure, Applicant and her husband had no 
problems with credit.  They are current on their taxes. They regularly check their credit 
reports for any discrepancies. They have never had systemic financial problems. They 
have never filed for bankruptcy. They are current on their other financial obligations. (Tr 
at 92, 96-99; AE M; AE N)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and FC DC &19(c), (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant was unable to pay the 
 
6 
 
 
mortgage payments on one of her three homes which ultimately led to foreclosure. The 
home has a first mortgage in the approximate amount of $340,000 and a second 
mortgage in the amount of $90,734.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. The 
mortgage foreclosure happened within the past year. Although claims were made during 
the hearing that Applicant and her husband owe nothing further on the first and second 
mortgages on the foreclosed home, nothing was presented from both mortgage 
companies indicating that they have no further issues with Applicant and her husband.  
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies in part. Applicant’s and her 
husband’s financial situation was complicated as a result of her daughter’s and son-in-
law’s failure to follow through with the terms of their rental agreement. However, 
Applicant’s decision to quit her job and move back to the southeastern part of the United 
States was out of choice rather than necessity. The decision to purchase a third home 
at their new location while still responsible for two mortgages demonstrated poor 
judgment. However, Applicant’s seven-month period of unemployment resulted in 
Applicant and her husband being unable to pay all of the mortgages. A downturn in the 
real estate market adversely affected their ability to sell the house with the 80/20 
mortgage. Attempts at a short sale were unsuccessful. Applicant and her husband took 
steps to prevent the foreclosure. Their mortgage problems were partially caused by 
circumstances beyond their control. However, FC MC ¶ 20(b) is given less weight 
because it was within Applicant’s control to delay purchasing a third home until the 
issues with the other two mortgages were resolved.   
 
FC MC ¶20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply with regard to counseling. However, Applicant’s financial issues 
are being resolved. Applicant’s daughter and son-in-law moved out of their home. They 
sold that home in November 2008. The second home was foreclosed and sold at 
auction in February 2009. Applicant and her husband both work full time. Aside from the 
mortgage issue, they have had no other financial issues. The problem appears to be 
under control.    
 
7 
 
 
FC MC &20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) applies because Applicant and her husband 
attempted to sell the home as a short sale before the foreclosure. They hired a real 
estate attorney. They made a good-faith effort to prevent the home from going to 
foreclosure.  
 
Applicant and her husband encountered financial trouble when they were unable 
to make the mortgage payments on their three homes after Applicant lost her job and 
was unemployed for seven months. They would have been able to sell their first home if 
Applicant’s daughter and son-in-law had cooperated. Ultimately, they had to file eviction 
proceedings against their own family members to gain control of the residence. They 
attempted to sell the second home, but did not receive offers that would pay off the 
mortgages on the home. They unsuccessfully attempted to sell the home as a short 
sale, but eventually had to turn the home over to foreclosure. While Applicant and her 
husband’s decision to purchase a new home while still responsible for two mortgages 
demonstrated questionable judgment, circumstances beyond their control contributed to 
their inability to pay all the mortgage payments. The fact that they pursued other 
avenues to prevent the foreclosure and have no other delinquent accounts aside from 
the mortgage foreclosure weighs heavily in their favor.  Applicant has mitigated the 
concerns raised under Guideline F.  
    
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s long career 
with various defense contractors. I considered that Applicant and her husband had no 
other financial issues aside from the mortgage foreclosure. I considered that 
circumstances beyond Applicant’s control were a factor in the inability to meet all of their 
 
8 
 
 
mortgage payments.  While it did not demonstrate the best judgment to purchase 
another home before the sale of two other homes, Applicant’s seven-month period of 
unemployment contributed to her inability to pay all of her mortgage payments. During 
her security clearance application, Applicant provided detailed information as to the 
issues which led to her mortgage foreclosure. Based on her candor about the issues 
during her background investigation, her attempts to prevent the home from being 
foreclosed, and circumstances beyond her control, including a delicate situation 
involving her daughter and son-in-law, Applicant met her ultimate burden of persuasion 
to obtain a favorable clearance decision.   
 
Formal Findings 
  
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
