 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------- )
SSN: -------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-08375
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, Applicant’s
request for a security clearance is granted.
On April 9, 2008, Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions
(QNSP) to renew a security clearance he has held for about 20 years through the
military, and which he now requires for his civilian job with a defense contractor. After
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a set of
interrogatories  regarding information in his background. Based on the results of the1
background investigation and his response to the interrogatories, DOHA adjudicators
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is clearly consistent with2
 The revised Adjudicative Guidelines were approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and were3
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending official revision of the Directive,
they supercede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
2
the national interest to continue Applicant’s access to classified information. On
February 12, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts which raise security concerns addressed in the revised Adjudicative Guidelines
(AG)  under Guideline E (personal conduct) and Guideline F (financial considerations).3
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on April 6, 2009. I convened a hearing on April 21, 2009, at which the
parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented four exhibits (Gx. 1 - 4),
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and
proffered five exhibits (Ax. A - E), which were admitted without objection. I also left the
record open to allow Applicant time to submit additional relevant information. Applicant’s
post-hearing submission was timely received and has been admitted without objection
as Ax. F. DOHA received the transcript of hearing (Tr.) on May 7, 2009.
Procedural Issue
Under Guideline E, the government alleged through SOR ¶ 2.a that Applicant
intentionally omitted from his security clearance application relevant information about
his finances by answering “no” to question 28 (debts more than 180 days past due in
the preceding seven years). Applicant admitted the omission, but he denied any intent
to falsify or mislead. At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to withdraw this
allegation. (Tr., 7) Without objection, and in accordance with Directive, E3.1.17, the
SOR was amended to strike SOR ¶ 2.a. Accordingly, I have not applied the Guideline E
adjudicative factors as part of this decision. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the government alleged Applicant owes approximately
$72,000 for ten delinquent or past due financial obligations. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.j) Applicant
admitted, in part, and denied, in part, those allegations. In addition to the facts
established through his admissions, and after reviewing the pleadings, the transcript,
and exhibits, I have made the following findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is 42 years old and has been employed by a defense contractor since
December 2007. Prior to that, he served for 21 years in the U.S. Army before retiring
with an honorable discharge as a Staff Sergeant. His military service was exemplary, as
shown by the numerous personal awards and commendations he received. While in the
Army, he was primarily assigned as a logistics specialist. He has continued in that line
of work through his civilian employment. His job performance appears to be excellent as
shown by his recent receipt of a meritorious pay increase.  (Gx. 1; Ax. D; Tr., 40 - 43)
Applicant and his wife have been married since September 1989. They have
three children, ages 14, 11, and 9. (Gx. 1; Tr., 38) Applicant’s last active duty
 After they relocated, his wife was definitively diagnosed with a degenerative neurological disorder, which,4
although partially manageable, is eventually terminal.
3
assignment was at an Army base in the midwest United States beginning in 2003.
Applicant and his wife liked the area and financed the purchase of a new-construction
home for $161,500. With his wife working full time as a store manager for a national
retail chain, they were able to meet all of their financial obligations. However, around
2002 or 2003, she began having undiagnosed physical problems which interfered with
her ability to work. By 2005, Applicant’s wife became unable to work at all. In 2007,
Applicant was scheduled to return for a second deployment to Iraq, but the Army
allowed him to retire instead, effective in February 2008, in view of his wife’s medical
problems.
Applicant was hired by a defense contractor in December 2007 and had to move
his family. However, without a second income,  he could not cover the two mortgages4
they already had on their house and pay rent in their new location. They had to sell their
house or rent it to cover the mortgage. They were unable to do either and the mortgage
was eventually foreclosed and the house sold at auction for $138,600. (Gx. 2) Applicant
still owes approximately $33,000 on the first mortgage, but it is unclear if this is for the
deficiency on his first mortgage after the house was sold at auction, or if it is for a
balance past due before the mortgage went into foreclosure. (Gx.  3; Tr., 56 - 57) He
also owes nearly $19,000 for the balance of a second mortgage, which was not satisfied
through the sale of the house. (Gx. 3; Tr., 37)
In addition to the problems with his mortgage, Applicant also incurred other
delinquent debts. In all, credit reports obtained during his background investigation
showed Applicant owed approximately $22,434 for eight accounts. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.e,
1.h - 1.j) However, two of the debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.I) have been removed from his
credit history after Applicant showed they were not his. (Answer to SOR; Ax. A; Ax. F;
Tr., 48 - 52, 69 - 71) Applicant has paid four of the debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1d and 1.j),
and is paying $200 each month to resolve a fifth (SOR ¶ 1.h). (Ax. A; Ax. F; Tr., 26 - 27,
37, 48 - 52) Finally, in October 2008, Applicant enrolled in a debt management and
repayment plan wherein he originally paid $487 each month to resolve the debts he still
owes on his foreclosed mortgage and one other delinquent credit account (SOR ¶¶ 1.e -
1.g). His monthly payment was reduced to $198 after the erroneous accounts were
removed from his credit history. The plan is intended to have his debts paid or resolved
in three years. (Gx. 2; Ax. A; Ax. F; Tr., 51 - 55, 73)
Applicant is also trying to resolve the debts related to his mortgage foreclosure
through a DoD assistance program. The Department of Defense Homeowners
Assistance Program (HAP) is designed to provide financial assistance to military and
some DoD civilian employees who have lost money through declining property values
when they have had to sell their houses. Applicant has applied for such benefits and
submitted information about the assistance for which he thinks he will be eligible.
However, Applicant’s information (Ax. B) and the information available at the HAP web
page show that this program is aimed at persons who have had to move because of the
DoD Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) initiative. If he is eligible for assistance,
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive. 6.3.6
4
Applicant expects that his mortgage obligations will be satisfied in whole or in part. He
also understands that he will incur a taxable income benefit as a result of any
assistance or debt forgiveness that may occur. For now, however, he is repaying his
mortgage-related debts through his debt management and repayment plan. (Tr., 58 -
60, 73 - 74).
Applicant earns approximately $5,658 each month from his defense contractor
pay, a disability benefit from an active duty injury, and his Army retired pay. He is
current on all of his present obligations, such as rent, car notes, and other recurring
monthly obligations. After all of his expenses, including the debt repayment plan, are
paid each month, Applicant estimates that he is able to save about $800. (Ax. F; Tr., 65
- 69)
Policies
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to5
have access to classified information. Each decision must be a fair, impartial, and
commonsense determination based on examination of all available relevant and
material information,  and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies6
in the revised Adjudicative Guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the
factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole
person” concept, those factors are:
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of access to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information
presented by the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative
factors addressed under AG ¶ 18 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations). 
The government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security clearance for an
applicant. Additionally, the government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
5
in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute,
extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has a “right” to a security
clearance, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion.  A person who has access7
to classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the government based
on trust and confidence. Thus, the government has a compelling interest in ensuring
each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one
who will protect the national interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the
national interest” standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an
applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.8
Analysis
Financial Considerations.
The government presented sufficient information to support the allegations in
SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.j. The facts thus established show that Applicant owed approximately
$72,000 in delinquent debts comprised of two delinquent mortgages and numerous
delinquent personal credit accounts. The resulting security concern about Applicant’s
finances, as stated in AG ¶ 18, is that 
[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, the record requires application of the disqualifying conditions listed at
AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not
meeting financial obligations).
By contrast, Applicant has shown that his financial problems arose from unusual
circumstances that were beyond his control. It is likely that, had his wife not become ill,
he would have remained in the Army and his family would have remained in the house
they eventually lost. He has further demonstrated through a proactive approach to
resolving his debts, that his financial problems are not indicative of a defect in his
judgment or reliability. He has paid or resolved the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c,
1.d, and 1.j. He is making monthly payments on the debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.h, and the
debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.g are being paid off through a debt management
and repayment plan that Applicant had entered into before the SOR was issued.
Applicant also has been trying to resolve his mortgage-related debts through a DoD-
sponsored assistance program; however, it does not appear that he will be eligible to
participate in that program. Even if he does not receive that assistance, he will continue
 See footnote 6, supra.9
6
to pay off the debts left from his foreclosure. As to the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1,h, and 1.I,
Applicant established that those were for credit accounts that were not his, and they
have been removed from his credit history. Applicant also showed that his current
finances are sound and that he has a sufficient positive monthly cash flow that will allow
him to resolve his remaining debts while avoiding future financial difficulties.
All of the foregoing requires application of the mitigating conditions at AG ¶ 20(a)
(the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) (emphasis added), AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person's
control (e.g. loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency,
or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the
circumstances), AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under
control), and AG ¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts). On balance, Applicant’s information is sufficient to
mitigate the Guideline F security concerns established by this record. 
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F. I have also reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is 42 years old and,
through his military service and the actions he has taken to resolve his financial
problems, has demonstrated he is a mature, responsible adult. He has established that
his financial problems represent only a brief portion of his background, and that he did
not intentionally or knowingly mismanage his finances. Applicant’s past record of
integrity and reliability in his Army service and the good health of his current financial
circumstances make it exceedingly unlikely that he will experience such problems in the
future or that he would act contrary to the national interest to resolve his past
delinquencies. A fair and commonsense assessment  of all available information9
bearing on Applicant’s finances shows he has mitigated the security concerns raised by
the government’s information.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.j: For Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to
continue Applicant’s access to classified information. Request for security clearance is
granted.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
