1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------  ) ISCR Case No. 08-00312
SSN: ------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
This is a security clearance case in which Applicant contests the Defense
Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. The action
is based on Applicant’s connections to China via his involvement with a company doing
business in China. These circumstances raised security concerns under the guidelines
for foreign preference and outside activities. Applicant mitigated the security concerns
by resigning from the company, terminating his interests in the company, and pledging
not to travel to China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan. Accordingly, as explained in more detail
below, this case is decided for Applicant. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition, because the SOR
was issued after September 1, 2006, the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access
to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, then made
effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. They supersede or replace
the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
 Exhibit 4; Tr. 29–30. 2
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  the Defense1
Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to
Applicant on April 7, 2009. The SOR is equivalent to a complaint and it details the
factual basis for the action. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B for
foreign influence and Guideline L for outside activities. The SOR also recommended
submitting the case to an administrative judge for a determination to deny or revoke
Applicant’s security clearance. 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 27, 2009, and he requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on June 8, 2009. The hearing took place as scheduled on
July 16, 2009. The testimony of Applicant was taken, and Government Exhibits 1
through 4 were admitted. The record was kept open until July 31, 2009, to allow
Applicant to submit documentary evidence. Those matters were timely received, and
they are marked and admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits A through E. The hearing
transcript (Tr.) was received July 22, 2009. 
Procedural Matters
Administrative or official notice was taken of certain facts concerning the
People’s Republic of China (China) as set forth in Department Counsel’s written
request.  In summary, the most pertinent of those facts are as follows: (1) China has an2
authoritarian government that is dominated and controlled by the Chinese Communist
Party; (2) China is actively engaged in intelligence gathering (industrial and military) that
targets U.S. information and technology; and (3) China has a poor record of human
rights. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR allegations, which establish his connections to China
via a company doing business in China. For ease of understanding, it will be described
as the Chinese company throughout this decision. Applicant testified on his own behalf,
and I found his testimony credible in all respects. Based on the record as a whole, the
following facts are established by substantial evidence.
 Tr. 72. 3
 Tr. 43–44. 4
 Tr. 48. 5
 Tr. 51–52. 6
 Tr. 65–66.7
3
Applicant is a 49-year-old entrepreneur and self-employed business consultant.
His educational background includes an MBA, and he is also a certified public
accountant. He has his own company and works in the areas of venture formation,
private equity, and hedge funds. In his line of work, the formation of a new company
typically results in an equity ownership in the new enterprise.  He also serves as a3
director of several companies and is paid a fee for his services. He described himself as
a “technology guy” with a background in telecommunications, encryption, compression,
satellites, and thermal imaging.  He is seeking an industrial security clearance for the4
first time in connection with his business relationship with a defense-contractor
company. He serves as a director on the defense-contractor company’s board of
directors, and it is this company that is sponsoring him for the clearance. 
The Chinese company is a privately-held company with its headquarters or main
office in the U.S. The company is engaged in two lines of business: (1) buying and
selling of raw materials for a renewable-energy product; and (2) manufacturing certain
parts or components for a renewable-energy product. There is no overlap or
commonalities between the business lines of the Chinese company and the defense-
contractor company; the only commonality is Applicant’s involvement in each.  Of5
concern here is a subsidiary of the Chinese company that is currently building the
manufacturing facility in China. 
Applicant has served as a director and chief financial officer for the Chinese
company. He was a minority shareholder who held about 1.5% of the company’s stock.
The chief executive officer (CEO), chairman, and founder of the Chinese company
holds about 95% of the company’s stock. The CEO is a U.S. citizen who has Chinese
ethnicity. The remaining 3.5% of shares of the company are held by a Chinese citizen
who is overseeing the manufacturing facility in China. Applicant described his
relationship with that gentleman as remote, as Applicant has never met him or spoke to
him on the telephone and could not recall his name at the hearing.   6
Applicant received a large number of shares of stock (vested and unvested) in
the Chinese company in exchange for his services. He estimated the potential future
value of his equity interest was in the seven-figure range.  Beginning in 2007, Applicant7
sold shares of stock back to the company at the rate of $6,000 monthly for about nine
months for a total of $54,000 in capital gains. He ceased selling the shares in about
August 2008, when concerns were raised by written interrogatories that the Agency
 Tr. 53. 8
 Tr. 52–53. 9
 Exhibits A – E. 10
 Exhibit D. 11
 Exhibit C. 12
 Exhibit E. 13
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to14
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
4
propounded to him. He has received no compensation from the company since August
2008, when he “truncated his relationship with the company.”8
Applicant’s work for the Chinese company included a business trip to China in
2007. During the trip, he met with local or municipal governmental officials. He
described his role as preparing the business plan, providing advice in the areas of
capital structure of the company, offering prices, corporate governance documents, and
employment agreements, and he helped obtain the necessary building permits.9
Applicant fulfilled his responsibilities in this regard, he had no ongoing business role with
the manufacturing facility, and he had no ongoing contact with the Chinese
governmental officials since concluding the trip.    
Applicant has now resigned from the Chinese company, terminated his interests
in the company, and pledged not to travel to China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan, and he
has advised the defense-contractor company of his actions.  First, he notified the CEO10
of the Chinese company that he was resigning, effective July 16, 2009, as an employee,
officer, and director of the company.  Second, the three-page separation agreement11
between Applicant and the Chinese company sets forth the terms of the separation. It
specifies, among other things, that Applicant will not receive any form of severance or
separation payment, and that he irrevocably surrendered all outstanding stock, stock
options, and warrants.  Third, Applicant agreed in writing not to travel for whatever12
purpose to China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan, and he agreed to report any contact by a
Chinese national.  13
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As14
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
 484 U.S. at 531.15
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 16
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 17
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).18
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.19
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.20
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.21
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 22
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).23
5
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,15
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An16
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  17
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting18
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An19
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate20
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme21
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.22
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.23
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant
and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-
person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.24
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 6.  25
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 36. 26
 Revised Guidelines, ¶¶ 6–8 and ¶¶ 36–38 (setting forth the security concerns and all the disqualifying and27
mitigating conditions). 
6
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that an applicant has not met the24
strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
The foreign influence and outside activities concerns are discussed together
because the record shows the concerns are factually related or connected to each
other. Under Guideline B, the concern is that an applicant’s foreign connections may
raise security concerns by creating divided loyalties or interests. The overall concern is
that:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.25
Likewise, under Guideline L, the concern is that an applicant’s outside employment or
activities may raise security concerns by creating a conflict of interest. The overall
concern is that:
Involvement in certain types of outside employment or activities is of
security concern if it poses a conflict of interest with an individual’s
security responsibilities and could create an increased risk of unauthorized
disclosure of classified information.26
Under the foreign influence and outside activities guidelines,  the following27
disqualifying conditions are raised by the record:
Contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate,
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 7(a).28
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 7(e). 29
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 37(a).30
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 8(b). 31
 Revised Guidelines, ¶ 38(b). 32
7
that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion;28
A substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country,
or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject
the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation;  and 29
Any employment or service, whether compensated or volunteer, with: 
(1) the government of a foreign country; 
(2) any foreign national, organization, or other entity; 
(3) a representative of any foreign interest; and,
(4) any foreign, domestic, or international organization or person engaged
in analysis, discussion, or publication of material on intelligence, defense,
foreign affairs, or protected technology.30
The guidelines also provide that certain facts and circumstances may mitigate
the concerns. The following mitigating conditions are raised by the record: 
There is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  and31
The individual terminated the employment or discontinued the activity
upon being notified that it was in conflict with his or her security
responsibilities.32
The record contains substantial evidence of Applicant’s connections to China
through his business activities with the Chinese company. This evidence raises security
concerns under both guidelines. The concerns are now resolved, however, by
Applicant’s affirmative actions. He wholly mitigated the concerns by resigning from the
Chinese company and terminating his interests in it. At this point, Applicant has no
connections to the Chinese company, and he has no other connections to China that
are of concern. His actions were probably to his financial detriment given the potential
future value of his equity interest in the Chinese company. But his actions demonstrate
8
his true sense of loyalty or obligation is in favor of U.S. interests. And there is no conflict
of interest between Applicant’s business activities and his security responsibilities.
Applicant has done everything he could do to mitigate the security concerns. 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines B and L. Applicant met his ultimate
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided for
Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations, as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of
Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.f:  For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline L: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.     
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
