                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08038 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On March 30, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 13, 2009, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
file of relevant material (FORM) on May 21, 2009. Applicant received the FORM on May 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
o other information was provided. 
 
Policies 
h are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
26, 2009. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to the FORM and did not 
submit additional material. The case was assigned to me on August 6, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements submitted, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 24 years old years old and works for a defense contractor. He 
submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 2, 2008. He is a high 
school graduate and is not married. 
 
 Applicant admits he used marijuana from 2001 to October 2008. In April 2008, 
Applicant provided a statement to the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator and confirmed its accuracy on October 9, 2008. In the statement he 
confirmed his intention to continue to use marijuana in the future because he enjoys the 
way it makes him feel.1  
 
 Applicant admits he purchased marijuana from approximately 2001 to October 
2008. He admits he sold marijuana in the past. He admits he used cocaine in 
approximately 2003 and 2004. He admits he used hallucinogenic mushrooms in 
approximately 2004 and 2005. He admits he used LSD in approximately 2003 and 
2004. He does not intend in the future to use illegal drugs, other than marijuana.2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR he stated the following: “Based on reading 
Guideline H, it is clear to me that I am not eligible for [a] security clearance at this 
time.”3 
N
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, whic
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
1 Item 6. 
 
2 Item 4 and 6. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
3 
 
 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
ise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
as the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
on as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
n 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Anal sis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common-sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likew
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant h
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolati
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Sectio
y
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a 
 
4 
 
 
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and 
include: (1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified 
and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., 
marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and 
hallucinogens), and (2) inhalants and other similar substances;  
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a 
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
Under Title 50 U.S.C. § 435c(b) a security clearance may not be granted for a 
person who is an unlawful user of a controlled substance or an addict. 
 
 I have considered all of the drug involvement disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 
25 and have especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse;  
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
 
Applicant has a significant history of possession and use of illegal drugs from 
2001 to October 2008. He has sold illegal drugs in the past. He intends to continue to 
use marijuana. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the drug involvement mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 
and conclude none apply. Applicant did not offer any relevant evidence in mitigation.  
 
Analysis 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
5 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant admits he 
possessed and used illegal drugs from 2001 to October 2008. He sold illegal drugs in 
the past. He intends to continue to use marijuana in the future. Applicant failed to offer 
any relevant mitigating evidence regarding his past drug history. In addition, I find 
Applicant is disqualified from being granted a security clearance under Title 50 U.S.C. § 
435c(b) because he intends to continue to use marijuana. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under the guideline for Drug Involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.h:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the relevant circumstances presented by the record in this case, it 
is not clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
