1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-06283
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
August 3, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on November 16, 2007.  On March 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security
concerns under Guidelines F and G for Applicant.  The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on March 27, 2009.  She answered
the SOR in writing on April 8, 2009, and requested a hearing before an Administrative
Judge.  DOHA received the request on April 14, 2009, and I received the case
assignment on May 4, 2009.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 6, 2009, and I
convened the hearing as scheduled on May 29, 2009.  The Government offered
2
Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 14, which were received without objection.  Applicant testified
on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits (AppXs) A through F, without objection.
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on June 3, 2009.  I granted
Applicant’s request to keep the record open until June 13, 2009, to submit additional
matters.  On June 11, 2009, she submitted Exhibits G through J, without objection. The
record closed on June 15, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings,
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Motion to Amend SOR
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by adding the following verbiage
to ¶ 1.b, “You are indebted to the Internal Revenue Service for unpaid taxes for tax
years 2006, 2007, and 2008" (TR at page 78 lines 1~13).  There being no objection, the
motion to amend was granted.
Findings of Fact
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a.,
1.c., 1.e., 1.g.~1.i. and 2.b.~2.d. of the SOR, with explanations.  She denied the factual
allegations in ¶¶ 1.b., 1.d., 1.f., and 2.a. of the SOR..
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The Applicant is a 48 year old Data Management Analyst (TR at page 35 line 18
to page 36 line 6).  She has held a security clearance for “about 26 years” (TR at page
11~13).  She “got into financial difficulties four years ago,” for the most part, when she
speculated in the real estate market, and the real estate “market crashed” (TR at page
34 lines 13~20, and at page 38 line 23 to page 39 line 13).
1.a.  In November of 2007, the Applicant filed for the protection of a Chapter 7
Bankruptcy; and as a result, most of her indebtedness was discharged by way of
bankruptcy, in March of 2008 (TR at page 36 line 24 to page 38 line 2, and GXs 6 and
7).  However, her tax debts were not discharged; and as such, remained outstanding
(Id).
1.b.  The Applicant is indebted to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for unpaid
taxes in the following amounts: for tax year 2006, $11; for tax year 2007, $7,481; and
for tax year 2008, $11,723 (AppX H).  She has set up a payment plan with the IRS, by
which she is making monthly payments of $140 towards these back taxes (Id).
1.c.  It is alleged that the Applicant was indebted to a municipality for unpaid
property taxes in the amount of about $6,564 (see GX 13).  The Applicant thought that
this debt was discharged by her bankruptcy (TR at page 50 line 13 to page 51 line 9,
3
and at page 52 lines 6~13).  In any event, the Applicant owes no property taxes to this
municipality, as evidenced by a printout from this creditor (AppX I).
1.d.  It is alleged that the Applicant was indebted to a county for unpaid
supplemental taxes in the amount of about $412.  In her answer and at the hearing, the
Applicant has repeatedly denied this debt (TR at page 54 lines 21~25).  Furthermore,
this alleged tax debt does not appear on the Government’s most recent credit report
from May 2009 (GX 14).  I find that this debt is not outstanding.
1.e.~1.i.  In the past, the Applicant’s father had expressed concern about her
gambling (TR at page 40 lines 9~21).  In part, as a result, she received counseling for
compulsive gambling from May through November of 2007 (TR at page 59 lines 1~14,
and GX 5).  She also attended Gamblers Anonymous (GA) meetings from May of 2007
to May of 2008 (TR at page 70 lines 4~19, and at page 72 line 24 to page 74 line 11).
Prior to filing for the protection of bankruptcy in November of 2007, the Applicant
attempted to acquire money through her gambling, in order to help with her financial
problems.  She would also use credit cards to obtain cash advances to fund her
gambling.  She last gambled just “three weeks” prior to her hearing (TR at page 72 line
24 to page 74 line 11).  After her hearing, the Applicant has now expressed an intention
to again attend GA meetings (AppX J).
Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption
2.a.~2.d.  Prior to May of 2007, the Applicant was consuming alcohol to the point
of intoxication and blackouts (GX 5).  She would consume as many as six to eight
glasses of wine on a weekend, and suffered blackouts “once or twice” (TR at page 60
line 1 to page 61 line 4).  As a result, she received counseling for alcohol abuse, from
May through November of 2007 (TR at page 62 line 1 to page 66 line 22, and GX 5).
The Applicant abstained from the use of alcohol while she attended Alcoholics
Anonymous (AA) meetings, from May~July of 2007 (TR at page 62 line 1 to page 66
line 22).  However, she started to consume alcohol again two days after she received a
60 day chip from AA, for 60 days of sobriety (TR at page 68 line 18 to page 70 line 3).
She continues to consume alcohol, and last consumed the intoxicant the night prior to
her hearing (TR at page 66 lines 5~20, and at page 72 lines 18~23, and at page 76
lines 15~25).  After her hearing, the Applicant has now expressed an intention to again
attend AA meetings (AppX J).
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines
list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
4
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.  According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.”  The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
5
Analysis
Guideline F - Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG Paragraph 18:
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns.  Under
AG Subparagraph19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG Subparagraph 19(c), “a history of not meeting
financial obligations@ may raise security concerns.  Subparagraphs 19(f) and 19(i) are
also applicable: “financial problems that are linked to . . . gambling . . . ;” and
“compulsive . . . gambling as indicated by an unsuccessful attempt to stop gambling . . .
borrowing money to fund gambling . . . .”  Although the mitigating condition noted in
Subparagraph 20(d) is applicable; i.e., “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”  The Applicant has addressed
those tax debts not discharged by her bankruptcy.  However, the mitigating condition
under subparagraph 20(b) is not applicable, as “the individual [has not] acted
responsibly under the circumstances.@  She used her credit cards to fund her gambling,
despite her being in financial distress.  Compulsive gambling is not a way to insure
financial stability.
Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out
in AG Paragraph 21: “Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of
questionable judgment or failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an
individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.”
The adjudicative guidelines set out certain conditions that could raise security
concerns.  Under Subparagraph 21(d), a “diagnosis by a duly qualified medical
professional . . . of alcohol abuse . . .” raises that concern.  The Appellant was
diagnosed as suffering from alcohol abuse; yet up until the very night preceding her
hearing, she consumed the intoxicant.  As such, I can find no countervailing mitigating
condition applicable here.
6
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances.  The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG Subparagraph 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.”  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her Financial
Considerations and Alcohol Consumption.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.I: Against Applicant
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
RICHARD A. CEFOLA
Administrative Judge
