1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------  ) ISCR Case No. 08-06931
SSN: ------------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: John R. Teakell, Esq.
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
This is a security clearance case in which Applicant contests the Defense
Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. The
action is based on Applicant’s two alcohol-related incidents away from work. The first
was a citation for drinking in public in 1999. The second was an arrest for driving under
the influence of alcohol (DUI) in April 2008. The record contains substantial evidence of
reform and rehabilitation such as: (1) Applicant has abstained from alcohol for the last
15 months; (2) he has not received a diagnosis of alcohol abuse, alcohol dependence,
or alcoholism, and he has not been required to obtain counseling or treatment; and (3)
his most recent alcohol-related incident, the April 2008 DUI, was resolved in February
2009, when he entered a year-long pretrial diversion program and prosecution was
deferred. Accordingly, as explained in further detail below, this case is decided for
Applicant. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition, because the SOR
was issued after September 1, 2006, the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access
to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, then
modified by the Defense Department, and made effective September 1, 2006, apply to this case. They
supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  the Defense1
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to
Applicant on November 26, 2008. The SOR is equivalent to a complaint and it details
the factual basis for the action. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline G
for alcohol consumption and Guideline J for criminal conduct. The SOR also
recommended submitting the case to an administrative judge for a determination to
deny or revoke Applicant’s security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR on December 16, 2008, and he requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on May 4, 2009. The case was delayed at the
request of Applicant’s counsel to accommodate his litigation schedule. The hearing took
place as scheduled on July 17, 2009. The testimony of three witnesses, including
Applicant, was taken, and Government Exhibits 1 through 4 and Applicant’s Exhibits
A–1 through A–8 were admitted. The record was kept open until July 31, 2009, to allow
Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. Those matters were timely
received per e-mail, and they are marked and admitted without objections as follows: (1)
Exhibit B–traffic ticket and complaint for the 1999 alcohol-related incident; and (2)
Exhibit C–conditions of release and order for the 1999 alcohol-related incident. The
hearing transcript (Tr.) was received July 27, 2009. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 2.a, and his
admissions are incorporated herein. Applicant testified on his own behalf and I found his
testimony credible. Based on the record as a whole, the following facts are established
by substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 48-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has been married
since 1986. He and his wife have a 12-year-old son. Applicant has a bachelor’s degree
in electrical engineering and an MBA in engineering management. His job title or
position is engineering manager for the electrical engineering department of the
company. He has worked for his current employer since 2001, although he previously
worked for the company from 1986 to 1999. He held a security clearance during that
period as well. He is seeking to upgrade an existing security clearance to a higher level.
Applicant has a history of alcohol-related incidents away from work, which he
does not dispute. Indeed, he reported the 1999 citation for drinking in public and the
 Exhibit 1. 2
 Exhibits B and C. 3
 Tr. 55. 4
 Tr. 56–57. 5
 Tr. 57; Exhibit A–1. 6
 Exhibit 4; Tr. 36–37. 7
 Exhibit A–2. 8
 Tr. 35, 59–60. 9
3
2008 DUI arrest on his security-clearance application, which he completed and certified
as true in 2008.2
The 1999 alcohol-related incident occurred when Applicant was on a business
trip. At the time, he was not working for a federal contractor and did not hold a security
clearance. Applicant and a business colleague were at a hotel playing pool and having a
few drinks. Unexpectedly, another colleague called and needed a ride from the airport.
Applicant went along as a passenger and took his drink with him. The end result was
the local police cited Applicant at the airport for the misdemeanor offense of “consuming
spiritous liquor in pubic,” otherwise known as drinking in public.  Applicant was released3
and allowed to return to the hotel. He returned to his state of residence upon completing
the business trip. Thereafter, he pleaded guilty to the offense and paid a small fine
through the mail. 
The 2008 alcohol-related incident also occurred when Applicant was on a
business trip. He had drunk about four and one-half glasses of wine at the hotel after
work.  Later in the evening, Applicant left the hotel and drove to a local restaurant where4
he had something to eat and had two beers.  The police stopped Applicant on the way5
back to the hotel based on a traffic violation (driving left of the center line). The police
gave Applicant field-sobriety tests and then arrested him for DUI. At the station,
Applicant took a Breathalyzer test with results of .119, which was in excess of what is
permissible under state law.  He was released on a bond, completed the business trip,6
and returned to his state of residence. He reported the DUI arrest to company officials
when he returned to work.7
Applicant sought to have the DUI case resolved through a pretrial diversion
program. In January 2009, he returned to the state of the DUI arrest and underwent an
alcohol evaluation.  Applicant does not know the results of the evaluation, but the8
results were reported to the pretrial diversion program.  Thereafter, on February 13,9
2009, Applicant entered into a seven-page agreement wherein the local district attorney
agreed to defer prosecution for 12 months (until February 2010), and Applicant agreed
 Exhibit A–1 at pp. 2–4 (setting forth 13 conditions of pretrial diversion). 10
 Exhibit A–1 at p. 2. 11
 Exhibit A–1 at p. 1. 12
 Exhibit A–1 at p. 6. 13
 Tr. 54, 61. 14
 Tr. 54. 15
 Tr. 50, 54, 61. 16
 Exhibits A–3 and A–4; Tr. 33-34. 17
 Tr. 34. 18
 See Tr. 59–60. 19
 Tr. 60. 20
4
to abide by certain conditions and requirements of the program.  If he successfully10
completes the program, no prosecution will be instituted and the case will be dismissed
with prejudice.  If he violates the agreement, the district attorney may revoke or modify11
the agreement, change the period of supervision, or ask the court to reinstate the case
on the docket for further prosecution.   12
As part of the agreement, Applicant stipulated that the allegations in the
complaint or information were true and factually correct, and he admitted that he was
guilty of the following charges: (1) the traffic offense of driving on the left half of the
road; (2) unlawfully driving and operating a motor vehicle with an alcohol concentration
in his breath of .119, which exceeds the amount allowed under state law; and (3)
unlawfully driving and operating a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol.  But13
under the terms of the agreement, Applicant is not now convicted of any offense. 
Applicant has abstained from alcohol as required by the program. Indeed, he has
abstained since his arrest in April 2008.   In the past, Applicant never drank at home14
and only drank alcohol when he was on business trips three to four times per year.  He15
intends not to drink alcohol in the future.  To date, he completed the program’s16
requirements except for monthly reporting, which is an ongoing requirement.  In July17
2009, officials advised Applicant that he may apply for early dismissal, but he has not
taken action on it.18
Applicant has not received a diagnosis or evaluation of alcohol abuse, alcohol
dependence, or alcoholism.  Likewise, Applicant was not required to attend alcohol19
counseling, treatment, or a rehabilitation program, and he was not required to
participate in Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or a similar organization.20
 See Exhibits A–5, A–6, A–7, and A–8; Tr. 63–84 (testimony of two character witnesses). 21
 Tr. 73–74. 22
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to23
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewiseth
plain that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to
cases such as Duane’s.”).
 484 U.S. at 531.24
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 25
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 26
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).27
5
Applicant is a highly successful employee.  For example, he received an21
achievement award for exceptional performance in June 2009. Likewise, he received an
overall performance rating of exceeds expectations for his 2008 annual performance
review, which noted his strengths as (1) work ethic, (2) knowledge, and (3) quality of
work. A senior engineering manager and a program manager appeared as character
witnesses for Applicant. They praised Applicant’s reliability, competence, and value to
the program. Of particular note was the senior engineering manager’s description of the
meeting with Applicant to discuss the 2008 DUI offense, and the manager described
Applicant as remorseful and disappointed in himself.   22
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As23
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,24
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An25
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  26
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting27
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.28
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.29
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.30
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 31
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).32
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.33
 Revised Guidelines at p. 15. 34
6
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An28
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate29
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme30
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.31
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.32
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a commonsense decision based upon consideration of all the relevant
and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-
person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that the applicant has not met33
the strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for a security
clearance.
Analysis
The alcohol consumption and criminal conduct concerns will be discussed
together because the record shows the concerns are factually related or connected to
each other. Under Guideline G, the general concern is that “[e]xcessive alcohol
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and
trustworthiness.”  Under Guideline J, the general concern is “[c]riminal activity creates34
doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it
 Revised Guidelines at p. 21. 35
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 15–16 and 21–22 (setting forth the security concerns and all the disqualifying and36
mitigating conditions). 
7
calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and
regulations.”35
Under the alcohol consumption and criminal conduct guidelines,  the following36
disqualifying conditions are raised by the record:
Alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;
A single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
Allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
Individual is currently on parole or probation. 
The guidelines also provide that certain facts and circumstances may mitigate
the concerns. The following mitigating conditions are raised by the record: 
The individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
There is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement. 
The record contains substantial evidence of Applicant’s excessive alcohol
consumption and two alcohol-related incidents that resulted in law-enforcement action.
Taken together, the 1999 citation for drinking in public and the 2008 DUI demonstrate
that Applicant would, from time to time, drink to excess during business trips away from
home. It caught up with him on these two occasions. Currently, he is about 5 months
into a 12-month pretrial diversion program for the 2008 DUI. Although this is not parole
or probation, which typically follow a conviction and sentence, it is similar in character
because it is lawful supervision imposed pursuant to a prosecution in state court.
Moreover, Applicant’s drinking-and-driving is viewed with extreme disfavor because it is
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 1–2. 37
8
a high-risk activity that endangers the public, which shows a serious lack of good
judgment. Simply put, a man of his age and experience should know better. 
The record contains substantial evidence of successful reform and rehabilitation.
To start, Applicant is addressing his alcohol-related issues in a mature and serious way.
This is established by his abstinence from alcohol since April 2008, a period of about 15
months when the record closed. He has not received a diagnosis or evaluation of
alcohol abuse, alcohol dependence, or alcoholism. Likewise, he was not required to
attend alcohol counseling, treatment, or a rehabilitation program, and he was not
required to  participate in Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or a similar organization. Taken
together, these circumstances strongly suggest that Applicant does not have an alcohol
problem that requires further attention. 
The criminal conduct is now resolved for the most part as well. In February 2009,
Applicant accepted responsibility for his misconduct by agreeing to enter the pretrial
diversion program and admitting that he was guilty as charged. Although he will be in
the program until February 2010, the concern here is lessened because there are clear
indications that Applicant has addressed his issues with alcohol (the basis for the
criminal conduct) and they are resolved and under control. Given these circumstances,
it is likely that Applicant will successfully complete the pretrial diversion program
resulting in dismissing the charges with prejudice. This means disposing of the charges
and barring any future action on the charges. 
Applicant also has a good employment record. This is shown by his record of
performance as well as by the endorsements and support he received from company
employees. These are professional people who work in the defense industry and are
likely to be careful when making such endorsements.  
I also considered this case in light of the whole-person concept, which requires
an administrative judge to evaluate a person’s eligibility by considering the totality of the
person’s conduct and all the surrounding circumstances. An administrative judge should
consider the nine factors listed in the Revised Guidelines as follows: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.  37
Applicant is a mature, experienced, and successful professional. By itself, the
1999 citation for drinking in public is of little, if any, security significance. Combined with
the 2008 DUI, however, the two incidents raise concerns about Applicant’s judgment.
Currently, he has made substantial progress in addressing these issues, as shown by a
See Tr. 50. 38
 Revised Guidelines at p. 3. 39
9
pattern of abstinence for 15 months. At the hearing, Applicant impressed me as a
serious individual who has a firm grasp on his situation and who is focused on fulfilling
his family and work responsibilities.  On balance, I am persuaded that (1) there is little38
to no potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress, and (2) there is little to no
likelihood of continuation or recurrence of similar problems.  
In addition to the whole-person concept, there are additional factors to consider.
Because Applicant is currently eligible for access to classified information, it is proper to
consider if he (1) voluntarily reported the information, (2) was truthful and complete in
responding to questions, (3) sought assistance and followed professional guidance, (4)
resolved or appears likely to favorably resolve the security concern, and (5) has
demonstrated positive changes in behavior and employment.  Factors (1), (2), (4), and39
(5) weigh in Applicant’s favor; factor (3) is inapplicable given the facts here. These four
factors further support a conclusion that Applicant’s alcohol-related issues are in the
past and will not be of concern in the future. 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the security concerns under Guidelines G and J. Applicant met his ultimate
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided for
Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations, as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of
Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.b:  For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.     
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
