                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-09564
SSN: ----------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tom Coale, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
History of Case
On February 11, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA),
pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992,
as issued and modified, issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, which
detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance, and recommended referral to an
administrative judge to determine whether a security clearance should be granted,
continued, denied, or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR on March 9, 2009, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record.  Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on April 24, 2009, and did not supplement the record. The case was
assigned to me on June 18, 2009.   Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
2
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant is alleged to have (a) accumulated eight delinquent
consumer debts exceeding $18,000; (b) had an adverse judgment entered against him
in September 2005, in the amount of $2,005; (c) had tax liens (one federal lien and two
state lines) filed against him totaling in excess of $19,000; and (d) listed expenses in
excess of income on a personal financial statement (DSS Form 154) he completed in
December 2008.
Under Guideline E, Applicant is alleged to have falsified the security clearance
application (e-QIP) he completed in February 2008 by omitting the following: the tax
liens placed against his property within the past seven years, an unsatisfied judgment
entered against him, debts delinquent over 180 days in the past seven years, and debts
currently 90 days delinquent.  
For his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations.  He
explained that he answered in the negative to the e-QIP he completed thinking of the
payments he was behind in, and not realizing at the time that he needed to calculate
what was owed (see item 3). 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 54-year-old driver for a defense contractor who seeks a security
clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted to by Applicant are
adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Applicant married in March 1984 and divorced in June 1996 (see item 4).  He has
three adult children from this marriage (item 4).  He has also one adult stepchild from
this marriage (item 4).
Applicant’s finances
Between 1995 and 2008, Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts
(see item 5). Three of the largest debts involve federal and state tax liens.  Records
show that a federal tax lien in the amount of $16,614 (creditor 1.e) was entered against
Applicant in June 2003 (item 5).  Records also show that two state tax liens were
entered against Applicant: one in March 1995 for $1,787 and another in June 1998 for
$1,099.  According to Applicant’s latest credit report, none of these tax liens have been
released (item 5). 
Besides the tax liens, records document that a judgment was entered against
Applicant by creditor 1.d in September 2005 for $2,005. Applicant rented an apartment
from creditor 1.d in 2003 (see item 7).  When Applicant was late in his rent in November
2006, this creditor filed a complaint to recover two months of  back rent, interest and
penalties (item 7). Creditor 1.d obtained a judgment against Applicant.  Applicant claims
3
he made arrangements to make monthly payments to this judgment creditor, at the rate
of $100 a month, and has since reduced the amount owing on the judgment to
approximately $1,200 (item. 7). He does not provide any documentation of his
payments, however, and still owes in excess of $2,000 according to his latest credit
report (item 5).  
During his 28 years of military service, between 1972 and July 2000,  Applicant
created a number of consumer-related delinquent debts.  Applicant’s credit report lists
eight consumer-related debts exceeding $18,000 (see item 5). Applicant claims some of
the debts represent duplicates but provides no evidence of disputing any of these debts
with either the credit reporting agencies or the disputed creditors themselves. 
By and large, Applicant attributes his debt delinquencies to child support issues.
Rising child support obligations have limited his ability to pay his other debts (see item
7). Approximately $225 has been garnished from his wages bi-weekly, and his
arrearage currently exceeds $50,000.  As interest continues to accrue on his child
support arrearage, Applicant can provide no estimate of when he will be able to
eliminate the arrearage (item 7). 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to insufficient trucking assignments
and heavy child support obligations (see item 7). Applicant does not provide any more
specific explanations of his accrued tax liens, the adverse judgment against him, or the
other delinquent consumer debts listed in his latest credit report.  He does not indicate
whether he has received financial counseling or considered debt consolidation.
Claiming he is on a payment plan with the IRS to resolve his tax lien, he does not
provide any documentation of his payment efforts or any corrective steps he has taken
to resolve any of his other tax liens, the judgment, and the delinquent consumer debts.  
Applicant completed a personal financial statement in December 2008.  In his
statement, he listed net monthly income of $2,631.14, monthly expenses of $2,978.95,
and debts that exceeded $16,000 (excluding his tax liens and judgment).  He listed no
assets in his statement and a VA disability of $116 a month (see item 7).
Applicant’s e-QIP omissions
Asked to complete an e-QIP in February 2008, Applicant omitted (a) his federal
and state tax liens, (b) the judgment entered against him in September 2005, and (c) his
admitted debts over 180 days delinquent and currently 90 days delinquent.  Applicant
did not provide any explanations for his omissions. 
The questions covering Applicant’s omissions are fairly straight forward.  Without
any credible explanations of why he omitted the listed  liens, judgment, and delinquent
debts, adverse inferences are warranted that he omitted them deliberately and not as
the result of any good-faith mistake or misunderstanding. 
4
Several months later (in June 2008), Applicant was interviewed by an
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Close review of the
summary of interview by the interviewing agent confirms that the interview was
scheduled to discuss Applicant’s finances.  The summary details the agent’s discussion
of Applicant’s listed debts in his credit report and the circumstances under which they
arose.  While it is not clear whether the agent confronted Applicant with his credit report
or other indicators of accrued debts, there is nothing in the report to indicate that
Applicant volunteered the information about his liens, judgment, and delinquent debts
without the benefit of prompting questions. 
Endorsements
Applicant did not provide any endorsements or other evidence of his
contributions to his employer and community.  Potentially helpful to Applicant in
evaluating his overall contributions and trustworthiness would be his performance
evaluations, achievement awards, training certificates, and meritorious citations.  None
were provided in Applicant’s SOR response, and he did not choose to provide any in
response to the FORM.
Policies
The revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (effective September 2006) list Guidelines to be considered by
judges in the decision-making process covering DOHA cases.  These Guidelines
require the judge to consider all of the "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (Disqualifying Conditions), if any, and all "Mitigating
Conditions," if any, before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be
granted, continued or denied.  The Guidelines do not require the judge to assess these
factors exclusively in arriving at a decision.  In addition to the relevant Adjudicative
Guidelines, judges must take into account the pertinent considerations for assessing
extenuation and mitigation set forth in E.2.2 of the Adjudicative Process of Enclosure 2
of the Directive, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
common-sense decision.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
5
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), ¶ 18.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the precepts framed by the revised Adjudicative Guidelines, a
decision to grant or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon
a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.
Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a common-sense
appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an
applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance
and materiality of that evidence.  As with all adversary proceedings, the judge may
draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the
evidence of record.  Conversely, the  judge cannot draw factual inferences that are
grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove any controverted
facts alleged in the Statement of Reasons and (2) it must demonstrate that the facts
proven have a material bearing on the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required showing of material bearing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation
or mitigation of the Government's case.  Because Executive Order 10865 requires that
all security clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, “security-
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  See
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
6
Analysis  
Applicant is a driver for a defense contractor who accrued several tax liens
(federal and state), a landlord’s judgment, and a number of delinquent debts over a
15-year period.  These obligations remain outstanding and are security significant.
Applicant’s e-QIP omissions of his tax liens, outstanding judgment, and all of his debts
over 180 days delinquent in the past seven years and currently 90 days delinquent,
raise security concerns, too, about his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.
Applicant’s financial issues
Security concerns are raised under the financial considerations guideline of the
revised Adjudicative Guidelines where the individual applicant is so financially
overextended as to indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, which can raise questions about the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information and can place the
person at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  Applicant’s
accumulation of delinquent debts and his past inability and unwillingness to address
these debts warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the
Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC ¶ 19(c) “a
history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant attributed most of his financial problems to the lack of trucking
assignments and his heavy child support arrearage.  He provided few documented
specifics of the circumstances surrounding his accrued tax liens, landlord’s judgment,
and consumer debts listed in the SOR and covered in his OPM interview.  Without
more information about the circumstances surrounding his debts and his past efforts in
addressing them, Applicant cannot be credited with any notable progress to date in
regaining control of his finances.  Further, he provides no hard assurances of any
commitment to resolve his debts in the foreseeable future. 
Considering Applicant’s lack of any documented explanations of his tax liens,
his outstanding judgment, and his failure to identify any responsive corrective steps
to address his debts, he may not take advantage of MC ¶ 20(b) of the financial
considerations guideline, “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the
individual acted responsibly.”  Application of MC ¶ 20(b) requires an applicant to
document not only probative evidence of extenuating circumstances associated with
his delinquent debt accruals, but also his demonstrated responsible efforts in
addressing his debts, both during and after the precipitating events have subsided.
Applicant has provided no qualifying documentation to warrant the application of MC
¶ 20(b).  Application of any part of MC ¶ 20(b) is unjustified herein.
7
Mitigation credit is not available to Applicant either under any of the other
mitigating conditions, because he has not provided any documented evidence of
restorative steps he has taken to date.  Afforded an opportunity to supplement the
FORM with documented contacts, payments, and work-out arrangements with some
or all of his listed creditors, Applicant declined to do so.
                                                    
Holding a security clearance involves the exercise of important fiducial
responsibilities, including trust and candor.  Financial stability in a person cleared to
access classified information is required precisely to inspire trust and confidence in
the holder of the clearance.  While the principal concern of a clearance holder’s
demonstrated financial difficulties is vulnerability to coercion and influence, judgment
and trust concerns are implicit in financial cases.
Whole person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his accumulation of still unresolved delinquent tax
liens, judgment, and other debts.  To date, Applicant has not shown any tangible
efforts to resolve his outstanding debts to overcome security concerns about the
state of his finances. 
Considering the record as a whole, it is still too soon to make safe predictive
judgments about Applicant’s ability to resolve his tax liens, outstanding judgment,
and old consumer debts, and restore his finances to stable levels commensurate
with his holding a security clearance.  Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect
to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.o. 
Applicant’s omission issues
Security concerns over Appellant’s judgment, reliability and trustworthiness
are raised under Guideline E as the result of his deliberate omission of his tax liens,
outstanding judgment, and delinquent debts over 180 days delinquent in the past
seven years and debts currently 90 days delinquent, respectively.  By his determined
intentional omission of his liens, judgment and delinquent debts, Applicant failed to
furnish materially important background information about his finances that was
needed for the Government to properly process and evaluate his security clearance
application.
Applicant’s omissions are not accompanied by any explanations of the
circumstances surrounding completion of his e-QIP. Standing alone, without any
credible explanations, the omissions manifestly reflect his conscious decisions to
omit material information concerning his tax liens, the outstanding judgment, and his
delinquent debts. Based on the inferences drawn of Applicant’s intentional omissions
of his tax liens, outstanding judgment, and debts over 180 days in the past seven
years and 90 days currently delinquent, respectively, the alleged omissions in the
SOR are proven and concluded as stated. 
8
To his credit, Applicant voluntarily disclosed his liens, judgment and all of his
debts when asked about them in a subsequent official OPM interview.  The summary
interview provided by OPM documents that Applicant was contacted by an OPM
agent two months after completing his e-QIP. Applicant’s answers reflect some
degree of prompting or confronting by the interviewing OPM agent.
Applicant’s explanations of his debts, which followed specific questions asked
of him by the OPM investigator, cannot, as such, be considered voluntary.  While
Applicant’s answers were sufficiently prompt to satisfy the prompt prong of MC ¶
17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts,” they did not
meet the good-faith requirement. of MC ¶ 17(a). 
In evaluating all of the circumstances surrounding Applicant’s e-QIP
omissions and his ensuing partial corrections, his disclosures are insufficient to
enable him to convincingly mitigate the deliberate falsification allegations.
Questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations are core security concerns of the personal conduct guideline
(AG ¶15).  They are clearly evident under the facts and policy considerations
developed under this Guideline.  Overall, Applicant’s omission corrections are
insufficient enough to warrant conclusions that his e-QIP omissions of his delinquent
debts are mitigated by prompt, voluntary corrections.
Taking into account all of the evidence produced in this record, unfavorable
conclusions warrant with respect to the Guideline E allegations that Applicant
knowingly and wilfully omitted his tax liens, the outstanding judgment against him,
and his debts more than 180 days delinquent in the past seven years and currently
90 days delinquent, respectively, in the e-QIP he completed.
In reaching my decision, I have considered the evidence as a whole, including
each of the E 2(a) factors enumerated in the Adjudicative Guidelines of the Directive.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in
the context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed
above, I make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):  AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 1.a through 1.o:      Against Applicant
GUIDELINE E (PERSONAL CONDUCT):      AGAINST APPLICANT
Sub-paras. 2.a through 2.c:      Against Applicant
9
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance
for Applicant.  Clearance is denied. 
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
