 
 
1
                                           
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
             )   ADP Case No. 08-00801 
                   ) 
        ) 
Applicant for Position of Public Trust              ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision 
________________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
conclude that Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. Accordingly, her request for a position of public trust is denied. 
  
Applicant signed and submitted a Public Trust Position Application (SF 85P) on 
August 3, 2006. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, 
adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to 
make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant’s request. 
  
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
On April 10, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
specifying that its decision was based on concerns addressed in the Directive under 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 In 
her Answer to the SOR, signed and notarized on April 30, 2009, Applicant admitted all 
SOR allegations except the following: 1.d., 1.e., 1.i., 1.l., 1.p., 1.q., 1.aa., 1.ff., 1.gg., and 
1.ii. She also requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 28, 2009, and the case 
was assigned to me the following day. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 5, 
2009, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 25, 2009. During the hearing, 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8 were admitted without objection. Applicant 
testified and did not present witnesses. She also offered one exhibit, which was marked 
as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A and admitted without objection. I held the record open to 
allow Applicant to submit additional documentation. She timely submitted two 
documents, which Department Counsel forwarded without objection. I admitted them as 
AE B and C. DOHA received the transcript on July 6, 2009. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
During the hearing, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to conform to 
the evidence by deleting two allegations. The following allegations are struck from the 
SOR: 
 
1.i. duplicate of 1.f. 
 
1.i.i. This debt was included in Applicant's 2002 discharged bankruptcy. 
 
The remaining allegations retain their original numbering. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the Statement 
of Reasons, and the record evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 41 years old, married in 2005, and separated the same year. She has 
been unable to complete the divorce process as she cannot locate her husband. 
Applicant has four children, who are 7, 15, 19 and 21 years of age. The three youngest 
                                            
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the 
President on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 
to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications of trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR 
was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
2
 
children live with her, and she receives no child support. Applicant is currently working 
part-time toward a bachelor’s degree in business administration, specializing in 
information technology. She has been employed by a defense contractor since August 
2006. She began as an administrative assistant, and after two promotions, she currently 
holds the position of operations and support analyst. (GE 1; Tr. 18-22). 
 
Applicant has had medical issues over the past several years. In 1988, her first 
child was born with a birth defect. He had surgeries and frequent hospital stays until his 
treatment ended in 2002. She was unable to pay the resulting medical bills. During her 
last pregnancy in 2001, she was unemployed for approximately five months because 
she was required to be on bed rest. Applicant received some funds from the Temporary 
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program, as well as short-term disability 
payments that began approximately four months after she started bed rest and covered 
the last two months of her confinement. The income was insufficient and she relied on 
credit cards and help from friends to pay her expenses. In June 2002, Applicant filed a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition, with liabilities of approximately $120,000. The bankruptcy 
was discharged in October of the same year. In March 2006,3 Applicant was diagnosed 
with cancer, and underwent surgery in July 2006. Between March and June, she 
worked part-time, 10 to 15 hours per week. She did not receive unemployment 
compensation or disability payments during this period (GE 2; Tr. 22-25, 63). 
 
The SOR alleges approximately $30,000 in delinquent debt. Applicant denies the 
following allegations: 
 
1.d. - $11,511 – voluntary repossession. Applicant appeared in court about one 
year ago and reached an agreement with the creditor to pay $150 per month. She 
provided a document showing a November 2008 payment. She estimates the current 
balance is approximately $8,550 (GE 2; Tr. 26-27). 
 
1.e. - $1,540 – unemployment compensation. Applicant applied for and received 
compensation after she was fired. Her employer informed the state unemployment 
commission that she left the job. The compensation was found to be unwarranted. She 
states that she has been making payments of $50 per month, and estimates the current 
balance is approximately $900. She did not provide supporting documentation (GE 3, 4; 
Tr. 27-29). 
 
1.i. – Deleted by the government. 
 
                                            
3 Applicant was initially confused and testified that her diagnosis occurred in 2005; she later corrected 
the date to 2006. 
 
3
 
1.l. - $440 owed to a collection agency – Applicant cannot find the company that 
currently holds the debt, or the original creditor. She has not received any 
correspondence concerning this debt (GE 6; Tr. 34-35). 
 
1.p. - $204 owed to a collection agency – Applicant testified that she has made 
payments on the debt, the last payment being about one year ago, and that she now 
owes $40. She did not provide supporting documentation (GE 6; Tr. 37-38). 
 
1.q. - $203 owed to a retail store – Applicant stated that she paid this bill in full 
two years ago. She contacted the store to have it removed from her credit bureau report 
and was told it would be. She filed a dispute with the credit reporting agency 
approximately 1 ½  years ago. She did not provide supporting documentation (GE 2, 4; 
Tr. 39-40).  
 
1.aa. - $2,085. Applicant testified that this debt was originally owed to a bank for 
an overdraft on her checking account and that it is a duplicate of the debt alleged in 1.z., 
which lists the same original creditor and collection agency. When Applicant reviewed 
her records, however, she discovered that allegations 1.aa. and 1.z. relate, instead, to 
student loans, and she believes that they are duplicates of the debts alleged at 1.ff. and 
1.gg. Applicant provided evidence to support her claim that she paid the two student 
loans, 1.ff. and 1.gg., in March 2009 (AE B; Tr. 45-47; 50). 
 
1.ii. – Deleted by the government. 
 
Among the debts Applicant admits are several that she states she has paid or 
are duplicates of other allegations: 
 
1.g. - $439. Applicant believes that this unpaid debt is a duplicate of the $158 
debt alleged at 1.y., which is owed to the same creditor. She has not contacted any of 
the listed creditors to determine if they are duplicates (Tr. 44-45). 
 
1.n. - $350, owed to a payday loan company. Applicant testified that she paid this 
debt around December 2008. Applicant provided no documentation to support her claim  
(Tr. 36). 
 
1.w. - $528. Applicant believes that this is a duplicate of the unpaid debt alleged 
at 1.k., a debt owed for a class for which her son registered. The amounts owed are the 
same, and the debt at 1.w. refers to an education-related debt (GE 4; Tr. 43-44). 
 
1.ee. - $25 owed to a tax preparation service. Applicant testified that she paid it 
in 2007, and that she contacted the creditor about it. She provided no documentation to 
support her claim (Tr. 49-50). 
 
 
4
 
The remaining 20 delinquencies include two judgments and debts owed for credit 
cards; telephone, cell phone and electric bills; child care; and medical debts. These 
debts are unpaid, with no arrangements or payment plans in place. Applicant sought 
financial counseling in 2007, but was informed that, with her large amount of debt, she 
should try to pay off a few of the debts at a time on her own rather than put them in a 
consolidation program (Tr. 57-58). 
 
 Applicant's monthly net income is $2,684. Her rent, including utilities, is $859; 
home phone/cable/internet services $129; cell phone $50; car payment plus insurance 
is $527; groceries $300; gas about $70; entertainment $15 per month; and after-school 
care $279 per month. She pays $200 per month for two delinquent debts (allegations 
1.d. and 1.e.). She contributes to a 401(k) and has a balance of approximately $3,000. 
Now that she has finished paying her student loans, she plans to use the money she 
had paid on those debts to start paying on a few other debts. Applicant estimates that 
she has about $20 monthly net remainder after paying her expenses and debts (Tr. 51-
57). 
 
 Applicant was arrested twice on fraud charges. In October 2003, she was 
arrested in relation to a May 2003 felony charge of credit card theft. The charge was 
dismissed. In February 2004, Applicant was arrested again related to a March 2003 
incident. She was charged with two felonies: credit card theft and credit card fraud. On 
the advice of her attorney, Applicant signed a plea agreement. In exchange for pleading 
guilty to credit card fraud, the charge was reduced to a misdemeanor and the felony 
credit card theft charge was not prosecuted. Applicant was sentenced to 12 months in 
jail, suspended; and ordered to serve three years supervised probation, pay restitution 
of $162 and costs of $207; and complete community service. Applicant believes her 
probation ended approximately three months after sentencing, when she completed her 
community service, because the probation officer told her that she did not have to return 
any more (GE 7, 8; AE C; Tr. 58-62). 
 
 Applicant testified that the offenses charged in March 2003 and May 2003 
actually relate to only one incident. She and a few co-workers bought season passes for 
an amusement park. The monthly payments of approximately $50 were to be charged 
automatically on Applicant's credit card account. Two payments for Applicant's pass 
were charged to another person’s credit card. Applicant believes that the amusement 
park company mistakenly charged the two payments to her card. The company accused 
Applicant of fraudulently using the other person’s card to pay for her pass. Applicant 
and the other card holder did not know each other, and initially the charge was 
dismissed for lack of evidence.  (Tr. 58-60). 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant testified that she did not plead guilty to the charge of 
credit card fraud. She explained that she signed a statement saying she was not guilty 
but was only taking the plea based on circumstances and on the advice of her attorney: 
 
5
 
 
Q: And then the thing I wanted to clarify then about the credit card 
fraud charge, you said that you signed a statement that you were 
not guilty? 
 
A: Yes. It was a statement you sign stating that you're not pleading 
guilty to the charges, that you had done anything but you're taking a 
plea because of circumstances, I'm trying to remember this 
statement, I'm sure my lawyer has it.  But you're taking the plea 
because of being advised by your lawyer that it is to your best 
interest. (Tr. 66-67). 
 
Applicant provided a copy of the statement that she signed. She hand-wrote “Yes” or 
“No” responses to a number of statements. Among the statements are the following: 
 
5. Have you discussed with your lawyer whether you should plead 
guilty or not guilty? 
 [Applicant answered “Yes”] 
 
6. After the discussion, did you decide for yourself that you should 
plead guilty? 
 [Applicant answered “Yes”] 
 
8. Are you entering the plea of guilty because you are, in fact, 
guilty of the crime(s) charged? 
 [Applicant answered “No”] 
 
 [If the Defendant answers “No,”] 
 
 [A] Have the Commonwealth summarize the evidence on 
the record. 
 [B] Ask the defendant, “Are you pleading guilty because 
this is the Commonwealth’s evidence and you do not wish to take 
the risk that you will be found guilty beyond a reasonable doubt?” 
 [Applicant answered “Yes”] 
 
Although Applicant testified that she did not plead guilty, Applicant's plea agreement 
indicates that she did enter a guilty plea. Although she asserted her innocence, she 
accepted the plea because evidence existed that could have resulted in her being found 
guilty at a trial (AE C; Tr. 66-67). 
 
 Applicant listed on her security clearance application that she left her job after the 
fraud charges, “…because I did not want to work for a company that did not trust me.” 
 
6
 
At the hearing, when asked if she was “laid off” as a result of the charges, she testified, 
“Yes, because they came to my job and arrested me” and “I was actually pretty much 
fired.” Nevertheless, Applicant applied for and received unemployment compensation 
after she left the job. The state unemployment commission found that she was not 
entitled to compensation and Applicant was required to return the money she received. I 
find that she left the job by her own choice, and therefore, was not entitled to 
unemployment compensation (see allegation 1.e.) (GE 1; Tr. 27-28, 59-61). 
 
 Applicant submitted a performance evaluation covering the first half of 2009. She 
was rated as Outstanding in one category and Exceeds Expectations in 8 of 14 other 
categories (AE A; Tr. 16).  
 
Policies 
 
Each trustworthiness decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).4 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the “whole 
person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition under any 
guideline does not determine a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific 
applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against 
them, as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to 
sensitive information. 
 
A trustworthiness decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an Applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to sensitive information. The government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke an Applicant’s access to sensitive information. Additionally, the 
government must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the 
government meets its burden, it then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or 
mitigate the government’s case. 
                                           
 
A person who has access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the 
 
6 Directive. 6.3. 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).  
 
 
7
 
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness to protect the national interests as 
hers or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels 
resolution of any reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in favor of 
the government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶18 expresses the concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may 
lead to financial crimes including espionage. Affluence that 
cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 The facts presented support application of the following disqualifying conditions: 
AG ¶19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), AG ¶19(c) (a history of not 
meeting financial obligations), and AG ¶19(d) (deceptive or illegal financial practices 
such as embezzlement, employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense 
account fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust). Applicant started with a clean financial slate after the discharge of her Chapter 
7 bankruptcy in 2002. However, she accumulated a substantial amount of new debt 
since that time, as shown in her credit bureau reports, her interrogatory responses, and 
her admissions to the SOR allegations. In addition, Applicant pled guilty to credit card 
fraud, and applied for and received unemployment compensation to which she was not 
entitled. AG ¶19(a), (c) and (d) apply. 
 
 The financial considerations guideline includes factors that can mitigate 
disqualifying conditions. The following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
AG ¶20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
                                            
8 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, §2(b). 
 
8
 
 
9
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG ¶20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control [e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation], and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
AG ¶(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue; 
 
Although Applicant’s current delinquencies began approximately seven years 
ago, most remain unresolved. Given that Applicant does not have the resources to 
resolve her significant debt load, her indebtedness will likely continue into the future. 
Moreover, Applicant's guilty plea to a charge of credit card fraud, and her application 
for unemployment compensation after she had left a job by her own choice, raise 
questions as to her trustworthiness. AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be applied. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Several events occurred that affected Applicant's 
finances and were beyond her control: her own serious illness, two periods of 
unemployment since 2002, and lack of child support. Applicant provided evidence that 
she has paid two debts, and is paying on another. However, to be applicable, this 
mitigating condition requires that the person act responsibly under the circumstances. 
Beyond these few efforts, Applicant has not contacted creditors, reported perceived 
duplicate debts to the credit reporting agencies, or established a plan to resolve her 
many remaining debts. Without such a plan, Applicant's finances are not under control 
and AG ¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 20(d) are unavailable. The partial mitigation available under 
AG ¶ 20(b) is insufficient to mitigate Applicant's conduct. I find against the Applicant on 
Guideline F. 
 
Whole Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and all the 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
 
 
10
                                           
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant access to 
sensitive information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. Under the appropriate 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant is a single parent with significant debt. She does not receive child 
support, and has experienced medical problems and some unemployment. In 2002, 
she discharged approximately $120,000 in debt through a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
Despite starting with a clean financial slate, delinquencies began to accrue in that 
same year. Applicant has paid two of the debts alleged in the SOR, and provided some 
evidence of a payment plan for another debt. She provided no evidence to support her 
claim that she has paid several other debts, and has a second payment plan in place. 
In addition, she has no plan to deal with the substantial remaining debt. Moreover, 
Applicant pled guilty to a charge of credit card fraud, and applied for unwarranted 
unemployment compensation. Her conduct raises questions as to her trustworthiness 
and good judgment. A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information 
bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a position of public trust shows she has not 
satisfied the doubts about her ability or willingness to protect the government’s 
interests. Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.7 
 
 Overall, the record evidence does not satisfy the doubts raised about Applicant’s 
suitability for access to sensitive information. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. - 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
 
8 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
11
  Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.e. – 1.h.:  Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.i.:   For Applicant  
        (withdrawn by the government) 
  Subparagraph 1.j. - 1.y.:  Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.z. - 1.aa.:  For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.bb. - 1.ee.: Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.ff. - 1.gg.:  For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.hh.:  Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.ii.:   For Applicant 
        (withdrawn by the government) 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to sensitive 
information. Applicant’s request for a position of public trust is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
 
