                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-09286 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
From 2005 to 2008, Applicant was involved in four alcohol-related incidents. He 
failed to comply with two court orders. He continues to consume alcohol. Applicant 
failed to mitigate security concerns arising from alcohol consumption and personal 
conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 23, 2007, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) for National Security Positions or security clearance 
application (SF-86) (Item 5). On March 12, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended and modified. The revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated 
by the President on December 29, 2005, are effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
009. 
                                           
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines G (Alcohol Consumption) 
and E (Personal Conduct). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On April 21, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing (Item 4). A complete 
copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated May 27, 2009, was provided to him, 
and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.1 Applicant did not provide a response to the FORM. The 
case was assigned to me on August 7, 2
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations with some 
explanations and limitations (Item 4). Although he admitted the police cited him for 
assault upon a female, he did not specifically admit that he assaulted a female (Item 4). 
His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 23 years old and has been employed by a government contractor 
since May 2007 as an intern between college sessions (Item 5).3 From 2001 to 2004, 
Applicant attended high school. From 2004 to 2007, he attended college. He is not 
married and does not have any children. Although drug involvement was not cited as a 
security concern in the SOR, his SF-86 indicates he used marijuana six times during his 
first year of college. 
 
Alcohol consumption (SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.e)  
 
Applicant consumed alcohol, occasionally to excess from about 2002, when he 
was 16 years old, to November 2008.4 During high school, he drank alcohol about once 
a month and consumed about five beers (Item 6). In college he drank about two days 
per week, and he drank about seven beers or two or three mixed drinks (Item 6).   
 
 
1The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated May 28, 2009; 
and Applicant’s receipt is dated June 2, 2009. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 
30 days after his receipt to submit information. 
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3 Applicant’s SF-86 (Item 5) is the source for the facts in this paragraph, unless stated otherwise. 
 
4 This paragraph addresses the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.a (Items 1, 4). SOR ¶ 1.a generally 
describes unremarkable alcohol consumption over a lengthy period without specifically raising any 
alcohol-related disqualifying conditions. Therefore, I find “For Applicant” on page 13, infra. 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
In April 2005, the police cited Applicant, who was 18 years old, for drinking 
alcohol in public and open container containing alcohol.5 He had consumed two beers 
(Item 6). The court sentenced him to pretrial diversion, 32 hours of community service, a 
$200 fine and ordered him to attend a six-hour alcohol awareness class (Item 6). He 
was a minor at the time of the citation (Item 5).  
 
In November 2007, two months after he completed his SF-86, the police arrested 
Applicant.6 He was charged with driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI) and 
speeding. He admitted that prior to his DUI arrest he consumed eight beers and one 
mixed drink (Item 6). He was driving 35 miles per hour in a 25 mile per hour zone (Item 
6). His blood alcohol content was .179 on the first test and .205 on the second (Items 6, 
8). Applicant pleaded no contest to DUI, and the speeding charge was dismissed (Item 
6). The court found him guilty of DUI. The court sentenced him to probation for nine 
months (to January 8, 2009), loss of driver’s license for 60 days, a $400 fine, and 
ordered him to attend three courses (defensive driving, alcohol awareness, and victim’s 
panel) (Items 6, 8). He had to pay court costs ($44), lab costs ($100), administrative 
fees ($30), probation fees ($225), and drug testing fees ($45) (Item 8). When the Office 
of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator interviewed him in June 2008, he had not 
completed any of the courses because he moved to a different city in the same state 
where he had the DUIs (Item 6). In September 2008, he completed the MADD Victim 
Impact Panel (Item 7). On October 18, 2008, he completed an eight-hour alcohol 
education course (Item 7). In December 2008, he completed the eight-hour Attitudinal 
Dynamic Driving Course (Item 7). 
 
After November 2007, he reduced his alcohol use because he wanted to stay out 
of trouble and wanted to obtain a security clearance (Item 6). He reduced his alcohol 
consumption to about one or two beers about three times per week (Item 6). He does 
not currently drink alcohol to intoxication (Item 6).    
 
In March 2008, the police noticed Applicant was standing outside a bar holding a 
container containing alcohol.7 This conduct violates the law. The police warned 
Applicant about his conduct; however, he was not arrested or charged. Applicant said 
he was not aware that his conduct violated the law.8 
  
In March 2008, the police arrested Applicant for assaulting a female, who was in 
his home.9 He had consumed alcohol before the arrest. He explained that he asked a 
 
 
5 This paragraph addresses the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.b (Items 1, 4).  
  
6 This paragraph addresses the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.c (Items 1, 4).  
  
7 This paragraph addresses the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.d (Items 1, 4).  
  
8 I find “For Applicant” on page 13, infra, because Applicant was not aware his conduct was an 
offense. Moreover, the police failure to arrest him is a good indicator of his lack of criminal responsibility.    
 
9 This paragraph addresses the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.e (Items 1, 4).   
 
 
4 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
guest to leave his house, and then pulled her sleeve to get her to the door (Item 7). He 
said the officer “agreed this was not a legitimate incident” (Item 7). The police generated 
a report, which contained the victim’s description of Applicant’s conduct. She described 
him as being intoxicated and physically and verbally aggressive towards her (Item 7).  
The file does not contain any information contradicting Applicant’s statement that there 
was no judicial disposition of this allegation.  
 
Personal conduct 
 
In May 2005, the court ordered Applicant to complete community service as part 
of his sentence for drinking alcohol in public and possession of an open container of 
alcohol.10 He failed to complete his court ordered community service as of November 
20, 2008.  
 
In April 2008, the court ordered Applicant to “abstain from the possession of and 
use of alcoholic beverages” for the next six months as part of his sentence for DUI (Item 
8).11 He was aware of this condition of his probation in April 2008 (Items 4, 7). 
Nevertheless, he continued to consume alcohol, asserting he did not consume alcohol 
in the county where the order not to consume alcohol was issued (Item 7).   
 
Applicant has never completed the community service requirement ordered by 
the court after his April 2005 alcohol-related offense (Item 4). He explained he had not 
completed his community service requirement because he moved to a different city in 
the same state, and could not locate any places where he could perform his community 
service (Item 6). He received an extension after moving, and then the office responsible 
for ensuring he completed the community service never contacted him (Item 4). He 
assumed the community service was waived and his case was resolved (Item 4).   
   
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the Applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
 
10 This paragraph addresses the allegations in SOR ¶ 2.a (Items 1, 4).  
  
11 This paragraph addresses the allegations in SOR ¶ 2.b (Items 1, 4).  
 
5 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the Applicant that may disqualify the Applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the Applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An Applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concern is under Guidelines G (Alcohol Consumption) and E (Personal Conduct) with 
respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 articulates the Government’s concern about alcohol consumption, 
“[e]xcessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment 
or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability 
and trustworthiness.” 
   
  Seven Alcohol Consumption disqualifying conditions could raise a security or 
trustworthiness concern and may be disqualifying in this case. AG ¶¶ 22(a) - 22(g) 
provide:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in 
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of 
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol 
dependent; 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence; 
 
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program; 
 
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion 
of an alcohol rehabilitation program; and 
 
(g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, 
evaluation, treatment, or abstinence. 
 
AG ¶¶ 22(b) through 22(g) do not apply. He did not consume alcohol at work or 
have any alcohol-related incidents at work. Applicant’s alcohol consumption problem 
was not diagnosed or evaluated by a qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) or by a licensed clinical social worker. Although he 
attended some alcohol awareness-type classes, he did not receive the benefits of a 
significant alcohol treatment program. He was not diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or as 
being alcohol dependent. Binge drinking is not defined and may require more significant 
alcohol consumption than Applicant’s. Although Applicant failed to comply with a court 
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
order not to consume alcohol, AG ¶ 22(g) does not apply because there was no 
allegation in the SOR under ¶ 1 concerning violation of this court order. 
 
Applicant had four alcohol-related incidents involving police intervention or arrest. 
The most serious incident was his DUI in November 2007. AG ¶ 22(a) applies.  
 
  “Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, 
there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 07-00852 at 3 (App. Bd. May 27, 2008) (citing Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 
F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990)). Because the government has met its initial burden 
concerning alcohol consumption security concerns, the burden now shifts to Applicant 
to establish any appropriate mitigating conditions. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
  Four Alcohol Consumption mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 23(a) - 22(d) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
AG ¶ 23(a) does not fully apply. Applicant had four alcohol-related incidents 
involving the police from April 2005 to April 2008. When he responded to DOHA 
interrogatories on November 20, 2008, he said his most recent consumption of alcohol 
was on November 8, 2008. He described his current alcohol consumption in his SOR 
response as enjoying alcohol responsibly and avoidance of legal and personal problems 
resulting from excessive alcohol consumption. His four alcohol-related incidents 
involving police intervention are relatively frequent and recent. Without credible 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
evidence of his current rate of alcohol consumption the likelihood of recurrence of 
alcohol-related offenses cannot be sufficiently assessed to mitigate security concerns.  
Security clearance cases are difficult to compare, especially under Guideline G, 
because the facts, degree, and timing of the alcohol abuse and rehabilitation show 
many different permutations. The Appeal Board has determined in cases of substantial 
alcohol abuse that AG ¶ 23(b) did not mitigate security concerns unless there was a 
fairly lengthy period of abstaining from alcohol consumption.12  
 
AG ¶¶ 23(b) to 23(d) do not fully apply. Applicant did not fully acknowledge or 
completely describe his history of alcohol consumption. He did not provide a thorough 
description of his current alcohol consumption. Although he was not diagnosed as being 
alcohol dependent, being an alcoholic, or an alcohol abuser, a clearer and more 
forthright description of his past alcohol use would have helped to erase lingering 
concerns. He may or may not be minimizing his alcohol consumption problem, refusing 
to fully acknowledge the extent of his alcohol consumption problem. Statements from 
colleagues, friends, or family members about his alcohol consumption would be helpful. 
SOR ¶ 1.a generally describes his history of alcohol use; however, I specifically find 
Applicant’s descriptions of his history of alcohol use (Items 4, 7) to be accurate. 
Applicant has not completed an alcohol abuse treatment or counseling program. He has 
not described attendance at any Alcoholic Anonymous meetings. His history of alcohol 
problems and the lack of evidence of completion of rehabilitation programs exclude 
providing full mitigating credit under AG ¶ 23 at this time.  
 
Applicant’s statement about reducing his alcohol consumption after his DUI and 
his current responsible alcohol consumption are positive developments, showing that he 
recognizes the importance of overcoming his alcohol problems. However, after careful 
consideration of the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence on alcohol consumption,13 I conclude 
his four alcohol-related incidents from 2005 to 2008, and the absence of detailed 
information about his current alcohol consumption are significant factors weighing 
against mitigating alcohol consumption concerns.  
   
 
 
 
12See ISCR Case No. 06-17541 at 3-5 (App. Bd. Jan. 14, 2008); ISCR Case No. 06-08708 at 5-7 
(App. Bd. Dec. 17, 2007); ISCR Case No. 04-10799 at 2-4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).   
 
13For example, in ISCR Case No. 05-16753 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2007) the Appeal Board 
reversed the administrative judge’s grant of a clearance and noted, “That Applicant continued to drink 
even after his second alcohol related arrest vitiates the Judge’s application of MC 3.”  In ISCR Case No. 
05-10019 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2007), the Appeal Board reversed an administrative judge’s grant of a 
clearance to an applicant (AB) where AB had several alcohol-related legal problems. However, AB’s most 
recent DUI was in 2000, six years before an administrative judge decided AB’s case. AB had reduced his 
alcohol consumption, but still drank alcohol to intoxication, and sometimes drank alcohol (not to 
intoxication) before driving. The Appeal Board determined that AB’s continued alcohol consumption was 
not responsible, and the grant of AB’s clearance was arbitrary and capricious. See also ISCR Case No. 
04-12916 at 2-6 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2007) (involving case with most recent alcohol-related incident three 
years before hearing, and reversing administrative judge’s grant of a clearance). 
 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment . . . or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. . . . 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes several conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case in regard to providing the SOR allegations: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of proprietary information, unauthorized release of 
sensitive corporate or other government protected information; 
 
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the workplace;  
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other employer's time 
or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group. 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
The SOR alleges two personal conduct allegations. He failed to complete his 
court-ordered community service requirements (SOR ¶ 2.a). He failed to comply with a 
court-order, which required him to abstain from alcohol consumption for six months 
(SOR ¶ 2.b).  
 
AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d)(1) both apply because the record contains substantial 
evidence that Applicant engaged in actions showing questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. 
AG ¶ 16(d)(3) applies because he violated court orders, which are rules. AG ¶ 16(e)(1) 
applies. His excessive alcohol consumption creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress because it is an activity, which adversely affects his personal, 
professional, and community standing. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
AG ¶¶ 17(a) and 17(b) do not apply because there are no allegations Applicant 
falsified a security document or failed to cooperate with a security investigation. AG ¶ 
17(c) does not apply. His failures to comply with court orders are not minor offenses. 
His failure to complete his community service is an ongoing rule violation. His 
consumption of alcohol in violation of a court order occurred in 2008, which is relatively 
recent. Because there are multiple violations, the offenses are not “isolated.” The 
Appeal Board’s jurisprudence requires consideration of all such offenses in a non-
piecemeal fashion. The Judge is required to evaluate the record evidence as a whole 
and reach a reasonable conclusion as to the recency of his conduct. ISCR Case No. 03-
02374 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 26, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-22173 at 4 (App. Bd. May 
26, 2004)). These rule violations continue to cause doubt about Applicant’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.        
 
AG ¶¶ 17(d), 17(e), and 17(g) have some application, but do not apply to a 
sufficient degree to mitigate all security concerns under Guideline E. There are some 
positive signs of Applicant’s rehabilitation. He admitted the four alcohol-related 
incidents. He said he was currently drinking alcohol responsibly. No allegations of 
problems at his employment have surfaced. He received job training, attended college, 
and has a good employment record. These are important factors showing some 
rehabilitation. His security manager is well aware of his alcohol abuse problems. 
Disclosure of his alcohol abuse has reduced his vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress.  
 
AG ¶ 17(f) does not apply. He admitted his rule violations, and the rule violations 
are established.   
 
In sum, Applicant’s failure to comply with court orders shows a significant lapse 
in judgment. After he received the SOR, he should have immediately contacted the 
court and resolved the issue of completion of his court-ordered community service. After 
he received the FORM, he was again informed that the failure to complete his 
community service was a security concern. His failure to take timely, aggressive action 
to resolve this security concern is too recent and serious to be mitigated at this time.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines G and E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is relatively young and immature. He knows the consequences of excessive alcohol 
consumption. Applicant contributes to his company and the Department of Defense. 
There is no evidence at work of any other disciplinary problems. There is no evidence of 
disloyalty or that he would intentionally violate national security. His character and good 
work performance show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. His 
supervisors evidently support him or he would not have been able to retain his 
employment after his security clearance was called into question.   
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial.  
Applicant had a problem with alcohol use beginning with his alcohol consumption as a 
minor. Although he received some alcohol awareness classes, he has not received 
alcohol counseling or treatment. He continues to consume alcohol. In 2008, the court 
ordered him to abstain from alcohol consumption; however, he continued to consume 
alcohol during the six month probation period. He continues to consume alcohol, and 
did not provide detailed information about his current alcohol consumption. In 2005, the 
court ordered him to perform community service. He did not perform the community 
service. Applicant received the SOR and FORM, which informed him of the security 
concern relating to his failure to resolve the issue of performing community service. 
Applicant did not provide proof that he either performed the community service or the 
court decided to waive this requirement. His actions show a lack of judgment in the 
context of security requirements. Such conduct raises a serious security concern, and a 
security clearance is not warranted. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude he has not mitigated the security concerns pertaining to alcohol consumption 
and personal conduct.     
  
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”14 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my  responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has not mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
14See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
13 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b and 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
