                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08808  
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for 
financial considerations and personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
  
On April 25, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to request a security clearance required as part of his 
employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request (Item 5). 
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
On March 17, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the 
Revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). The SOR was issued pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 
1960, as amended and modified; and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended, modified and revised.2 
 
Applicant received the SOR on March 19, 2009. He submitted a signed, 
notarized Answer to the SOR, and requested a decision without a hearing. DOHA 
Department Counsel submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM),3 dated May 7, 2009, 
in support of the government’s preliminary decision. A copy of the FORM, with the 
supporting government evidence, was forwarded to Applicant by letter dated July 29, 
2009. Applicant was given 30 days from the date he received the FORM to file a 
response, but did not respond (Items 1, 3, 4; FORM). 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each allegation under Guideline F, 
except allegation 1.a. Under Guideline E, he admitted allegations 2.a. through 2.d., with 
explanation. The case was assigned to me on August 6, 2009, for an administrative 
decision based on the record. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Applicant denied the allegation at SOR ¶1.a. In his FORM, Department Counsel 
withdrew a portion of the allegation in order to conform the allegation to the evidence. 
The withdrawn portion reads, “for the removal of a washer and dryer from the landlord’s 
property.” The revised allegation 1.a. now reads: 
 
a. You are indebted to [name] in the approximate amount of 
$590.00 and a judgment has been (sic) entered against you in 
about August 2002. As of January 9, 2009, this debt had not 
been satisfied. 
 
Among the government’s exhibits are two sets of Interrogatories. The first, Item 
6, is dated October 31, 2008. It includes a report of Applicant's Subject Interview of 
June 25, 2008, and a list of debts. It requests that Applicant verify if the report is 
accurate, and provide information and documentation as to his actions on each of the 
debts. Item 6 does not include a response, signature, or notarization from Applicant. 
Item 7 is the second Interrogatory. It does not show the date it was mailed to Applicant, 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President 
on December 29, 2005, which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
The Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and 
they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after 
September 1, 2006. 
 
3 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included nine documents (Items 1 - 9) in support 
of the government’s case. 
 
 
3 
 
 
but three pages are signed and dated by Applicant: page I-5 is dated January 4, 2009; 
pages I-11 and 1-13 are dated November 21, 2008. Item 7 contains the same list of 
Applicant's debts, as well as hand-written notes at pages I-4, I-11 and I-12. However, 
while it does not include a copy of the report of Applicant's Subject Interview, it does 
include two pages on which Applicant responded that the report was accurate (pages I-
4 and I-12).  
 
Each of these Items is incomplete. Although Item 7 contains Applicant's 
checkmark indicating that the Subject Interview report is accurate, that Item does not 
contain a copy of the report. Item 6 contains the report, but no verification that Applicant 
adopts its contents. I find that these documents, as presented, are insufficient to show 
what documents Applicant received. I cannot determine whether Applicant, in fact, 
received, read, and adopted the Subject Interview report. Therefore, in this decision, I 
do not rely on either Item in making findings of fact or drawing conclusions.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the FORM, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant, 40 years old, has been a custodian for a defense contractor since 
2007. He has also worked as a bartender since 1995. He married for the first time in 
1994, and divorced in 1997. He remarried in 2001, and divorced in 2005. He has seven 
children, ranging in age from 2 years to 20 years old (Item 5).  
 
 Applicant’s credit bureau reports show that Applicant's debts began to become 
delinquent in 2002. His credit bureau reports of May 2008 and January 2009 show three 
judgments, two of which were filed in 2002, and one in 2003. Other listed delinquencies 
include two medical debts, three telephone company debts, a utility company debt, a 
credit card debt, an automobile loan, and unpaid child support (Items 8 and 9). The 
SOR debts amount to $34,550. Applicant admitted all the debts, except ¶1.a., which 
lists a $590 debt and subsequent judgment related to rental property. Applicant did not 
explain the reason for his denial.  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Appellant wrote that he “took a step to file bankruptcy” 
and that he had begun working at a second job, both in an attempt to resolve his debts 
(Item 4). He provided no documentation to show that a bankruptcy petition has been 
filed or to support the fact that he might be working at a second job. The file also shows 
no indication that Applicant undertook any kind of consumer counseling.  
 
 When he completed his security clearance application in April 2008, Applicant did 
not disclose one of the two alleged judgments, one repossession, or any of his 
delinquent debts (Items 1, 4, and 5). In his Answer, he admitted to the falsification 
alleged at ¶¶ 2.a. through 2.d. of the SOR, but explained that he “misread the questions 
on the questionnaire and take full responsibilities for my actions.” (Item 4)  
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).4 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors 
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept.  
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative 
of a conclusion for or against an Applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines 
should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F (financial 
considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest5 for an Applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an Applicant. Additionally, the government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the Applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an Applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the  
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each Applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an Applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may 
lead to financial crimes including espionage. Affluence that 
cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
 The evidence contained in the FORM raises two potentially applicable 
disqualifying conditions. AG ¶19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) applies. 
Applicant has allowed delinquencies to accrue and remain unresolved to the point 
where he carries a significant debt load of approximately $34,000. AG ¶19(c) (a history 
of not meeting financial obligations) also applies because Applicant’s debts, which 
started becoming delinquent around 2002, still appear in his credit bureau reports and 
remain unpaid as of the date of his Answer, showing a seven-year history of failing to 
meet financial obligations. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following conditions that can potentially mitigate security 
concerns are relevant:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) cannot be applied. Applicant’s debts did not occur in the distant past, 
because the debts are still delinquent. Moreover, his failure to make any attempt to 
resolve his financial situation casts doubt on his reliability. The record contains no 
indication that unforeseen circumstances delayed or prevented Applicant from dealing 
with his debts, which negates any mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b).  
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant did not indicate in his Answer that he sought professional guidance or 
consumer counseling to assist him in resolving his delinquencies. He did note that he 
had taken “a step to file bankruptcy and try to resolve these (sic) financial situation.” 
Although bankruptcy would be a legitimate path to resolve his debts, Applicant provided 
no further information or documentation, and it cannot be determined whether he, in 
fact, has taken has taken such steps. A stated intention or promise of future action is 
insufficient to show that an applicant will take that action, nor does it negate this 
Applicant's past record of failure to respond to his debts.8 Mitigation is not available 
under AG ¶ 20(c).  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is also unavailable, as Applicant has not paid or set up a payment 
plan for any debt. He admitted in his Answer that the debts alleged in the SOR were 
unpaid as of January 2009, and included no documentation to show that he had paid 
any since that date. As none of the mitigating conditions apply, I find against the 
Applicant on Guideline F. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) (deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities) is relevant. When he completed his security clearance application in 
April 2008, Applicant failed to disclose a repossession, a judgment related to a 
motorcycle, or any of his debts that had been delinquent since 2002 (Item 5). Applicant 
admits the allegations of falsification, but explains in his Answer that he misunderstood 
the questions (Item 4). Applicant did disclose one judgment, alleged at ¶ 1.a., in the 
amount of $590. However, he failed to disclose a much larger judgment for more than 
$4,000, as well as a repossession involving a debt of approximately $5,000, and 11 
other debts, all of which total approximately $34,000. His statement that he did not 
understand the questions relating to repossession and past-due debts is not credible, as 
he understood the question relating to unpaid judgments. Applicant's disclosure of a 
relatively small debt misrepresented the true extent of the debt load he carries. I 
conclude that the omission was intentional, and that AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
8 ISCR Case No. 98-0445 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 1999). See also, ISCR Case No. 96-0544 at 5 (May 12, 
1997).  
 
7 
 
 
 Under Guideline E, two factors could potentially mitigate Applicant’s conduct: AG 
¶ 17(a) (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts) and AG ¶ 17(c) (the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). Neither condition 
applies. The record contains no evidence that Applicant attempted to inform the 
government of his true financial situation. In addition, Applicant’s falsification cannot be 
considered insignificant under AG ¶ 17(c). Revealing one debt of approximately $600, 
when his past-due debts actually amount to more than $34,000, is a significant 
misrepresentation that cannot be considered minor. The government relies on 
information provided by Applicants, and deliberate falsification both undermines the 
security clearance process, and casts serious doubts on the Applicant’s trustworthiness. 
I find against Applicant on Guideline E. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited Guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence Applicant is 46 
years old and presumed to be a mature, responsible adult.  
 
 Applicant is an adult 40 years of age, who is assumed to be mature and 
responsible. He has accrued a significant amount of debt since 2002, but during the 
past seven years, he has not taken steps to resolve it. Applicant stated that he had 
taken a step toward filing for bankruptcy, and had begun a second job. But without 
evidence to support these claims, they do little to assure that the debts will be resolved. 
In addition, Applicant's failure to disclose his debts on his security clearance application 
indicates a lack of trustworthiness that is incompatible with the high standards required 
of those who are granted access to classified information. A fair and commonsense 
assessment of the available information bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts about his trustworthiness and 
 
8 
 
 
reliability. Because protection of the national interest is paramount in these 
determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a: - 1.n.   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a: - 2.d.   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
