 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 08-04926 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on October 3, 2007. On 
December 4, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns based on financial considerations. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on January 9, 2009; answered it on February 20, 
2009; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
 
2 
 
 
request on March 16, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 6, 2009, 
and the case was assigned to me on the next day. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
May 21, 2009, scheduling the hearing by video teleconference for June 9, 2009. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A through G, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record 
open to enable Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He submitted AX 
H on June 10, 2009. The record closed upon receipt of AX H. Department Counsel’s 
comments concerning AX H are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on June 15, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.e. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old aircraft mechanic employed by a defense contractor 
and assigned overseas. He has worked for his current employer since August 2006. He 
has never held a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant started his own aircraft repair business in the summer of 2000. His 
business declined substantially after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. 
Applicant used personal funds and credit card accounts in an unsuccessful effort to 
keep the business running (Tr. 33-35). The business failed in August 2006.  
 
Applicant started working for his current employer shortly after the business 
failed. He deployed overseas to a combat zone three times, and he was able to save 
enough money to pay off his delinquent debts (Tr. 35-38). He has about $26,000 in 
savings and $7,500 in investments (Tr. 46). 
 
 The table below summarizes the evidence concerning the delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a Dental bill $1,563 Paid AX B; AX G at 3 
1.b Business equipment $1,208 Settled AX D; AX G at 4 
1.c Credit card $4,078 Settled AX E; AX G at 5-6 
1.d Credit card $1,619 Settled AX C; AX G at 7-8 
1.e Auto loan $5,461 Payment agreement Answer at 9-14; AX H 
1.f Bad check $640 Paid AX F; AX G at 15-16 
1.g Rental car $340 Paid AX G at 17 
1.h Collection $766 Paid AX G at 18 
1.i Utility bill $613 Paid AX G at 19 
 
 The delinquent auto loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e occurred after Applicant co-signed 
with his mother to purchase an automobile for her. His mother failed to make the 
 
3 
 
 
payments and the auto was repossessed. Applicant, who was deployed in a combat 
zone at the time, made telephonic arrangements with the creditor to start making 
monthly payments on the debt. He paid $123 per month from May to October 2008, 
when he was informed by the creditor that they had no record of his account and no 
record of his payments (Tr. 44). At the time of the hearing, he was still corresponding 
with the creditor in an effort to locate his account and resolve the debt (AX H).  
 
 Applicant’s supervisor, a chief warrant officer (CW4), has known him for about a 
year and described him as talented, dependable, responsible, honest, and courteous. 
The chief warrant officer has worked with Applicant while deployed overseas in a 
combat environment, and he rates Applicant among the top 5% of the contractor 
employees he has supervised (AX A).  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
4 
 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Three disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. AG ¶ 19(a) is 
raised by an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” AG ¶ 19(c) is raised by “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” AG ¶ 19(e) is raised by “consistent 
spending beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.” 
Applicant’s financial history raises these three disqualifying conditions, shifting the 
burden to him to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
 
5 
 
 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s delinquent 
debts were numerous and are not yet fully resolved. However, recurrence is unlikely 
because his debts occurred as a result of the business downturn following the events of 
September 11, 2001, and he is no longer involved in running a private business. His 
methodical and conscientious resolution of all but one debt dispels any doubt about his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude AG ¶ 20(a) is 
established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that ‘the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Based on the above discussion of AG ¶ 20(a), I 
conclude AG ¶ 20(b) also is established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition also has two prongs that may be either disjunctive or conjunctive. If 
the person has received counseling, it must also be shown that there are clear 
indications the problem is being resolved or under control. However, if the person has 
not received counseling, this mitigating condition may still apply if there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or under control. This mitigating condition 
is established because Applicant’s debts are being resolved. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). An applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. See ADP Case 
No. 06-18900 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008). An applicant need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. ISCR 
Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant has methodically 
resolved all but one of his delinquent debts, and he is actively working to resolve his 
one remaining debt. I conclude AG ¶ 20(d) is established. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
6 
 
 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult, with a reputation as a dependable, responsible, and 
honest person. He has rebounded from the failure of his business, resolved all but one 
of his delinquent debts, and is actively working to resolve the one remaining debt. After 
weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and evaluating 
all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the security concerns based on his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude he has 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
