1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------------    ) ISCR Case No. 08-08908
SSN: ----------------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
This is a security clearance case in which Applicant contests the Defense
Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. The action
is based on a history of financial problems, which Applicant has just begun to address
through a June 2009 bankruptcy case with more than $100,000 in debts. The record
contains insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns
stemming from his history of financial problems, which are ongoing and unresolved.
Accordingly, as explained in detail below, this case is decided against Applicant. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
dated February 20, 1960, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). In addition, because the SOR
was issued after September 1, 2006, the revised Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access
to Classified Information (Revised Guidelines) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, then
modified by the Defense Department, and made effective September 1, 2006, apply to this case. They
supersede or replace the guidelines published in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.  
 By mutual agreement, the Directive extends to many other federal agencies, to include the Justice2
Department. Directive, ¶ 2.2. 
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  the Defense1
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to
Applicant on February 19, 2009. The SOR is equivalent to a complaint and it details the
factual basis for the action. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F for
financial considerations. The SOR also recommended submitting Applicant’s case to an
administrative judge for a determination to deny or revoke a security clearance.  
Applicant answered the SOR on or about March 18, 2009, and he requested a
hearing. The case was assigned to me on May 4, 2009. The hearing took place as
scheduled on June 17, 2009. The government presented documentary exhibits (Exhibits
1–5) and called no witnesses. Applicant presented documentary exhibits (Exhibits A–H),
called one witness, and testified on his own behalf. The transcript (Tr.) was received
June 25, 2009. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s Answer to the SOR was mixed. The SOR alleged 23 delinquent debts
for a total of about $156,000. He admitted $79,000 in delinquent debts and asserted
that many of the debts were duplicates. His admissions are incorporated herein as
findings of fact. Based on the record as a whole, the following facts are established by
substantial evidence.
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee who works for a federal contractor that
provides services to the Drug Enforcement Administration, an agency of the U.S.
Department of Justice.  He has worked for his current employer, or its predecessor in2
interest, since he was 19 years old. He has been continuously employed for many years
except for about a six-month period in 2003–2004, as discussed below, when he was
out of work without income due to a dirt-bike accident. He is married, and he and his
wife have two children, ages 21 and 10, both of whom reside in Applicant’s household.
He is seeking to obtain an industrial security clearance for the first time. 
Applicant completed a security-clearance application in February 2008 (Exhibit
1). It required him to disclose information about his background, to include his financial
3
record. In response to a question about financial delinquencies, Applicant reported
many medical accounts and stated that he was in the process of filing for bankruptcy. 
Credit reports from 2008 and 2009 establish that Applicant has a history of
financial problems (Exhibits 2–5). For example, the trade section of the April 2008 credit
report has 52 accounts of which 36 are listed as in collection or past due (Exhibit 5).
The collection section of the same report has ten collection accounts with a total
balance of about $54,000. 
Applicant admitted making no payments toward any of the accounts in the SOR
(Tr. 71–72). Likewise, Applicant and his wife admitted having no documentation to
support the claim of account duplication in the SOR (Tr. 42, 70). Applicant agreed that
the debts in the SOR are credit card debts or medical debts (Tr. 71). Applicant also
agreed that he allowed himself to become disconnected from his family’s finances and
should have played more of a role, but held back to show his wife he trusted her despite
evidence of financial problems (Tr. 84–85). 
It appears that Applicant’s financial problems are due to a combination of: (1) a
dirt-bike accident in September 2003, which resulted in a fracture to his pelvis, surgery,
hospitalization, and unemployment without income for about six months; (2) his wife’s
mishandling of their finances, to include multiple incidents of transferring  balances from
one credit card account to another, hiding mail, and misrepresenting the full extent of
the situation; and (3) Applicant’s insufficient attention or deliberate ignorance or both to
his financial responsibilities. Applicant’s spouse consulted with a bankruptcy attorney for
the first time in 2007, but action was not taken at that time. Applicant found out about
the consultation in late 2007 or early 2008 because he noted a pending bankruptcy
case in his February 2008 security-clearance application (Exhibit 1). Applicant learned
more about his financial problems in about May 2008, when his spouse wrote him a
letter revealing what she had done and failed to do (Tr. 67–68). 
In a June 3, 2009, letter, Applicant’s bankruptcy attorney advised that Applicant
and his spouse had retained his office and that a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case would be
filed by June 12, 2009 (Exhibit A). At the hearing, Applicant’s wife explained that she
understood the case was converted from a Chapter 7 liquidation case to Chapter 13
wage earner’s plan with a repayment plan calling for monthly payments for 60 months
(Tr. 50–52). She indicated that the Chapter 13 case was filed the day before the hearing
(Tr. 51). Other than the letter, Applicant did not present any paperwork associated with
the bankruptcy case (e.g., the petition, summary of schedules, schedules, repayment
plan, etc.). Nevertheless, both Applicant and his spouse agreed that the bankruptcy
case will address approximately $194,000 in debts, which includes a home mortgage
loan (Tr. 52, 80–81). 
Applicant estimates his gross earnings for 2009 at about $36,000 (Tr. 70). He
and his wife had less than $100 in the bank as of the date of the hearing (Tr. 79–80).
His wife had a 401(k) account from a previous employer, but she liquidated it to pay
bills. Applicant has a 401(k) account with a balance of about $40,000. Last year, he
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a3
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (“It is likewise plainth
that there is no ‘right’ to a security clearance, so that full-scale due process standards do not apply to cases
such as Duane’s.”).
 484 U.S. at 531.4
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 5
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 6
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).7
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.8
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.9
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.10
4
obtained a loan against his 401(k) account and is now repaying it. His wife resumed full-
time employment about one year ago, and she earns $12 hourly working as a client-
service representative. She was not working when Applicant had the accident in 2003
and when he was out of work. 
Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. To start, the only purpose of a clearance decision is
to decide if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information.
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As3
noted by the Supreme Court in the case of Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly
consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive,4
any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An5
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  6
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The government has the burden of presenting7
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An8
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate9
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 11
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).12
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.13
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 13–14 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating14
conditions). 
 Revised Guidelines at p. 13. 15
5
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.11
The agency appellate authority has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s
findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.12
The Revised Guidelines set forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when
evaluating a person’s security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions
(DC) and mitigating conditions (MC) for each guideline. In addition, each clearance
decision must be a fair and impartial commonsense decision based upon consideration
of all the relevant and material information, the pertinent criteria and adjudication
factors, and the whole-person concept. 
A person granted access to classified information enters into a special
relationship with the government. The government must be able to have a high degree
of trust and confidence in those persons to whom it grants access to classified
information. The decision to deny a person a security clearance is not a determination
of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it is a determination that the applicant has not met13
the strict guidelines the President has established for granting eligibility for a security
clearance.
Analysis
1. The record contains insufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate
Applicant’s history of financial problems.
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  a security concern typically14
exists due to significant unpaid debts. The overall concern is that: 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  15
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information.   
 DC 1 is “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” 16
 DC 3 is “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 17
 Revised Guidelines at p. 14 (setting forth six mitigating conditions). 18
6
Applicant’s history of financial problems raises concerns because it indicates
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial16
obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. Taken together, (1) Applicant’s17
admissions to the SOR allegations, (2) the four credit reports, and (3) the testimony
about the indebtedness included in the bankruptcy case, show that Applicant has
delinquent debts in excess of $100,000. These facts and circumstances are more than
sufficient to establish the two disqualifying conditions noted above, and it suggests
financial irresponsibility as well.
The guideline also provides that certain conditions may mitigate security
concerns as follows:  18
MC 1–the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
MC 2–the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
MC 3–the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
MC 4–the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts;
MC 5–the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
MC 6–the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
All of the mitigating conditions have been considered and none are sufficient to
mitigate and overcome the security concerns. The most pertinent is MC 2, which
recognizes the situation when bad things happen to good people. Certainly, Applicant’s
dirt-bike accident in 2003 and the resulting unemployment fall into this category.
 Revised Guidelines at pp. 1–2. 19
7
Applicant was still largely uninformed of his family’s financial situation at this time, but
he was not irresponsible by trusting and accepting that his wife had matters under
control. It is insufficient to fully mitigate the concerns, however, because Applicant’s
injury and unemployment took place six years ago. Moreover, Applicant should have
been more aggressive in monitoring or verifying his family’s financial situation when he
saw the warning signs. MC 3 deserves consideration as well, but it does not apply.
Although Applicant and his spouse received the benefit of the bankruptcy attorney’s
advice, there are no clear indications that the problem is resolved or under control.
Whether it is a Chapter 7 or Chapter 13 bankruptcy case, it was just filed in June 2009,
and it is likely still pending at the bankruptcy court. It is premature to make any
judgments about the consequences (positive or negative) of Applicant’s bankruptcy
case.  
Applicant’s financial problems are not minor, and they are ongoing and
unresolved. The bankruptcy case was only recently filed. If it is a Chapter 13 case, it is
premature to determine if Applicant will obtain a discharge upon completion of all
payments under the Chapter 13 plan. Given these circumstances, it is also too soon to
tell if Applicant will resolve his outstanding delinquent debts in a reasonable time and
then continue to be a financially responsible person. At this time, the likelihood of
additional or continuing financial problems cannot be ruled out. Accordingly, Guideline F
is decided against Applicant.  
2. The whole-person concept does not support a favorable decision. 
I also considered this case in light of the whole-person concept, which requires
an administrative judge to evaluate a person’s eligibility by considering the totality of the
person’s conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider
the nine factors listed in the Revised Guidelines as follows: 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  19
Applicant is an experienced and mature individual who should be able to handle
his financial obligations. He has a good job and earns a decent salary. He has good
intentions and wants to resolve his indebtedness. These circumstances weigh in his
favor. Also weighing in his favor is his good employment record (Exhibits D–H). But a
good employment record, by itself, is not sufficient to mitigate the concerns. 
8
With more than $100,000 in delinquent debts, Applicant faced a serious problem.
He chose bankruptcy as a remedy, which is a lawful means to address indebtedness.
But resort to bankruptcy also indicates how unmanageable or out-of-control or both his
financial problems had become. Although the origins of his financial problems were
largely beyond his control, it appears the problems were compounded over time by his
insufficient attention or deliberate ignorance or both to his financial responsibilities.
Based on this record, Applicant cannot place all the blame on his spouse. Without a
well-established record of financial responsibility—which is lacking here—the clearly-
consistent standard and Egan require an unfavorable decision.
To conclude, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F. Applicant did not meet his ultimate
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided
against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations, as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of
Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.w:  Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.    
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
