                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-08965 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel and  
Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leslie McAdoo Gordon, Esquire 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s work performance for a government contractor and his efforts to 
resolve his financial problems show reliability, judgment, and willingness to comply with 
rules and regulations. He paid the debt alleged in the SOR. Moreover, he has 
established a viable plan to pay his legal obligations and is taking significant actions to 
implement his plan. He mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 17, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 27, 2009, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant 
to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended and modified, and Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
 
2 
 
 
dated January 2, 1992, as modified and revised. The SOR alleges security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for him, 
and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, denied or revoked. 
 
On February 13, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegation, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
May 14, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 2, 2009. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled on June 18, 2009. The government offered Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted without objection (Tr. 16). Applicant 
testified on his own behalf, presented one witness, and submitted Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) 1 through 10, which were admitted without objection (Tr. 20). DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 26, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the single SOR allegation. His admission is incorporated 
herein as a finding of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, and having 
considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old executive assistant to the chief executive officer (CEO) 
of a large defense contractor. He is single and has no children. While in high school, 
Applicant accepted a Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) college scholarship. In his 
junior year of college, Applicant failed his physical training test and was dismissed from 
the ROTC program. He lost his scholarship and had to transfer to a university he could 
afford. Applicant worked through college and took student loans to pay for his 
education. 
 
Applicant’s ROTC scholarship debt, approximately $27,981, became due as 
soon as he was dismissed from the ROTC program. Although he worked part-time while 
attending college, Applicant’s income was not sufficient to pay his ROTC obligation and 
cover his day-to-day living expenses. Applicant stayed in contact with the Defense 
Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) and several times attempted to establish a 
payment plan. The DFAS’ collection agency required Applicant to pay a minimum of 
$1,000 a month to establish a viable payment plan. Applicant failed to repay his ROTC 
debt because, as a student, he did not have the financial means to do so.  
 
Applicant graduated from college in December 2003. He started working shortly 
thereafter at an hourly rate of $8.50. When he left that job in 2005, he was making 
$10.50 an hour. Between 2005 and 2007, Applicant studied for his master’s degree in 
public policy. At the same time, he was working part-time as a receptionist for his 
current employer, a government contractor. He was making $10 an hour.  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant received his master’s degree in May 2007. He then started working full-
time for his current employer at a yearly salary of $36,000 ($18 an hour) - $42,000 with 
overtime. After he started working full-time, Applicant again attempted to establish a 
payment plan with DFAS; however, the DFAS’ collection agency would not accept 
payments bellow $800 a month. Applicant could not afford those terms.  
 
While in college and during the graduate program, Applicant also took other 
student loans to pay for his education. When he started working full-time, Applicant 
consolidated all his student loans and started making payments on them. Thereafter, he 
has consistently paid his student loans on time and has not been in default. He was not 
allowed to consolidate his DFAS debt with his other student loans. Applicant started to 
save money to pay his DFAS obligation. 
 
Applicant has been working as the executive assistant to the CEO and Chairman 
of the Board of his company since 2007. He is considered to be a bright young man with 
a promising career. He is also considered to be honest, trustworthy, and loyal to the 
United States. In the CEO’s opinion, Applicant has absolute integrity and is a 
hardworking valuable citizen. He strongly recommended that Applicant receive a 
security clearance (AE 6).  
 
Applicant discussed with his CEO his financial problems and the SOR allegation. 
Because of Applicant’s job performance and his promising future, the CEO gave 
Applicant $10,000 as a gift. He also extended Applicant a $14,702 loan so that 
Applicant could pay his debt to DFAS. In June 2009, Applicant paid his debt to DFAS 
(AE 2). Applicant signed a promissory note agreeing to repay the $14,702 loan to his 
company by making $400 monthly payments (AE 3). He is current and in compliance 
with the terms of his loan (AE 5).  
 
Applicant owes approximately $80,000 between his student loans and his debt to 
his company. A review of Applicant’s personal financial statement (AE 1) and credit 
report (GE 2) shows that he is in control of his financial situation, and that he is not 
financially overextended. There is no evidence of any additional delinquent and/or 
charged off debts. Applicant appears to be living within his financial means. Moreover, 
he has established a viable plan to pay his legal obligations and is taking significant 
actions to implement his plan. 
 
Applicant expressed remorse for his failure to complete the ROTC program and 
for his subsequent inability to pay his financial obligation on time. He was candid and 
forthcoming explaining the circumstances surrounding his ROTC debt and his financial 
situation. Applicant has learned his lesson through the security clearance process. He is 
now well aware of what is required of him to show that he is reliable, trustworthy, and 
financially responsible.  
 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s controlling 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
In the decision-making process, the government has the initial burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR by “substantial evidence,”1 
demonstrating, in accordance with the Directive, that it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s access to classified information. 
Once the government has produced substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, 
the burden shifts to applicant to produce evidence “to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by department counsel, and [applicant] 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the 
government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
 
1  See Directive ¶ E3.1.14. “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable 
mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the record.” 
ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1). “Substantial 
evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit 
Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
5 
 
 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
In 2002, Applicant was discharged from the ROTC program because he failed his 
physical training test. His ROTC scholarship debt became due immediately. At the time, 
he was a full-time student and worked part-time. He did not have the financial means to 
pay his ROTC debt and his day-to-day living expenses. He paid his ROTC debt in June 
2009, with the generous financial assistance of his employer. AG ¶ 19(a): inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts; and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial 
obligations, apply in this case.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 I find that AG ¶¶ 20(a), (c), and (d) apply. Applicant intended to comply with his 
ROTC commitment, and he wanted to receive an officer commission. He claimed he 
failed his physical training test during his junior year for reasons beyond his control. 
Applicant’s ROTC scholarship debt became due as soon as he was dismissed from the 
ROTC program. At the time, Applicant’s income was not sufficient to pay his ROTC 
obligation and cover his day-to-day living expenses. Applicant maintained contact with 
DFAS, and several times attempted to establish a payment plan.  
 
Applicant started working full-time after completing his master’s degree in 2007. 
He consolidated his student loans and started making payments on them. Thereafter, 
he has consistently paid his student loans on time and has not been in default. He also 
attempted to consolidate his debt to DFAS with his other student loans and he was not 
allowed to do so. Applicant paid his debt to DFAS with the financial assistance of his 
employer. He owes approximately $80,000 between his student loans and his debt to 
his employer. Notwithstanding his large debt, Applicant is in control of his financial 
situation, and he does not appear to be financially overextended. He has no additional 
delinquent and/or charged off debts. Applicant appears to be living within his financial 
means. 
 
 Considering the evidence as a whole, I find Applicant’s financial problems 
occurred under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur. His past 
questionable behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. Applicant’s consolidation and payment of his student loans, his 
otherwise good credit, and his payment record to his employer show good-faith effort to 
repay his creditors.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, well educated 
man with outstanding potential. He has been successful working for a defense 
contractor since 2005. He has established a reputation as a valuable, dedicated, and 
reliable employee. His supervisors consider him to be honest, trustworthy, and 
dependable. There is no evidence he has ever compromised classified information or 
committed any security violations. Applicant expressed sincere remorse for his financial 
problem and seems resolute on fixing it. These factors show responsibility, good 
judgment, and mitigation. 
 
On balance, I conclude Applicant’s favorable evidence is sufficient to mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant’s four-year performance for a government contractor, and 
his efforts to resolve his financial problems show reliability, judgment, and willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. He has a stable job. Moreover, he has established a 
viable plan to pay his legal obligations and is taking significant actions to implement his 
plan. Applicant has learned from his past mistakes and, in the future, he will be able to 
live within his financial means. Overall, the record evidence convinces me of Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
