  
 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
 DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-11779 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le'i, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Since March 2008, Applicant has failed to make her mortgage payments. She 
purchased a second home without first selling her home. She has been unable to sell 
either of the homes. Applicant owes approximately $650,000 on her second home. She 
has taken reasonable steps to find a purchaser for both homes. She actively pursued 
alternatives with the mortgage holder including the possibility of a short sale and a deed 
in lieu of foreclosure. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security 
concerns under financial considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
 
1 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 7, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
  
 On May 1, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On May 
27, 2009, I was assigned the case. On June 4, 2009, DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
scheduling the hearing held on June 23, 2009. The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 
through 3, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified on her own behalf and 
submitted Exhibits A through J, which were admitted into evidence. On June 29, 2009, 
the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, in her Answer to the SOR, admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 1.b. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. 
After a thorough review of the record, including pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old senior systems engineer who has worked for a 
defense contractor since May 2007. She is seeking to maintain a security clearance. 
Applicant was in the United States Air Force for 14 years, having enlisted in 1978. (Tr. 
21) She was enlisted before becoming an officer. (Tr. 83) She was a captain (O-3) when 
she retired due to a service drawdown of officers. (Tr. 21) She receives an annual 
retirement of approximately $11,000. (Ex. 2, page 148)  
 
In October 2003, Applicant was living in an apartment when she met and later 
married her partner. (Tr. 21, 51, 54) They purchased a home (House A) on an interest-
only loan for $476,000, with a monthly mortgage payment of approximately $3,100. (Tr. 
55, Ex. I) Her partner was a real estate agent working for the company that sold them 
their home. She had been employed by that company since 2005. (Tr. 55) In December 
2006, after having lived in their home for two and a half to three years, they learned of a 
larger home being sold by the same company that sold them their current home. 
 
In June or July 2006, they purchased the larger home (House B) and closed on it 
in January 2007. (Tr. 23) The selling company told them the company would assist 
them in selling their home. (Tr. 24) Applicant’s partner was still working for the 
company. Once the contract was signed, the company failed to remember the 
agreement and has taken no action to help Applicant sell her home. (Tr. 25)  
 
The home was appraised at $850,000. (Tr. 45, Ex. 1) The principal mortgage of 
$650,000, which represented about 80% of the purchase price, required monthly 
interest only payments of $4,642. (Ex. 2, page 220) Applicant had a second mortgage of 
$200,000, representing approximately 20% of the purchase price, which required 
$2,134 monthly interest only payments for 30 years and then a balloon payment. The 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
balloon payment of $175,000 was due in February 2022. (Ex. 2, page 221) Initially, 
Applicant was able to pay both mortgages and the new home and her mortgage on their 
other home. In March 2008, Applicant made her last monthly mortgage payment on 
House B. (Tr. 30, 77) The mortgage on House B is currently more than $81,000 past 
due.  
 
Applicant intended to sell House A after buying House B, but was unable to do 
so. In March 2007, House A was put on the market for the amount originally paid for the 
house. (Tr. 56) No offers were received on House A and in June 2007, it was taken off 
the market. (Tr. 27) Applicant changed realtors and still no offers were received. In April 
2007, after having lived in the bigger house for 90 days, Applicant listed House B for 
sale and moved back into her original home (House A). (Tr. 26, 28)  
 
In February 2008, Applicant began negotiations with her mortgage company to 
list House B as a short sale.2 Applicant received a dozen offers on House B, but the 
mortgage company was slow in processing or negotiating on the offers. (Tr. 30, 31) As 
of September 2008, only one offer remained, which the mortgage lender did not accept. 
In October 2008, Applicant paid $15,000 she obtained from her income tax refund to be 
released from her second mortgage of $ 200,986. (Tr. 58, Ex. 2, page 155) With this 
payment, her account was “paid in full.” (Ex. 2, page 154) 
 
The creditor informed Applicant the short-sale was not accepted because the 
market value of the home was $30,000 less than the creditor’s minimum appraisal rate. 
(Tr. 33) In October 2008, Applicant elected to proceed with a Deed in Lieu of 
Foreclosure.3 In December 2008, she was asked to commit to, but not to pay at that 
time, $15,000. She made the commitment. (Tr. 79) She has set aside the funds so they 
are available should the mortgage lender accept the Deed in Lieu of Foreclosure.  
 
In May 2009, Applicant received an offer of $560,000 on House B, which was 
$84,950 less than the $659,000 owed by Applicant. (Tr. 63) The Deed in Lieu of 
Foreclosure was stopped and a short-sale agreement considered. (Tr. 34, 60) The 
purchasers were to be provided written evidence of the creditor’s approval by June 5, 
2009. (Tr. 59) Approval has not been received.  
 
In January 2009, the mortgage lender ordered a title search of the property. The 
company that sold the house put three liens on the property for $1 million, $3 million, 
and $4 million dollars. It took Applicant 90 days to have the liens removed and title 
                                                          
2 A short sale is a sale of real estate in which the proceeds from the sale fall short of the balance owed on 
a loan secured by the property sold. The mortgage lender agrees to allow the home owner to sell the 
mortgaged property for less than the outstanding balance of the loan. The lender has the right to approve 
or disapprove any proposed sale. A short sale typically is executed to prevent a home foreclosure and is 
based on the most economic way for the mortgage lender to recover the maximum possible amount owed 
on the property. A short sale is typically faster and less expensive than a foreclosure. It does not 
extinguish the remaining balance unless clearly indicated on the mortgage lender’s acceptance offer. 
3 A creditor can not be forced to accept a Deed in Lieu of Foreclosure. (Tr. 47) 
 
3 
cleared. (Tr. 37, Ex. D) Two other liens on the property were also released. (Tr. 37, 38, 
Ex. E and F) 
 
In February 2008, Applicant and her partner separated and her partner moved to 
the opposite coast. They are not divorced. (Tr. 51) Before she left, her partner’s annual 
income was $30,000. (Tr. 43) Applicant’s and her partner’s names were on both 
houses. Applicant has refinanced the mortgage on House A with the same creditor who 
holds the first mortgage on House B. (Tr. 78) Her partner provided a quit claim deed on 
the homes. (Tr. 42) Applicant has received no payment from her partner on either 
home. (Tr. 44)  
  
Applicant’s gross monthly income from her job with a defense contractor is 
approximately $10,000. (Ex. 2) If Applicant was making payments on both mortgages, 
her monthly net disposable income (gross income less deductions and monthly 
expenses) would be a negative $2,769. (Ex. I) If she were no longer liable for the 
$5,000 monthly mortgage payments on House B, her net monthly disposable income 
would be $2,358. (Ex. I) She has $15,000 in stocks. She has sufficient funds to pay her 
mortgage lender should a Deed in Lieu of Foreclosure be accepted. Except for failure to 
pay her mortgages, Applicant has not been late on any other payments. (Tr. 53)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common-sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
 
4 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances so as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant is approximately $81,000 behind on her mortgage payments having 
made her last payment in March 2008. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; or 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant made a serious mistake in her real estate purchases. She purchased a 
second home before selling her first home. She did so, in part, relying on assurances 
from the selling company that they would help her sell her first home, which she had 
also purchased from them. Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by market 
factors beyond her control. Home prices greatly declined following a period of homes 
being over-valued.  
 
 Applicant has done what she can to eliminate this obligation. She knew she could 
not financially pay for the home without selling her original home. Market factors 
prevented the sale of that home. Until March 2008, Applicant was able to make the 
approximate $10,000 monthly mortgage payments on the two homes; the $3,100 
interest only payment on the first home, the $4,642 interest only payments on the 
$650,000 mortgage, and $2,134 interest only payments on the second mortgage on the 
second home. Escrow fees, including property tax and insurance, would have increased 
 
6 
these monthly amounts. Applicant was fortunate to be able to settle the $200,000 
second mortgage for $15,000.  
 
 When she realized the real estate company would not help her sell her original 
home, she moved out of the second home and put it on the market for sale. She also 
had the first home on the market. In the few months she owned the second home, the 
market had changed. Homes had been over-valued when appraised. Her second home 
was appraised at $850,000 and she has been unable to secure an offer on it at 
$660,000. Additionally, Applicant and her partner separated and her partner moved out-
of-state and provided no financial support.  
 
The decline in the value of the real estate is not, of itself, the sole cause of 
Applicant’s financial problems. The decline in valued has prevented Applicant from 
liquidating the debt through sale of the properties at the amounts owed. However, it was 
the inability to sell her first home that that resulted in her inability to make her mortgage 
payments. Both are factors factor beyond her control. 
 
Applicant made payments on both homes until March 2008. She actively pursued 
alternatives with the mortgage holder including the possibility of a short sale and a deed 
in lieu of foreclosure. She obtained offers on the second home, but each fell through 
due in part to her mortgage company taking too long to evaluate the offers and their 
unwillingness to accept reasonable offers based on decreased property values. In May 
2009, Applicant obtained an offer of $560,000 on the second home, which was 
approximately $85,000 less than the $659,000 owed. Her mortgage company has yet to 
act on the offer.  
 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not fully apply. Although the behavior is infrequent, one debt 
remains unpaid. There are no other delinquent obligations. Her unpaid mortgage 
payments are “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 4 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). The debt was incurred under circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur. The downturn in the housing market does not cast doubt on 
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
AG & 20(b) fully applies. The downturn of the market, the inability to sell either 
home, and the separation from her partner are actions beyond her control. Applicant did 
all she could to eliminate the debt. She obtained offers and forwarded them to her 
mortgage lender for action. She acted responsibly under the circumstances. She has 
held back $15,000 in funds should her mortgage lender accept a Deed in Lieu of 
Foreclosure or some other offer of settlement as was made by the holder of the second 
mortgage.  
 
AG & 20(c) partially applies. There has been no showing Applicant has received 
financial counseling. However, except for this single debt, Applicant’s finances are 
under control. If the second mortgage is eliminated, which is approximately $5,100 per 
 
7 
month, Applicant’s monthly net income (gross income less deductions and expenses) 
goes from a negative $2,769 to a positive $2,358. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall common-sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole person concept is sufficient to warrant 
reinstatement of Applicant’s security clearance. The debt incurred was not the type that 
indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. Applicant has only one outstanding debt. 
This debt cannot be a source of improper pressure or duress. Of course, the issue is not 
simply whether all her debts are paid—it is whether her financial circumstances raise 
concerns about her fitness to hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) I have 
considered the unique circumstances surrounding the purchase of the second home. 
Applicant’s reasoning in purchasing the larger home had merit at the time. Homes were 
increasing in value. She anticipated house prices would continue to increase or at least 
no decrease. The downturn in the housing market caught a large segment of the 
population by surprise.  
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole person analysis in 
financial cases stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted 
that the concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes 
evidence of actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an 
applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid 
off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
 
8 
 
9 
applicant demonstrate that he has ‘. . . established a plan to resolve his 
financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.’) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the 
payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement 
that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan 
be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations 
omitted).  
 
Having had a bad experience in purchasing a home without first selling the prior 
home, it is unlikely Applicant will repeat the conduct. Applicant was unable to make her 
monthly mortgage payments on two houses, but this does not indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. It does not raise 
questions about her reliability, trustworthiness, or ability to protect classified information. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant      
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
