1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-10543
SSN: ----------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on February 27, 2008. On April 13, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns
arising under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended, Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and effective for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
In a response notarized on May 6, 2009, Applicant admitted three of the seven
allegations set forth in the SOR and declined to request a hearing on the record.
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Materials (FORM), dated June 26,
2009, that included 11 attached items. Applicant received the FORM on July 7, 2009.
He responded to the FORM within the 30 days provided by submitting a letter and two
documents. On August 18, 2009, the Director, DOHA, forwarded the case for
assignment to an administrative judge for administrative determination. I was assigned
 These checks constitute the down payment and first month’s payment under the agreement.      1
2
the case on the following day. Based upon a review of the case file, submissions, and
exhibits, I find Applicant met his burden regarding the security concerns raised. Security
clearance is granted.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 52-year-old lead repair and refurbishment technician. He has
worked for the same defense contractor since 2006. He retired from the military after 20
years of service and is currently an inactive reservist. Married for over 30 years, he and
his wife have three adult children. He did not attend school beyond the high school
level.
In about March 1995, Applicant and his wife jointly filed for Chapter 13
bankruptcy protection. Their case was brought to a successful close and their trustee
discharged the case in January 2001. Later that year, in about July 2001, he took out a
loan and purchased a vehicle for approximately $17,500. 
In 2003, Applicant was laid off from his job. He collected unemployment for
about nine months. During this time, he became late on his car payments, the interest
rate was raised, and the automobile was ultimately repossessed. Shortly thereafter, in
January 2004, Applicant’s son was killed in an automobile accident. As his son lacked
insurance, Applicant fell behind on his own bills while paying for his son’s funeral-
related costs. 
In 2007, the creditor sold or transferred Applicant’s automobile loan account with
an approximate balance of $10,000 remaining. When completing an e-QIP during a
periodic reinvestigation in 2008, Applicant disclosed the repossession of the automobile
and the balance owed on the loan. He also disclosed that he had been subject to wage
garnishments by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). No other financial difficulties were
noted. 
In the late spring or summer of 2009, Applicant and the holder of the automobile
loan account entered into an agreement under which a $2,350 down payment and
monthly payments of $300 would ultimately satisfy a settlement account balance of
$4,275.34. The promised due date for the down payment was June 29, 2009. Applicant
submitted a copy of this agreement in his response to the FORM. He also submitted
copies of checks written between June 21, 2009, and July 29, 2009, amounting to
approximately $2,650.1
Aside from the bankruptcy action noted in SOR allegation ¶ 1.a and car
repossession noted in ¶ 1.f, the SOR notes four delinquent accounts: 
 Response to SOR at 4/9.      2
 Id. at 5/9.      3
 Id. at 8/9.      4
 Id. at 6-7/9.      5
 Response to FORM, Cover letter, dated Aug. 1, 2009.      6
 Id.      7
3
¶ 1.b, a $515 indebtedness placed for collection. Applicant provided evidence that this
account was settled and paid in January 2009.2
¶ 1.c, a $116 indebtedness placed for collection. A check for $116 was drafted and sent
to the creditor on February 9, 2009.3
¶ 1.e, a $127 indebtedness placed for collection. Payment of $126.91 was paid by
credit card by telephone at some time prior to August 3, 2009. Applicant detailed both
the telephone number and a confirmation number for the transaction.
¶ 1.g, a $309 indebtedness placed for collection. A check for $123.71 was drafted and
sent to the creditor on or about February 9, 2009.4
Finally, SOR allegation ¶ 1.d states that there is a past due balance of approximately
$1,568 owed to Applicant’s mortgagor. The total mortgage amount is about $83,200.
Applicant showed that the account is now current with no past due balance owed.5
Applicant concedes he has “made some poor judgments on [his] finances in the
past and just want[s] a fresh start. In the past, [he has] signed for government
equipment worth millions of dollars and never even considered engaging in illegal acts
to generate funds to pay [his] debts. [He is] a very honest and trustworthy person on the
job and [his] everyday life.”  He concludes by noting that he “made a promise to6
[him]self that [he] will never live beyond [his] means and never let this happen again.”7
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these
guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process.
An administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common
sense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number
of variables known as the “whole person concept.” An administrative judge must
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      8
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      9
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      10
 Id.      11
 Id.      12
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.      13
4
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The United States Government must present evidence to establish controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or
proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a8
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  9 10
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the United States Government based on trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
United States Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals
to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity,
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to
protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of
legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise
of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access11
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The12
decision to deny an individual a security clearance is not necessarily a determination as
to the loyalty of an applicant.  Nor does it reflect badly on that person’s character. It is13
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18.      14
5
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find Guideline F (Financial
Considerations) to be the most pertinent to the case. Conditions pertaining to this
adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as
well as those which would mitigate such concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
Analysis
Guideline F – Financial Considerations
Under Guideline F, failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or an
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.14
The Directive sets out several potentially disqualifying conditions under this guideline. 
Applicant admitted he filed for bankruptcy protection in the 1990s and that he
more recently incurred some delinquent debts. Such facts are sufficient to raise security
concerns under financial considerations disqualifying condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a)
(“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not
meeting financial obligations”). With such conditions raised, the burden shifts to
Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns. 
In relying on an administrative determination, an applicant restricts review of his
or her case to the FORM and the applicant’s own submissions. Here, Applicant
supplied significant information concerning his protracted period of unemployment in
2003 and the death of his son in 2004. The facts show that these events gave rise to a
significant portion of the debt at issue, the automobile loan balance, and that Applicant
otherwise tried to stay current on his obligations. Consequently, financial considerations
mitigating condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(a) (“the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment”)
and FC MC AG ¶ 20(b) (“the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation) and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances”) apply. 
Although Applicant failed to provide information as to whether he has received
financial counseling, he has clearly shown that his mortgage is now current, that he
negotiated a settlement concerning his automobile loan balance, and that he has paid
the largest of the four remaining, relatively minor, obligations. Evidence of far lesser
weight, such as copies of checks which reveal no signs of having been negotiated or
 Copies of checks and money orders which have not been negotiated do not, by themselves, demonstrate      15
actual payment. Similarly, contact telephone and payment confirmation numbers do not establish actual
payment.
6
confirmation numbers for telephonic payments purportedly made, suggest, but do not
necessarily prove, that he also paid most of the approximately $552 represented by the
remaining three obligations and has made progress in repaying his automobile loan
balance.  FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (“the person has received or is receiving counseling for15
the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control”) and FC MC AG ¶ 20(d) (“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts”) apply. No other FC MCs apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2)
the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency
of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the
time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation
or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole person”
factors. Applicant is a mature man who has raised a family and devoted the majority of
his adult life to military service. Applicant lacks both a high school diploma and a
background in finance. His written argument, however, is plain and straightforward. 
Multiple facts speak in Applicant’s favor. He refrained from filing for Chapter 7
bankruptcy in favor of Chapter 13 protection when he faced financial problems in the
early 1990s. He successfully paid off his share of those debts in under six years.
Despite the clean slate provided by the discharge of his 1995 bankruptcy petition, a
protracted period of unemployment and a sudden family tragedy struck in the mid-
2000s, helping to create most of the financial issues set forth in the SOR. He has made
 A more financially savvy applicant could have provided a receipt from the creditor or a copy of either his      16
bank statement or ATM screen showing that the checks referenced successfully cleared his bank.
 Had Applicant not submitted these documents, I conclude the result would remain the same given the      17
Applicant’s honesty, diligence, and significant progress, as discussed above.
7
considerable progress on those issues and has vowed to live within his means in the
future. In requesting an administrative determination, however, he chose to carry his
burden regarding the allegations by presenting limited facts and often imperfect
supporting documentation. 
In issuing the SOR, DOHA relied upon seven derogatory entries on Applicant’s
credit reports. Three of those entries are significant in terms of the amounts of money
potentially at issue: a 15-year-old bankruptcy petition, an auto loan balance, and a past
due amount on a mortgage of approximately $83,200. Combined, they are sufficient to
raise security concerns. Applicant provided clear evidence, however, that his
bankruptcy petition was successfully discharged, that he negotiated a settlement on his
automobile loan balance, and that his mortgage payments are now current with no past
due amounts owed. With regard to the four remaining debts, which cumulatively
represent only about $1,000, he provided solid proof that payment on one of those
debts was successfully completed. These facts alone demonstrate significant progress,
particularly in light of Applicant’s line of work.
Applicant also endeavored to prove that he paid the three remaining nominal
creditors and made significant progress on the automobile loan settlement. With a
limited education and unaware of the exacting standards of proof expected by the
Appeal Board, he introduced copies of drafted checks and confirmation numbers for
telephonic payments, seemingly unaware that such documentation cannot establish
actual receipt and payment without process for verification well beyond the scope and
resources of this review.  While there are no allegations of fraud or dubious personal16
conduct, such documents can do little more than fortify his written expression of resolve
to honor his debts and live within his means.  When taken in tandem with the17
circumstances giving rise to these debts, the significant progress noted above, and the
“whole person” analyzed herein, however, Applicant has substantially mitigated financial
considerations security concerns. Therefore, I conclude it is clearly consistent with
national security to grant Applicant a security clearance. Clearance is granted. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
8
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is granted.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
