 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-11321 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
 Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence as a whole, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On July 16, 2008, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On April 9, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security 
concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 24, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA assigned the case to me on May 26, 
2009, and issued a Notice of Hearing on June 16, 2009. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on July 8, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into 
evidence, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, but did not submit 
any exhibits. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on July 15, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c.  
 
 Applicant is 53 years old and was born in the United States. He graduated from a 
U.S. university in 1979 with a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering. He is 
divorced, and has a 35-year-old stepson and a 20-year-old biological son with his 
former wife. His wife and sons were born in the United States. 
 
 Applicant has worked as an engineer in the aerospace industry for 29 years. In 
July 2008, he obtained his current position with a federal contractor. He is a state 
licensed professional engineer. About 25 years ago, he held a secret security 
clearance. 
  
 Applicant worked in Canada from December 1992 through 1999. At his 
employer’s suggestion, he obtained Canadian citizenship in 1998, and ceased using a 
Canadian work permit, which made his travels to and from Canada easier. He worked in 
Canada until 1999, when he was laid off. He then returned to a job in the United States, 
but continued to maintain Canadian residency until 2002 when he divorced. His wife 
and biological son also became Canadian citizens in 1998. All three of them hold dual 
citizenship with the United States and Canada. His son and former wife continue to 
reside in Canada. He works and resides in the United States. (Tr. 23-26) 
 
 Applicant enjoys certain benefits as a result of his Canadian citizenship. His son 
attends a Canadian university for a fraction of the cost of tuition at a U.S. institution, 
which saves Applicant money. Applicant has access to free Canadian health care 
should he need it in the future. (Tr. 39) He has a Canadian retirement fund with an 
estimated value of $18,000. He has two Canadian bank accounts to which he transfers 
money for his son and ex-wife. (Tr. 42-43) He voted in one Canadian election in 1998. 
(Tr. 43) 
 
 In September 2007, Applicant applied for a Canadian passport after a border 
official advised him that his Canadian identification card could no longer be used to gain 
entry into the country. He uses the passport because it allows him to travel easily 
between the United States and Canada. (Tr. 40) He intends to renew the passport when 
it expires in 2012. (Tr. 39) He has no intention of relinquishing his Canadian citizenship 
or passport. (Tr. 46-47) He intends to maintain both as long as his son resides there.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 In his closing argument, Applicant asserted that he is a more patriotic U.S. citizen 
and less of a security risk because of his experiences living in Canada. He appreciates 
the opportunities and freedoms of the United States when compared to other countries. 
(Tr. 52) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department counsel and 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
Under AG ¶ 9, the security concern involving foreign preference arises: 
[W]hen an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
AG ¶ 10 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern, two of 
which may be disqualifying in this case: 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial, or business 
interests in another country; 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country;  
(7) voting in a foreign election; and 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen. 
Applicant was born in the United States. In 1998, he became a citizen of Canada. 
He resided there from approximately 1992 to 2002. He obtained a Canadian passport in 
2007 that expires in 2012. His son attends a Canadian university, which benefits 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant because of the lower tuition costs. He intends to use the Canadian health care 
system in the event he becomes ill. He maintains a Canadian bank account for 
convenience. He voted in an election in 1998. Based on that evidence, the Government 
produced substantial evidence of disqualifying conditions under AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1), 
10(a)(3), 10(a)(4), 10(a)(5), 10(a)(7) and 10(b). 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those conditions, the 
burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation. AG ¶ 11 provides 
six conditions that could mitigate security concerns under this guideline:  
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a foreign 
country; 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security 
authority; 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and, 
(f) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
None of the above conditions apply. Applicant was born in the United States, not 
Canada. He has no intention of renouncing his Canadian citizenship or surrendering his 
Canadian passport. He intends to exercise his rights as a Canadian citizen, in particular 
access to its health care system. He did not present evidence that his security office 
approves his use of his Canadian passport to travel to and from the country. There is no 
evidence that the United States Government encouraged him to vote in 1998.  
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
6 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 53-year-old, mature 
man, who works for a federal contractor. Applicant’s conduct of potential concern under 
Guideline C resulted from choices he made in 1998 when he decided to become a 
Canadian citizen while residing there, and again in 2007 when he decided to obtain a 
Canadian passport for ease of travel. Although he has not resided in Canada since 
2002, he continues to exercise his rights as a Canadian citizen. Although he professes 
strong loyalty to the United States, he has no intention of renouncing his Canadian 
citizenship or surrendering his passport because of the benefits and advantages that 
they provide him. Consequently, Applicant’s preference is conflicting because he 
voluntarily chooses to reap the benefits offered by both countries and is unwilling to 
declare his undivided commitment to one country because of the potential loss of 
benefits from the other. Applicant has clearly made an economic choice that establishes 
his commitment to Canada, yet he also wants to ensure he maintains whatever benefits 
he can derive from the U.S. Subsequently, he is reluctant to relinquish ties to Canada 
despite the adverse implication it may pose to his employment.     
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under foreign preference.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c: Against Applicant 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly not consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
   
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
