 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX ) ISCR Case No. 08-10490 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Financial 
Considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), on September 14, 2004. On July 16, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 
29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on February 24, 2009, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received her response on March 3, 
2009. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on March 20, 2009. On April 2, 
2009, the case was assigned to another administrative judge, and on May 11, 2009, 
the case was reassigned to me due to caseload considerations. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on April 23, 2009, scheduling the hearing for May 18, 2009. The hearing 
was held as scheduled. 
 
The government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through K, 
which were received without objection, and testified on her own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until May 29, 2009 to afford the Applicant the opportunity 
to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE L through AE DD, which 
were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 3, 
2009. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
At the onset of the hearing, Department Counsel stated the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 1.g. and 1.h. had been paid or resolved as evidenced by 
Applicant’s documentation. Tr. 13-15, AE A - AE E. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.e., and 1.f.; and denied 1.c., 1.d., 1.g., 
and 1.h. Her admissions are accepted as findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old integrated logistics manager, who has been 
employed by a defense contractor since August 2008. Tr. 17, 25, She previously held 
a secret security clearance while in the U.S. Army, discussed infra. She does not 
currently have a clearance, and seeks a secret security clearance as a condition of 
her employment. Tr. 26-28.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1989. Tr. 20-21. She served in 
the U.S. Army from October 1996 to November 2002, and was honorably discharged 
as a Specialist 4 (pay grade E-4). While in the Army, she successfully held a secret 
clearance during her entire enlistment, and also during a brief period of employment 
as a Department of the Army civilian employee from July 2003 to September 2003. Tr. 
18, 26-28, AE H, AE I, AE J. Applicant has earned 134 college credit hours and has 
one course to complete before earning a Bachelor of Science degree in Professional 
Aeronautics. She also attended a vocational school from June 2005 to September 
2005 to learn software programming. Tr. 22-24, 30, GE 1.  
 
Applicant has never been married, and has a 17-year-old son for whom she 
has custody of and provides for his sole support. Tr. 18, 21, GE 1. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation and 
included the review of her July 2008 e-QIP, her November 2008 and August 2008 
credit reports, her September 2008 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Personal 
Subject Interview, and April 1992 and March 2007 judgment and lien filings. GE 1 – 6. 
 
Applicant’s SOR identified eight separate line items, which included three liens, 
and five collection accounts approximating $44,803. (Debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.d. 
are duplicates.) Tr. 13. 
 
Applicant attributes her financial problems to an overpayment and recoupment 
that occurred in the Army, and two periods of unemployment following her discharge 
from the Army. It was not until she secured her present job that she was able to earn 
sufficient income to support herself and her family. Tr. 32-38. 
 
Since her SOR was issued, Applicant has paid off or resolved all debts alleged 
in her SOR. As noted at the onset of the hearing, Department Counsel stated the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.c., 1.d., 1.g. and 1.h. have been paid or resolved as 
evidenced by Applicant’s documentation.  AE A - AE E. After her hearing, Applicant 
submitted documentation that she took out a loan from her 401k to pay off the $1,163 
cable bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. AE L – AE M. She also submitted additional 
documentation that she had begun repayment and was current on her student loans, 
which were alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.f. The respective amounts were $16,348 and 
$23,644, which comprised the majority of overall debt alleged. Applicant set up a 
repayment plan at the rate of $275 per month through direct debit beginning in March 
2009. AE C, AE O – AE V. 
 
Additionally, after her hearing she provided evidence of having sought financial 
counseling and provided updates of her progress in attaining financial stability. She 
also included a budget reflecting that she is living within her means. AE N, AE W - AE 
X, AE BB - AE DD.  
 
Applicant provided a reference letter from her supervisor and a performance 
evaluation covering the period of August 2008 to September 2008. Her reference 
letter noted Applicant’s “high level of performance, attention to detail and a willingness 
to go above and beyond to ensure the mission of supporting our soldiers is fulfilled.” 
Because of Applicant’s exceptional performance, she was promoted from supply 
analyst to her current position of integrated logistics manager shortly after being 
employed by her company. Applicant has received an overall “outstanding” on her 
evaluation on both of her performance reviews. AE F – AE B. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
 
4 
 
 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [A]pplicant 
concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 
1995), Section 3. Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I 
have based this decision, in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination 
as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication the 
Applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed therein and an Applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 
95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
 
5 
 
 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under AG 18, the Government’s concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 The government established that Applicant owed substantial debt as reflected 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.h. through her admissions and evidence presented. At the time the 
SOR was issued in January 2009, Applicant owed eight debts approximating $44,803. 
 
Under AG ¶ 19, two disqualifying conditions raise a security concern: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s indebtedness stems from an overpayment and recoupment issue 
while in the Army and two periods of unemployment. This contributed to Applicant 
being placed in a financial tailspin.  
 
Her financial situation has substantially improved as a result of finding a job 
which provides her with enough income to support her family and meet her financial 
obligations. Notably, she paid or resolved five of the eight debts alleged before her 
hearing commenced, and has made significant progress in resolving her student 
loans. After her hearing, she provided further documentation of her progress towards  
repayment of her student loans, and of her having taken out a loan from her 401k 
account to pay off her cable bill.  
 
She has sought financial counseling, and submitted a credible budget reflecting 
that she is living within her means. All indicators point to an individual who has taken 
this process quite seriously and taken what appears to be all reasonable steps to 
correct her financial situation. What is different now as opposed to before is that she 
has the means, tools and resolve to achieve financial stability. 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Under AG ¶ 20, there are three potential mitigating conditions: 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) fully applies. Applicant’s indebtedness began while on active duty 
as a result of an overpayment. She struggled to repay her indebtedness to the Army, 
and after her discharge from the Army, she experienced two periods of 
unemployment. She has also been solely responsible for providing full support to her 
son.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) applies because Applicant sought financial counseling and there are 
clear indications that her finances are being resolved and are under control. AG ¶ 
20(d) applies because Applicant initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts. In short, Applicant has made substantial progress in 
turning her financial situation around. She has established a viable budget, which 
shows a net remainder after her monthly bills are paid. 
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant met her ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. I also gave 
considerable weight to her years of honorable service in the Army, her years of 
successfully holding a secret clearance, her service as a defense contractor, and her 
being the sole provider for her 17-year-old son. In reaching this conclusion, the whole 
person concept was given due consideration and that analysis does support a 
favorable decision. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”1 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
she is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
1 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.h.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
