1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------ )       ISCR Case No. 08-10189
SSN: ---------------- )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
August 31, 2009
Decision
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On February 6, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
H, E, and J for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on March 26, 2009, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
April 16, 2009. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on April 22, 2009, and I convened the
hearing on June 11, 2009. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 3, which were
received and entered into evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own
behalf, and he submitted no exhibits. At the request of Applicant, the record remained
open until June 25, 2009, to allow Applicant to offer post hearing character letters. No
evidence was submitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on June 18,
2
2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR Applicant admitted SOR allegations 1.a. through 1.g., under
Guideline H, 2.a. under Guideline E, and 3.b. under Guideline J. He denied 2.b. and
3.c., with no response given for 3.a. The admitted allegations are incorporated herein as
findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 29 years old. He is not married, and he has no children. Applicant
works for a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection
with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement) 
The SOR lists seven allegations regarding illegal drug involvement under
Adjudicative Guideline H. As stated above, all of these allegations were admitted by
Applicant in the RSOR, although his testimony, as will be reviewed below, differed from
the SOR in terms of dates of usage. They will be discussed in the same order as they
were listed in the SOR:
1.a. The SOR alleges that Applicant used marijuana, with varying frequency,
from approximately 1998 to at least 2007. At the hearing, Applicant testified that he
actually last used marijuana in May 2007, and from 2005 till his last use in 2007, there
were times when he used marijuana every day and other times when it was used
approximately two times a week (Tr at 28). From 1999 until 2005, he generally used it
on a daily basis, and most of what he used he purchased from friends (Tr at 34).
Applicant testified that although he was marijuana dependent, he intends to never use
marijuana again (Tr at 52-53).
1.b. The SOR alleges that Applicant used cocaine, with varying frequency, from
approximately 1998 to at least 2007. He testified that he last used cocaine on one
occasion in 2007, and before that his last usage had been in 1999 (Tr at 29-30). He
estimated that he used cocaine, which he purchased from friends, a total 20 times. 
1.c.  The SOR alleges that Applicant used hallucinogens, with varying frequency,
from approximately 1998 to at least 2007. He testified that he last used hallucinogens,
specifically mushrooms, on one occasion in either 2006 or 2007, and before that his last
usage had been in 1999 or 2000. He estimated that his total mushroom usage was less
that four times (Tr at 29-31). 
3
 1.d. The SOR alleges that Applicant used depressants, with varying frequency,
from approximately 1998 to at least 2007. He testified that he last used depressants,
specifically the prescription drug, Xanax, in 2004 or 2005, and he estimated that he
used it in total 20 times. He also purchased Xanax from friends.  (Tr at 32-33).  
1.e. The SOR alleges that Applicant used stimulants, with varying frequency,
from approximately 1998 to at least 2007. He testified that he last used stimulants or
speed in 1999, and he estimated that he only used it 2 times in total  (Tr at 34-37). 
1.f.  The SOR alleges that Applicant spent approximately $200 per month on
illegal substances.  Applicant testified that this average purchase amount, that he
estimated to be correct, continued on for a period of many years (Tr at 37-38). 
1.g.  The SOR alleges that Applicant distributed and/or sold marijuana to his
friends between 1998 and 2007. Applicant testified that he did sell marijuana to his
friends over a period of many years, although he had no estimate as the total amount
he sold (Tr at 45-46).
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he exhibited conduct involving questionable judgement, lack of
candor, dishonesty or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.
2.a. Applicant executed a Security Clearance Application (SCA), which was
certified on May 14, 2008 (Exhibit 1).  Question #24 of the SCA asked if, since the age
of 16 or in the previous seven years, whichever is shorter, had Applicant illegally used
any controlled substance? Applicant answered "No" to this question, and he listed no
illegal substances. The Government alleges, and the evidence is clear that Applicant
should have included all of his illegal drug usage as included in subparagraphs 1.a.
through 1.e., above.  In his RSOR, Applicant wrote in response to this allegation, ”I
admit, but I never saw this form before or held a clearance. I was unaware it was for the
DoD I thought it was a job application.” 
At the hearing Applicant conceded that he knew he was not being honest in
completing this SCA, but he claimed that he thought it was only part of the job
application, not a Government questionnaire to apply for a security clearance. He  did
not include any of his illegal drug usage, because he thought it could potentially hurt his
chances of getting a job (Tr at 38-43). 
2.b.  During a July 8, 2008 interview with an authorized investigator for the
Department of Defense, Applicant indicated that he last used illegal substances and/or
prescription medication prescribed to someone other than himself, when he was 25
years old, in approximately 2005, rather than his actual last usage which was in at least
2007.
4
Applicant testified that he did not believe he provided incorrect information to the
investigator, regarding the dates of his drug usage. He argued that the dates that are
the basis of the SOR allegation are taken from the information he furnished to the
investigator. However, in reviewing the statement made to the investigator as part of a
Report of Investigation (ROI), which was verified in Exhibit 3, it appears that Applicant
did identify his last usage of marijuana in 2005, when he was 25, not the correct date of
2007, as he has admitted. Additionally, the dates that were used in the SOR, came from
Applicant’s responses to interrogatories, which is also part of Exhibit 3. Finally, while it is
not alleged in the SOR, it indicates in the ROI that Applicant stated he only used
cocaine on two occasions, which contradicts his testimony at the hearing, that he used
cocaine on 20 times, as referred to in 1.c., above. 
Paragraph 3 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has engaged in criminal conduct. 
3.a. Applicant's conduct, reviewed above in Paragraph 1, subparagraphs a.
through g., constitutes criminal conduct. All of Applicant’s drug usage, drug purchase
and drug sale did constitute illegal conduct. 
3.b. Applicant's conduct, reviewed above in Paragraph 2, subparagraphs a. and
b., constitutes criminal conduct. Applicant also committed criminal conduct by furnishing
incorrect information to the Government on an SCA and to an investigator. 
3.c. Applicant's conduct, reviewed above in Paragraph 2, constitutes a violation
of Federal Law, Title 18, United States Code, Section 1001, which is a felony.
Applicant’s furnishing incorrect information also is a violation of Title 18, United States
Code, Section 1001, which is a felony. 
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common-sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
5
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
With respect to Guideline H, the Government has established its case.
Applicant's improper and illegal drug abuse, including primarily the possession, and use,
for many years of marijuana, and other illegal substances as well, is of great concern,
especially in light of his desire to have access to the nation's secrets. Applicant's overall
conduct pertaining to his illegal substance abuse clearly falls within Drug Involvement
Disqualifying Condition (DC) 25. (a) (any drug abuse) and (c) (illegal drug possession,
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution).
Based on the Applicant’s many years and frequency of  use of illegal substances,
and his lack of candor in the information about his drug involvement that he furnished to
the Government, I can not conclude at this time that Applicant’s conduct comes within
any Mitigating Condition (MC). 
6
In this case, the Government has met its initial burden of proving by substantial
evidence that Applicant has used illegal drugs for many years under Guideline H.
Applicant, on the other hand, has failed to introduce persuasive evidence in rebuttal,
explanation or mitigation which is sufficient to overcome the Government's case against
him.  Accordingly, Paragraph 1 Guideline H of the SOR is concluded against Applicant.
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant furnished to
the Government incomplete, untruthful answers regarding the extent of his drug
involvement on an SCA that he executed on May 14, 2008, and during an interview with
a Government investigator on July 8, 2008.
The Government relies heavily on the honesty and integrity of individuals seeking
access to our nation’s secrets. When such an individual intentionally falsifies material
facts or fails to furnish relevant information to a Government investigator, it is extremely
difficult to conclude that he nevertheless possesses the judgment, and honesty
necessary for an individual given a clearance. In this case, I conclude that Applicant
knowingly and willingly failed to give complete, honest answers regarding his drug
usage to the Government.
In reviewing the Disqualifying Conditions (DC) under Guideline E, I conclude that
DC 16. (a) applies because of Applicant’s deliberate omission, concealment, and
falsification of relevant facts from a personnel security questionnaire, which was used to
determine security clearance eligibility. DC (b) also applies since Applicant deliberately
provided false relevant information to the Government investigator. I can not find that
any Mitigating Condition (MC) applies in this paragraph.  
Applicant’s conduct, considered as a whole, exhibits questionable judgement,
unreliability, and a lack of candor. I resolve Paragraph 2, Guideline E, against Applicant.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
The Government also established by substantial evidence that Applicant
engaged in criminal conduct, by his using illegal substances for many years, and
knowingly providing false and misleading information to a Government investigator and
on a  security questionnaire, the last two of which are felonies.
DC 31. (a), a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses, applies in this
case. DC 31. (c), allegations or admissions of criminal conduct, regardless of whether
the person was formally charged, is also applicable to this case. There is no MC under
Criminal Conduct. Paragraph 3, Guideline J is found against Applicant
7
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guidelines H, E, and J in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.
Based on all of the reasons cited above, including Applicant’s long history of using
marijuana and other illegal drugs, and his lack of honesty and candor with the
information he furnished to the Government, I find that the record evidence leaves me
with serious questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance under the whole person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant
has not mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. -1.g.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.-2.b.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a.-3.c.: Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
