 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10826 
 SSN:   ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted a questionnaire for sensitive positions (SF 86) on June 5, 
2008. On March 10, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On April 7, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested his case be 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) on May 19, 2009. The FORM was forwarded to Applicant on May 20, 2009.  
Applicant received the FORM on June 3, 2009. He had 30 days to submit a response to 
the FORM. He did not submit a response. On August 4, 2009, the FORM was 
forwarded to the hearing office and assigned to me on that same date. Based upon a 
review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
2 
 
 
 
Motion to Amend the Statement of Reasons 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the Statement of Reasons pursuant to 
E3.1.10 and E3.1.13 of the Directive by adding the following allegation: 
 
 1.i. You are indebted to the U.S. Department of Education on a student 
loan account that has been placed for collection in the approximate 
amount of $34,117. As of November 24, 2008, this debt had not been 
paid.  
 
Applicant was served a copy of the proposed amendment within the FORM. He 
was given 30 days to respond to the FORM as well as the proposed amendment to the 
SOR. No response was submitted. Applicant was provided adequate notice. The motion 
to amend the SOR is approved. (Note: Department Counsel labeled the motion to 
amend the SOR as paragraph 2.i. It should actually be paragraph 1.i and is marked as 
such.) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denies all of the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 
1.h. (Item 3) He did not respond to the motion to amend the SOR. I am treating his lack 
of response to the motion to amend the SOR as a denial. (Item 2) 
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee with a Department of Defense contractor. He 
seeks a security clearance.  He has been employed as a security officer since June 
2008. He is married and has three adult children. (Item 4)   
 
Applicant’s background investigation revealed the following delinquent accounts:  
a judgment in the amount of $8,259 entered against Applicant in October 2002 (SOR ¶ 
1.a: Item 5 at 3; Item 6 at 1); a judgment in the amount of $3,474 entered against 
Applicant in March 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 5 at 3; Item 6 at 1); a $53 phone account 
placed for collection in May 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 5 at 5; Item 6 at 1); a $911 cell 
phone account placed for collection in March 2007 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 5 at 5; Item 6 at 1); 
a $285 medical account placed for collection in September 2003 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 5 at 
5; Item 6 at 1); a $276 account placed for collection in August 2001 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 5 
at 4); a $354 cell phone account placed for collection in October 2002 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 
5 at 6); and a $4,217 medical account placed for collection in May 2008. (SOR ¶ 1.h: 
Item 5 at 7). Applicant has approximately $34,117 in delinquent student loans that were 
placed for collection in May 2008. (SOR ¶ 1.i: Item 5 at 5, 6; Item 6 at 2).   
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant claimed the majority of the debts have 
been paid. He claims that his attorney has filed a motion to vacate to two default 
judgments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He claims the $53 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c 
was a mistaken entry on his credit report. He claims he settled the account alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.d. He is disputing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g. He claims medical 
 
3 
 
 
insurance paid the medical bills alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e and 1.h. (Item 3) He did not 
provide documentation verifying his assertions.  
 
The status of the delinquent student loan account remains uncertain because 
Applicant failed to respond to the FORM which contained the motion to amend the SOR 
by adding SOR ¶ 1.i.  
 
Applicant requests that his case be looked at with tempered mercy. He claims he 
is a law abiding citizen and would not violate or abridge his U.S. status. He will be 
checking his credit reports from now on. (Item 3)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
 
4 
 
 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find Financial Considerations Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) &19(a) (an 
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC &19(c) (a history of not meeting 
financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Between 2001 and 2008, Applicant 
incurred eight delinquent debts, totaling $17,829. He also has approximately $34,117 in  
delinquent student loans that have been placed for collection.  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 
(FC MC) ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) is not applicable. 
Applicant continued to incur delinquent accounts as recently as May 2008 (SOR ¶¶                      
1.c, 1.h, and 1.i). Although Applicant claims most of the accounts have been resolved, 
he provided no documentation corroborating his assertions.  
 
 FC MC & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) does not apply. Applicant did not explain 
the cause of his financial problems. It is noted that two debts are medical debts (SOR 
 
5 
 
 
¶¶ 1.e and 1.h). However, they account for $4,502 of the $17,829 in debt. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude FC MC ¶ 20(b) applies.    
 
     FC MC ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control) does not apply. There is no evidence that Applicant attended financial 
counseling. At the close of the record, the status of Applicant’s delinquent accounts 
remained uncertain. His financial situation is unlikely to be resolved in the near future. 
 
FC MC & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. While Applicant claims most of the 
delinquent accounts are resolved, he provided no evidence to verify the accounts were 
resolved. He provided no information pertaining to his largest debt, the $34,117 
delinquent student loan account. It was Applicant’s burden to provide sufficient evidence 
to show his accounts were being repaid or resolved. He provided no evidence to 
corroborate his assertions. 
 
FC MC ¶ 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of 
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the 
issue) does not apply. While Applicant claims he disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.e, 1.f, and 1.g, he provided no documentation verifying the disputes or substantiating 
the bases for the disputes. There is insufficient proof to apply FC MC ¶ 20(e).  
 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under financial 
considerations.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has a significant amount 
of unresolved delinquent debt. He failed to provide sufficient evidence to establish that 
most of the debts are resolved. He did not provide sufficient evidence of the steps he is 
taking towards resolving the remaining delinquent debt, including the significant 
delinquent student loan account. Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
raised under financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interests to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
