  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 08-10029 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se  
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant owed six charged off, past due, or placed for collection accounts, which 
totaled in excess of $32,000. He has paid three of the debts and is making monthly 
payments on the remaining three debts. The charged off or placed for collection 
accounts are now current. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the government’s security 
concerns under financial considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on February 4, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations.  
  
 On March 6, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
June 17, 2009, I was assigned the case. On July 7, 2009, DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing scheduling the hearing which was held on August 5, 2009.  
 
 The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6, which were admitted into 
evidence. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through EE, 
which were admitted into evidence. The record was held open to allow additional 
information from Applicant. On August 6, 2009, additional material was submitted. 
Department Counsel had no objection to the material, which was admitted into the 
record as Ex. FF and Ex. GG. On August 11, 2009, the transcript (Tr.) was received. 
The record closed on August 6, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the amount owed on three of the 
debts and admitted the remaining factual SOR allegations. Applicant’s admissions to 
the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. The SOR had alleged six past due or 
charged off accounts totaling a debt in excess of $32,000. After a thorough review of the 
record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old computer support technician who has worked for a 
defense contractor since 2002, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. His annual 
salary is $58,549. (Ex. GG) His monthly net pay is approximately $3,000. (Tr. 58) Since 
1992, Applicant has an additional part-time job working as a security guard. He currently 
works 21 hours a week from which his take-home pay is almost $400 per week. (Ex. 
EE) Applicant has $2,584 in his company’s retirement plan. (Ex. FF) 
 
 From February 1997 to April 1992, Applicant was on active duty in the U.S. Air 
Force. He retired with an honorable discharge at the grade of E-6. He received a 
military retirement, but the funds go to his ex-wife. (Tr. 66) 
 
 In 1998, Applicant purchased a home, which was later turned into rental property. 
He incurred debts when he had to make repairs due to mold damage. He was unable to 
rent the home until February 2009. (Tr. 45, 71) He pays $1,625 on his first and second 
mortgage and receives net income of $1,380, which leaves a $245 monthly deficit. (Tr. 
59) That monthly amount is offset by his tax saving he receives on the rental property. 
(Tr. 74)  
  
 Prior to 2008, Applicant’s finances were good. In 2008, he incurred repair debts 
to his rental property, his daughter separated from her husband resulting in Applicant 
 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
 
making a number of the monthly payments on her mobile home, and his sister needed 
his assistance with her financial problems. (Tr. 65, 70)    
 
 The $9,111 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.a was incurred due to home repairs, car 
repairs, and a combination of credit card purchases. (Tr. 43) The debt has been paid. 
(Ex. S) He made two payments of $1,675. (Ex. T, U, V) At the time the debt was 
incurred, Applicant’s home had a fair market value of $380,000 on which he owed 
approximately $150,000. (Tr. 44) Applicant owed $1,107 (SOR ¶ 1.b) on a charged off 
account, which has been paid. (Tr. 46, Ex. X) Applicant paid $720 to settle the debt. 
(Ex. W)  
 
 Applicant is making monthly payments on the $10,572 credit card debt (SOR ¶ 
1.c). (Ex. N, O) In December 2008, Applicant opened a bank account so he could make 
automatic, monthly, direct payments on his debts. He is paying $375 monthly on one 
debt (SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant has paid the $4,229 (SOR ¶ 1.d) credit card debt. (Tr. 48, 
Ex. C) Payment was made to a collection agency. (Ex. D through H) Applicant was at 
one time past due on an account (SOR ¶ 1.e, $175) with this same creditor. He makes 
$200 monthly payments on this account and the account is current. (Ex. BB) Applicant 
is also current on an account (SOR ¶ 1.f, $7,169) that had been placed for collection. 
(Tr. 49, Ex. A, I, J, K, L, M) 
 
 Applicant asserts his current credit is good. (Tr. 69) Applicant has taken steps so 
that financial problems will not return in the future. (Tr. 73) He is more aware of how to 
handle his finances.  
 
 A summary of the six SOR debts follows:  
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Credit card account 
charged off. 
$9,111 Paid in full as of April 2009. (Tr. 42, Ex. 
S, T, U, and V)  
b Credit card account 
charged off. 
$1,107 
 
Paid in March 2009. (Ex. B, W, and X) 
c Credit card acount 
charged off. 
 
 
$10,572 
 
Applicant is paying $375 each month on 
this debt. After four months the 
arrangement will be re-evaluated by the 
creditor. (Ex. N and O) 
d Credit card account 
charged off. 
$4,229 Paid. (Ex. C, D, E, F, G, and H) 
e Credit card account was 
past due. 
$175 Account is current. Applicant pays $200 
monthly on this debt. (Ex. BB) 
 
 
4 
 
 
f Credit card account 
placed for collection. 
$7,169 Account is current. Applicant pays $200 
monthly on this debt. (Ex. A, I, J, K, L, 
and M) 
 Total debt listed in SOR $32,363.00  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
5 
 
 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns 
relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 The record evidence supports a conclusion Applicant has a history of financial 
problems. Applicant owed six charged off, past due, or placed for collection accounts, 
which totaled in excess of $32,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
6 
 
 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and, 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant has paid or is currently paying all six of the SOR debts. Even though 
Applicant=s financial problems are recent and there were six debts, AG ¶ 20(a) partially 
applies because Applicant has sufficient funds to meet his financial obligations and his 
financial problems are unlikely to recur.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), Applicant did not experience loss of employment, unexpected 
medical emergency, death, divorce, or separation, but he helped his adult daughter 
make her monthly mobile home payments when she experienced separation and 
divorce. Additionally, his sister unexpectedly looked to him for help in meeting her 
financial problems. Because of mold problems, unexpected repairs had to be made to 
his home. Applicant was unable to rent this property until February 2009. These are 
factors beyond his control. More importantly, Applicant has acted responsibly by paying 
his debts, contacting his creditors, and establishing a separate account in order to make 
direct payments on his remaining debts. AG & 20(b) applies. 
 
AG & 20(c) applies for there are clear indications Applicant’s financial difficulties 
are under control. He is living within his means, paying his debts, meeting his monthly 
obligations, and funding a retirement account. AG & 20(d) applies to all of his debts.  He 
has paid three of the SOR debts and is making monthly payments on the remaining 
three debts, which constitutes a good-faith effort to address his past due debts.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
7 
 
 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The debts incurred were not the 
type that indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules 
and regulations. Money was not spent frivolously. The debts listed in the SOR were not 
incurred on luxuries. 
 
Applicant has paid three debts and is making monthly payment on the three 
remaining debts. These debts cannot be a source of improper pressure or duress. Of 
course, the issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid or are being paid—it is 
whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security 
clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).)  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, financial considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a—1.g:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_____________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
