1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 08-10344
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA) on October 14,
2008. On May 5, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under financial considerations
(Guideline F) and personal conduct (Guideline E). The action was taken pursuant to
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President
on December 29, 2005, and made effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued on or after September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant’s undated answer to the SOR was received on May 9, 2009. DOHA
issued a notice of hearing on July 8, 2009 for a hearing on July 27, 2009. The hearing
was held as scheduled. At the hearing, four exhibits (GE 1 through 4) were admitted
into evidence without objection to support the government's case. Applicant testified and
submitted five exhibits (AE A-AE E). The five exhibits were received into evidence. The
record remained open until August 7, 2009 to allow Applicant to submit additional
evidence. No evidence was received. DOHA received the transcript on August 5, 2009.
The record closed on August 7, 2009.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 37 years old. He married in 1998 and divorced in August 2001. He
has two children from that marriage; their ages are 16 and 12. He has taken several
technical courses in college or trade schools (Tr. 20). Applicant has been employed as
an electrician for the past 20 years. He seeks a security clearance. 
Financial Considerations
Applicant admitted all 33 delinquent accounts appearing under paragraph 1
(financial considerations) of the SOR, but he does not recognize each account (Tr. 42).
His explanation is that the security people told him to admit all the debts and then
explain the debts later. (Id.). The total amount of debts as of the date of the SOR was
approximately $37,000, with medical debts ($28,000) representing about 2/3 of the total
amount. He admitted all allegations listed under paragraph 2 (personal conduct) of the
SOR. However, Applicant claims he did not intentionally omit information from his SCA.
The security department told him to admit everything (Tr. 71-74). His answers are
incorporated into the following factual findings. 
There appear to be two reasons for Applicant’s financial problems. The first
reason is the nature of his profession that is characterized by short employment
contracts, layoffs and other types of gaps in employment (Tr. 35). These employment
problems have been aggravated by medical problems in Applicant’s case. His SCA
shows he has worked for 16 employers since 2001. The short employment contracts
have caused insurance problems. Occasionally, Applicant has not worked long enough
to qualify for health insurance. An example of the lack of insurance coverage occurred
in 2004 (Tr. 38) when he had no insurance to cover his appendectomy costing $23,543
(subparagraph 1.l.). His surgery was complicated by an infection that required 10 extra
days in the hospital, and three or four months of convalescence (Tr. 49-50). Applicant
had no insurance in 2008 when his son received treatment for having a needle lodged
in his foot (Tr. 61). Applicant is currently not working because of a back injury (Tr. 80-
81). 
The second reason has two parts. Applicant is trying to officially obtain full
custody of his son so that he can end child support payments. Unofficially, Applicant
has full custody of the child anyway (Tr. 24). In addition, he has always provided
3
financial help for his mother, sister, brother, and former wife whenever they needed it
(Tr. 33).  
The credit reports reflect that Applicant’s financial accounts started falling
delinquent between December 2001 (subparagraph 1.a.) and August 2008
(subparagraph 1.ee.). As noted in the Statement of the Case, Applicant was provided
additional time to furnish documentation supporting his claim of having paid some of the
medical services (Tr. 53) or any other debt (Tr. 85). No documentation was supplied. 
In his interrogatory responses (GE 2) dated January 15, 2009, Applicant provided
no individual responses to any of the delinquent accounts appearing in the first nine
pages of the exhibit. On the last page, he stated he intended to pay his debts as his
finances allowed. Then he stated, “I will continue to contact and make payment
arrangements on my debts as finances allow me to do so.” (Id.) At the hearing,
Applicant testified he has taken no action on the debts because he is waiting on the
security clearance decision (Tr. 80).
Personal Conduct
The security investigation began on August 7, 2008, when Applicant certified and
signed his SCA. Under section 27 (FINANCIAL RECORD), Applicant answered
question 27B (wage garnishments/property repossessions?) “no,” when he should have
answered “yes” because of his vehicle repossession in 2003 (subparagraph 1.f.). In
response to questions 28A (any debts over 180 days delinquent in the last 7 years), and
28B (over 90 days delinquent on any debts), Applicant answered “no,” when he should
have answered “yes” because of his admissions to the delinquent accounts listed in the
SOR. In addition to his admissions to the vehicle repossession and other overdue
accounts listed in the SOR, the delinquent debt information is substantiated in the two
credit reports identified as GE 3 (August 15, 2008), and GE 4 (February 26, 2009). 
Before treading into his explanations for the missing information, Applicant
provided a general explanation that he was following the standard procedure of applying
for a construction job where “you just put down basically no and then answer any
questions later that come up.” (Tr. 66). Applicant provided four explanations for the
missing information; (1) they just handed him papers and told him to sign the
application; (2) he did not understand the importance of the application; (3) he did not
really believe that the debts needed to be reported; and, (4) I am not certain about his
fourth explanation, but I believe he got confused by the questions and simply wanted to
finish the application so he could turn it in (Tr. 68-73). I find Applicant intentionally
omitted material information about his finances from his SCA in October 2008.
Character Evidence
Applicant furnished four character statements from coworkers and his mother.
Reference A believes Applicant takes pride in his work while dedicating quality time to
his family. According to Reference A, Applicant paid his former wife’s telephone bill so
4
that his children could talk to her. Reference B has found Applicant trustworthy, honest
and a faithful employee. Reference C, a coworker, considers Applicant a leader and a
team player. Reference D, a coworker and friend for 20 years, commended Applicant’s
trustworthiness. 
Applicant’s financial problems, according to his mother (Reference E), were
caused by sporadic employment and inconsistent insurance coverage. His mother
believes Applicant is a diligent worker who takes pride in his work. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant's suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). Each
guideline lists potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are
useful in evaluating an applicant's eligibility for access to classified information. These
guidelines are flexible rules of law that must take into consideration the complexities of
human behavior. 
The administrative judge's ultimate adjudicative goal is to reach a fair and
impartial decision that is based on commonsense. The decision should also include a
careful, thorough evaluation of a number of variables known as the "whole person
concept." Finally, the Administrative Judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Reasonable doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are sensible, logical, and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to the potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Under Directive ¶ E3.l.14., the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.l.l5., the applicant is
responsible for presenting "witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . ." The
5
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Financial Considerations (FC)
¶ 18. The Concern. "Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts."
Applicant’s financial delinquencies began in December 2001. Over the next
seven years, Applicant collected 33 debts totaling approximately $37,000. Both FC
disqualifying condition (DC) ¶ 19.a. (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and FC
DC ¶ 19.c. (a history not meeting financial obligations) apply.
The first four mitigating conditions of the FC guideline are potentially applicable:
FC mitigating condition (MC) ¶ 20.a. (the behavior happened so long ago, was so
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment); FC
MC ¶ 20.b. (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the
person's control and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances); FC MC
¶ 20.c. (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control); and, FC MC
¶ 20.d. (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts). None of the mitigators are applicable.
FC MC ¶ 20.a. does not apply as there are 33 delinquent debts, with three
becoming delinquent in August 2008. The fact that Applicant has provided no plan to
address his current debts, other than repeatedly stating he plans to pay them, continues
to raise doubts about his current reliability and judgment. 
Applicant divorced his wife in 2001. He had sporadic employment since 2001. He
and members of his family had some medical problems since 2001. The divorce, the
irregular employment, and the isolated medical problems were events beyond his
control. However, he has made no documented adjustments in his financial practices or
lifestyle to confront the realities of his employment. In addition, he was hired at his
present job in August 2008, and could have taken some small steps to show he truly
wants to pay his creditors by paying off one or more of the eight creditors that hold
overdue accounts of less than $100. 
6
There is no indication Applicant has ever had financial counseling. Because his
33 debts are still unresolved, FC MC ¶ 20.c. and FC MC ¶ 20.c. do not apply. Given his
seven-year history of not meeting his financial obligations, Applicant has not mitigated
the FC guideline. 
Personal Conduct (PC)
¶ 15. The Concern. “Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.” 
PC DC ¶ 16.a. (deliberate omission or falsification of relevant facts from any
personnel security questionnaire to determine security clearance eligibility or
trustworthiness) applies based on Applicant’s deliberate omission in his SCA of his
repossessed car (question 27B) and 33 delinquent debts (questions 28A and 28B). 
PC MC ¶ 17.a. (the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the
omission, concealment or falsification, before being confronted with the facts) does not
apply as Applicant continues to deny he intentionally falsified his SCA. PC MC ¶ 17.c.
(the offense was so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment) does not apply because Applicant’s refusal to acknowledge his intentional
omission of material information raises current doubts about his judgment and reliability
that are not sufficiently relieved by his favorable character evidence. 
The application of PC MC ¶ 17.d. (the individual has acknowledged the behavior
and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to
alleviate stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable or
other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur) is predicated upon
an understanding by the applicant that his omissions were intentional. Applicant, who is
now 37 years old, has not reached that understanding, as evidenced by his other
explanations for omitting information from his SCA. The PC guideline is resolved against
Applicant.
Whole Person Concept (WPC)
I have examined the evidence with the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in
my ultimate finding against Applicant under the FC and PC guidelines. I have also
weighed the circumstances within the context of nine variables known as the whole
person concept. In evaluating the relevance of an individual's conduct, the
administrative judge should consider the following factors:
7
¶ 2(a) (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and, (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The record reflects Applicant is employed in a profession with short employment
contracts where time on the job is, more often than not, too short to qualify for insurance
coverage. Applicant has worked in this profession for 20 years. Between 2001 and
August 2008 (his first permanent employment), Applicant has been employed by 16
different contractors. He had his appendix removed in 2004 when he was uninsured.
Applicant did not have insurance when his son had a needle removed from his foot.
Applicant currently has a back injury that has kept him unemployed for an undetermined
period. However, Applicant has done nothing to address his listed debts at any time
covered by the SOR. There are eight debts under $100 that he could have paid but he
has not. In addition, Applicant deliberately omitted the debts from his SCA, attempting to
give the impression he had no debts. Considering the entire record, including his
favorable character evidence, it is not clearly consistent to grant Applicant a security
clearance. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. through 1.gg. Against Applicant
Paragraph 2 (Personal Conduct, Guideline E): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a. through 2.c. Against Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                      
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
