1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)         ISCR Case No. 09-01595
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
______________
Decision
______________
MASON, Paul J., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted her Security Clearance Application (SCA, Item 4), on
October 3, 2008. On March 19, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under
financial considerations (Guideline F) and personal conduct (Guideline E). The action
was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive), and adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and made effective within the Department of Defense
for SORs issued on or after September 1, 2006.
 Item 3, as described by Department Counsel, includes Applicant’s answer dated April 2, 2009. Item 3 is1
hereby amended to include Applicant’s second answer dated and notarized on April 11, 2009. This
amendment is made pursuant to E3.1.17. of the Directive.
2
Applicant submitted her answers to the SOR on April 2 and April 11, 2009 (Item
3).  She requested a decision on the record in lieu of a hearing. A copy of the1
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM, the government’s evidence in support
of the allegations of the SOR) was sent to Applicant on May 18, 2009. Applicant
received the FORM on May 22, 2009. Her response was due by June 21, 2009. No
response was received by DOHA. The case file was assigned to me on August 4, 2009.
Findings of Fact
The SOR lists five allegations under the financial considerations guideline, and
one allegation under the personal conduct guideline. In her first answer (Item 3) to the
SOR dated April 2, 2009, Applicant denied subparagraph 1.c. of the SOR. Regarding
subparagraph 2.a., Applicant surmised she misread the question, and attributed the
omission to negligence. On April 11, 2009, Applicant submitted a second answer (Item
3) to the SOR. In her second answer, she denied subparagraph 1.c. as she had done in
her first answer. But, she admitted subparagraph 2.a. in her second answer. Applicant’s
admissions will be incorporated in the following factual findings. 
Applicant is 45 years old and divorced. She has been employed by a defense
contractor first as an executive assistant/analyst, then as an executive assistant/office
manager since June 2005. While in the military between 1983 and 2005, Applicant
received training and was certified as a career information counselor, a drug and
alcohol facilitator, an employment requirements manager, and a scheduling and cost
control analyst. Applicant has held a security clearance since 1984. She mentioned that
fact in her first answer to the SOR, and also indicated, “Therefore, I am aware of the
extent of an investigation to prove an individual’s truthfulness and reliability.” (answer to
SOR)
Financial Considerations
Applicant owes a total of about $12,800 for five delinquent accounts that are
listed in SOR. Two of the past due debts (SOR 1.b. and 1.c.) are delinquent telephone
accounts. SOR 1.e. is a credit card. The accounts became delinquent between 2002
and 2005. Even though given the opportunity to explain the origin of the accounts, why
they became delinquent, and a plan to address them, Applicant provided no information.
Personal Conduct
As set forth in subparagraph 2.a. of the SOR, Applicant executed a security
clearance questionnaire (SCA) on October 3, 2008. In response to question 28.a. (In
the last 7 years, have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?), Applicant
checked “no,” giving the impression she had no debts over six months delinquent. I find
3
Applicant intentionally omitted her delinquent financial accounts from her SCA in
October 2008. 
Character Evidence
Applicant provided no statements or independent evidence regarding her job
performance and/or reputation in the community where she lives. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines
are applied in conjunction with the variables listed in the “whole person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.
Reasonable doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified
information will be resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere
speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
is not restricted to normal duty hours. Rather, the relationship is an-around-the-clock
responsibility between an applicant and the federal government. The government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
4
Analysis
Financial Considerations (FC)
¶ 18. The Concern. “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is
also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal
acts.”
Applicant’s five accounts, more than 180 days delinquent, total approximately
$12,800. The debts have been delinquent for four to seven years. FC disqualifying
condition (DC) ¶ 19.a. (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and FC DC ¶ 19.c. (a
history not meeting financial obligations) apply. The existence of the debts denotes an
inability to pay them. Given Applicant’s understanding of the importance of the security
investigation, Applicant’s decision not to provide any evidence as to how she plans to
resolve the debts suggests an unwillingness to pay the debts she created. 
Applicant’s financial problems may be mitigated by FC mitigating condition (MC)
¶ 20.a. (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment); FC MC ¶ 20.b. (the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances); FC MC ¶ 20.c. (the person has
received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications
that the problem is being resolved or is under control); FC MC ¶ 20.d. (the individual
initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and
FC MC ¶ 20.e. (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the
issue). None of the mitigators are applicable. 
FC MC ¶ 20.a. is inapplicable. Even though the debts are dated, the fact that
they have not been paid continues to cast a pall over Applicant’s judgment and
reliability. FC MC ¶ 20.b. cannot supply mitigation as there is no indication the debts
were caused by unforeseen circumstances. Applicant has been steadily employed since
her Honorable Discharge from the service in 2005. There is no evidence of medical
problems. Finally, she furnished no evidence connecting her financial problems to her
divorce in 1991. 
FC MC ¶ 20.c. does not apply as there is no evidence that shows Applicant has
received financial counseling. With no evidence of how Applicant intends to remedy her
5
financial indebtedness, there is no basis upon which to conclude her financial difficulties
are being resolved. With no restitution payments, Applicant cannot satisfy FC MC ¶
20.d. 
In her original and amended answers to the SOR, Applicant disputed the debt
listed in subparagraph 1.c. of the SOR. When disputing a debt, FC MC ¶ 20.e. requires
an applicant to (1) furnish a reasonable explanation for the dispute and (2) provide
documented proof that corroborates her explanation. Applicant has not complied with
the two elements of the mitigator, rendering FC MC ¶ 20.e. inapplicable. The FC
guideline is resolved against Applicant.
Personal Conduct (PC)
¶ 15. The Concern. “Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security
clearance process.” 
This guideline applies to intentional attempts to conceal or omit information from
an SCA. I am unable to find in Applicant’s favor under this guideline because she
deliberately omitted all her delinquent debt from her SCA. PC DC ¶ 16.a. (deliberate
omission or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire to
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness) applies.
There are three mitigating conditions (MC) that are potentially applicable to the
circumstances in this case. Those conditions are: PC MC ¶ 17.a. (the individual made
prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment or falsification, before
being confronted with the facts); PC MC ¶ 17.c. (the offense was so minor, or so much
time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and, PC MC ¶ 17.d. (the individual has
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken
other positive steps to alleviate stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused
untrustworthy, unreliable or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely
to recur). PC MC ¶ 17.a. is not applicable as Applicant did not acknowledge her
delinquent debt history until after she received the SOR in March or early April 2009. PC
MC ¶ 17.c. is inapplicable because Applicant tried to conceal her entire debt history by
misrepresenting to the government she had no overdue debts. Applicant’s intentional
omission of material financial information in October 2008 continues to cast doubt on
her reliability and judgment. Lastly, Applicant receives no mitigation under PC MC ¶
17.d. because she still maintains her intentional omission was the result of negligence.
The PC guideline is resolved against Applicant.  
6
Whole Person Concept (WPC) 
I have examined the evidence utilizing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions
of the FC and PC guidelines. Even though I have resolved both guidelines against
Applicant, the case still must be weighed within the context of nine variables known as
the whole person concept. In evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the
administrative judge should consider the following factors: 
AG ¶ 2(a) (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which the participation was voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and, (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant was 20 years old when she joined the military. During her 21 years in
the service, Applicant became certified as a career information counselor, a drug and
alcohol facilitator, an employment requirements manager, and a scheduling and cost
control analyst. Even without character evidence, it is clear she used her time wisely. By
having a security clearance since 1984, it is fair to assume she had to fill out security
forms more than once over a 20-year period. With her security clearance background, I
am unable to accept her claim that she misread the financial question. The absence of
evidence to demonstrate how she is going to pay back her creditors, coupled with her
deliberate omission on an official government document, damages her credibility and
indicates her current financial problems are likely to persist in the future. Even if she has
determined that she does not have to pay the debts because they are legally
unenforceable under the state statute of limitations, this action cannot be interpreted as
the same type of good-faith effort to resolve debts as a documented track record
showing regular payments of past due debts. See, FC MC ¶ 20.c. The FC and PC
guidelines are resolved against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1 (Financial Considerations, Guideline F): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d. Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e. Against Applicant
7
Paragraph 2 (Personal Conduct, Guideline E): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a. Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                       
Paul J. Mason
Administrative Judge
