  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00384 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison O’Connell, Esq. Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant owed approximately $63,000 for nine unpaid obligations. Applicant 
failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s security concerns under financial 
considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on March 24, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations. 
  
 On April 8, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter 
decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the government's case in a 
File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated May 11, 2009. The FORM contained ten 
attachments. On May 18, 2009, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with 
notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or 
mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions.  
 
Responses to the FORM are due 30 days after receipt of the FORM. Applicant’s 
response was due on June 17, 2009. As of August 4, 2009, a response was not 
received. On August 7, 2009, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the factual allegations in SOR ¶ 1.i 
stating the claim against the insurance company had been filed for payment of a 
medical debt, but payment had yet to be received. He admitted the remaining factual 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.h. Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations 
are incorporated herein as facts. After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, and 
exhibits, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old individual working in a security position for a defense 
contractor since December 2007. He is seeking to obtain a security clearance. (Item 5) 
 
 From October 2003 to January 2006, Applicant owned a dry cleaning business. 
Applicant incurred a $45,148 loan (SOR ¶ 1.b) to start and run this business. (Item 6) 
The business failed. Applicant asserts the bank was to liquidate the remaining materials 
and equipment from the business and he would pay half of the debt that remained. 
(Item 6) No documentation of the repayment agreement was provided. The cleaning 
business incurred a $1,086 utility bill (SOR ¶ 1.g), which remains unpaid. (Item 7) The 
certified public accountant (CPA) used by the business has not been paid $587 for 
services provided (SOR ¶ 1.h). Applicant owes the landlord2 $680 (SOR ¶ 1.c) related 
to the business.  
 
 Applicant, in his response to the SOR (Item 4), states that 90 % of his debt is 
related to his failed business. He asserts he had excellent credit before acquiring the 
business. In January 2009, in response to interrogatories (Item 7), Applicant stated he 
had talked with a financial coach and decided to file for chapter 7 bankruptcy protection.  
 
 On March 20, 2009, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. (Item 10) 
Applicant listed total assets of approximately $79,000 and total liabilities of 
 
 
2 This debt was listed in his March 2009 bankruptcy as owed to a hardware store. (Item 10) 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
approximately $110,000. Applicant listed approximately $70,600 in obligations, 
excluding his home mortgage. Those obligations include: a $4,000 priority debt to the 
IRS (SOR ¶ 1.a); a $680 debt (SOR ¶ 1.c); three credit card accounts totaling $9,826 
(SOR ¶ 1.d and ¶ 1.e); a $52,681 debt (SOR ¶ 1.f); the $1,086 utility bill (SOR ¶ 1.g); 
the $587 CPA debt (SOR ¶ 1.h); and a $264 medical bill (SOR ¶ 1.i). (Item 10) The only 
SOR debt not listed was the state tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.b). At the time of filing, Applicant’s 
and his wife’s net monthly take home pay was approximately $3,300. (Item 10)  
  
 From the bankruptcy filing it does not appear Applicant was living beyond his 
means. In the filing, he listed as assets a 1997 Mercury Cougar as his vehicle and a 
$70,000 home, on which approximately $39,000 was owed. (Item 10) 
 
 In September 2006, the state entered a $732 tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.b) for unpaid 
employee taxes related to Applicant’s business. In a July 2008, personal subject 
interview, Applicant stated he was aware of the lien and was “currently working to pay 
off the debt.” (Item 6) In January 2009, in response to written interrogatories, Applicant 
stated the debt had ballooned to approximately $4,500, not further explained. He stated 
he would make an $80 payment on January 25, 2009. (Item 7) No proof of payment was 
received. As of January 2009, the bank was still trying to sell the remaining equipment 
and supplies. (Item 7)  
 
 Applicant’s January 2009 credit bureau report (CBR) lists a $5,751 lien (SOR ¶ 
1.a) and a $732 lien (SOR ¶ 1.b). (Item 8) The $732 lien is also listed in Applicant’s 
March 2008 CBR. These are tax liens. 
 
 Applicant had two3 credit cards with the same creditor (SOR ¶ 1.d, $3,036 and 
SOR ¶ 1.e, $2,213) Applicant was 120 days past due on his personal credit card 
account (SOR ¶ 1.d, $3,036). (Item 7) The credit card was used for daily purchases and 
travel expenses. Applicant disagreed with the amount owed. As of June 2008, Applicant 
was “trying to make payments to have the debt [brought] up to date.” (Item 6) In January 
2009, Applicant stated he had made a few payments on the debt (SOR ¶ 1.d, $3,610), 
but was unable to continue. The second credit card (SOR ¶ 1.e, $2,213) was a business 
credit card with the same creditor. (Item 7)  
 
 Following the business failure, Applicant was unemployed from January 2006 to 
February 2007. (Item 4) As of June 2008, Applicant asserted he was living within his 
means and meeting his financial obligations, other than the debts listed in the SOR. 
(Item 6) In January 2009, in response to written interrogatories, Applicant stated he was 
overwhelmed with stress and worry. He did not realize the importance of these matters 
and would provide the information requested. He stated he had learned much 
concerning debts and was a wiser person. This was not further explained. (Item 7)  
 
 
3 The bankruptcy filing lists Applicant and his wife as owing three credit card accounts to this creditor. 
(Item 10) 
 
4 
 
 
 A summary of the nine debts alleged in the SOR follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Internal Revenue Service 
tax lien. 
$5,751 Included in Applicant’s bankruptcy.  
b State tax lien amount.  $4,500 
 
Unpaid. Not Included in Applicant’s 
March 2009 Chapter 7 bankruptcy. 
c  This is either a defaulted 
lease account or a 
hardware store debt. 
$680 
 
Included in Applicant’s bankruptcy. 
d Credit card account. $3,036 Included in Applicant’s bankruptcy. 
e Credit card account. $2,213 Included in Applicant’s bankruptcy. 
f Default on a business 
loan. 
$45,186 Included in Applicant’s bankruptcy. 
g Unpaid utility bill. $1,086 Included in Applicant’s bankruptcy. 
h Unpaid CPA bill.  $587 Included in Applicant’s bankruptcy. 
9i Unpaid medical account. $264 Included in Applicant’s bankruptcy. 
 Total debt listed in SOR $63,303  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
5 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns 
relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 
6 
 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant owed a dry cleaning business which failed in January 2006. The 
business generated a state and federal tax lien, unpaid credit card debt, an unpaid CPA 
bill, an unpaid utility bill, and unpaid rent. The record evidence supports a conclusion 
that Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant had to resort to bankruptcy 
protection as to his business obligations. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability 
or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; or 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Following the failure of the business, there is little evidence Applicant acted 
responsibly in trying to address his financial obligations. Applicant’s dry cleaning 
business ended in January 2006. Applicant asserted he made some payments on this 
debt, but provided no documentation supporting his assertion. In March 2009, he filed 
 
7 
 
 
for bankruptcy protection. There is evidence the bankruptcy was filed, but no evidence 
the debts having been discharged.  
 
The debts are recent and not infrequent. Some, but not all, of the SOR debts 
were included in Applicant’s bankruptcy filing. Because Applicant chose to have this 
matter handled administratively, I am unable to evaluate his demeanor, appearance, or 
form a positive determination as to his truthfulness. Additionally, I am prevented from 
obtaining additional information in order to have a more complete picture concerning the 
facts and circumstances resulting in Applicant’s financial problems and his bankruptcy 
filing. 
 
From the record, I am unable to find Applicant’s financial problems occurred 
under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant=s financial problems were contributed to by a failed business and a 
period of unemployment for more than one year following the failed business. Normally 
a business downturn and loss of employment are factors beyond a person’s control. 
The record gives no indication why the unemployment occurred and I will not speculate 
as to its cause. However, it has been more than three and a half years since the 
business failed and Applicant has failed to document payment on any debt. Even the 
medical debt of $264 (SOR ¶ 1.i) was not paid. Because Applicant has not acted 
responsibly under the circumstances, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
  
There is no evidence Applicant has received financial counseling, nor is there 
clear indication the problem is being resolved. There is evidence of a bankruptcy filing, 
but no evidence the debts have been discharged. Applicant asserts he is living within 
his means and meeting his financial obligations. He also stated he had learned much 
concerning debts and is a wiser person. Having been unable to evaluate Applicant’s 
demeanor, appearance, or form a positive determination as to his truthfulness, I am 
unable to find Applicant was sincere, open, and honest in his statements. AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply. 
 
For AG ¶ 20(d) to apply there must be an “ability” to repay the debts, the “desire” 
to repay, and evidence of a good-faith effort to repay. A systematic, concrete method of 
handling his debts is needed, but is not present here. The majority of the SOR debts 
may be discharged in bankruptcy. The $4,500 state tax lien was not included in that 
bankruptcy and remains unpaid. The record fails to establish a good-faith effort to repay 
the debts. AG ¶ 20(d) does not apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
8 
 
 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The majority of the debts relate to a 
failed business. A bankruptcy has been filed, but there is no indication that the debts 
have been discharged. His bankruptcy filing indicates he has a modest home and an 
older car. He does not appear to be living beyond his means. I am limited in my findings 
as to credibility and honesty because Applicant chose to have this matter handled 
administratively.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his failure to meet his 
financial obligations. 
 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under the Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. Should the Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance 
with a repayment plan, established they were discharged in bankruptcy, or otherwise 
adequately addressed the obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of 
his security worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
9 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a—1.i:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
