  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-03552 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: James Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kathleen E. Voelker, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in India and came to the U.S. as a student in 1985. In 2003, 
Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen and in 2006, his wife became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen. Applicant’s brother, a citizen and resident of India, is a deputy commander 
of an artillery brigade in the Indian Army. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the 
government’s security concerns under foreign influence. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
1 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 30, 2009, detailing security concerns under 
foreign influence. 
  
 On July 15, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
August 4, 2009, I was assigned the case. On August 4, 2009, DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing scheduling the hearing which was held on August 11, 2009. The government 
offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence. The Government 
also asked that administrative notice be taken of 14 additional items. Applicant testified 
on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through Q, which were admitted into 
evidence. On August 17, 2009, the transcript (Tr.) was received. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted his brother is a colonel in the 
Indian Army. Applicant’s admission to the SOR allegation is accepted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is the 45-year-old president of a professional consulting company 
providing management consulting and information technology (IT) implementation. 
Applicant started the company in 1996. (Tr. 131, Ex. C, E) He is seeking to obtain a 
security clearance. His business generates income of more than two and a half million 
dollars. (Ex. F, G)  
 
 In 1964, Applicant was born in India. In August 1985, at age 21, he came to the 
U.S. on a student Visa and started attending university. (Tr. 96, 123) He obtained a 
master’s degree in electrical engineering. (Tr. 123) In 1989, he obtained his Ph.D. in 
management. In 1996, he obtained his “green card” and in June 2003, Applicant 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen. (Tr. 124) His Indian citizenship ended at that time, 
because India does not recognize dual citizenship. When he was naturalized, he took 
an oath renouncing all foreign allegiances and agreeing to support and defend the U.S. 
Constitution and U.S. laws, and to bear arms or provide noncombatant service, or 
civilian service on behalf of the U.S. Since becoming a citizen, Applicant has voted in 
every U.S. election. (Tr. 125) Applicant supports local candidates and has sponsored 12 
fundraisers in his home. He served for two years on the Board of Directors for a county 
board for family and children’s affairs and also served on the county arts council. (Tr. 
126) 
  
 In 2005, Applicant’s Indian passport expired. He does not have and has not ever 
obtained an Indian identification card. If he were an Indian citizen, he would be willing to 
renounce that citizenship. He receives no benefits from India. Applicant has no financial 
interests in India. He has no bank accounts, property interests, or investments there. 
Applicant and his wife own a home in the U.S. worth approximately $600,000 that they 
purchased in 1997. (Tr. 128, Ex. D) They also own a condo worth approximately 
 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
3 
 
$120,000, which is used for rental income. (Tr. 129) Applicant has more than $217,000 
in retirement accounts and investment accounts in the U.S. (Ex. K) 
 
 Applicant’s wife was born in India in 1965, obtained her “green card” in 1994, and 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in March 2006. (Tr. 100) In 1986, she came to the 
U.S. on a student visa. (Tr. 96) In 1991, she obtained a master’s degree in electrical 
engineering. (Tr. 97) Applicant met his wife in 1986 and they married in 1991. (Tr. 96) 
They have two children, born in the U.S., ages 10 and 14. (Tr. 102) His children are 
involved with soccer, football, basketball, martial arts, cub scouts, boy scouts, the chess 
club, music, Latin and French. (Tr. 107) Applicant and his wife are active in the PTA, are 
patrons of the botanical garden and the art museum. (Tr. 108)  
 
 In the last 10 years, Applicant’s wife has traveled to India three times. (Tr. 104) 
While there, she met her husband’s brother twice; once in 1994 and again in 2008. (Tr. 
103) Her Indian passport expired. (Tr. 112) Her father, no longer living, was an engineer 
educated in California who owed his own fabric fabrication company in India. (Tr. 112) 
Her mother was an office assistant. (Tr. 113) She usually calls her mother once or twice 
a month. (Tr. 115) Her mother lives approximately 300 miles from where her father-in-
law lives. (Tr. 116) His wife has two brothers living in Singapore, one who is a sales 
director and the other is a marine engineer. (Tr. 102) 
 
 In the past 10 years, Applicant has returned to India six times. He visited in: 
September 1999, December 2003, July 2006, and for a week in October and November 
2006. (Ex. 1) In July 2007, Applicant went to India to attend his mother’s funeral. In 
August 2008, just after the one year anniversary of his mother’s death, he traveled to 
India to attend a memorial service. (Tr. 143) When in India, he stayed with his father. 
(Tr. 143) Since his mother has died, Applicant does not anticipate returning to India. (Tr. 
183) 
 
 Applicant’s father, age 73, a retired auditor, is a citizen and resident of India. 
Applicant has never spoken on the phone with his father during the past six years. 
Applicant saw his father at his mother’s funeral, but did not speak to him. (Tr. 169) Even 
though Applicant has stayed in his father’s home in 2006, 2007, and 2008, he has not 
spoken with him since 2003 due to a family dispute. (Tr. 178) His father and brother live 
approximately 20 miles apart in India. (Tr. 115) Applicant has a sister who is an Indian 
citizen who teaches at a community college in New Zealand. (Tr. 171) That sister’s 
husband is a welder in a factory. (Tr. 172) Applicant has another sister who has a 
degree in hotel management and resides in Australia. (Tr. 171) Until recently, Applicant 
has seldom spoken with his sisters. However, he is planning a family trip to Australia in 
December and has talked to his sister about the upcoming trip. (Tr. 172)  
 
 Applicant’s younger brother, age 43, is a colonel and deputy commander of an 
artillery brigade in the Indian Army. An Indian brigade, composed of approximately 
5,000 soldiers, is normally commanded by a brigadier. (Tr. 66, 67) His brother joined the 
Indian Army in 1986, has served in the Army for 23 years, and is eligible to retire. (Tr. 
17, 146, 149) Applicant and his brother do not ask about or discuss each other’s work. 
 
4 
 
(Tr. 147-148) In the last 15 years, Applicant has seen his brother five times: in 1993, 
1997, 2006, 2007, and 2008. (Tr. 149) During the nine-year period between 1997 and 
2006, Applicant did not speak with his brother, did not see his brother, and did not even 
know where his brother lived. (Tr. 149) As a member of the Indian Army, his brother 
would transfer to a new location every two years. 
 
 In November 2007, during a personal subject interview, Applicant said he 
currently talked with his brother every two months and sees him every two years. (Ex. 2) 
There have been times when Applicant emailed his brother monthly and other times 
when long periods have elapsed without contact. Applicant included copies of emails 
sent to his brother and/or his sister-in-law. (Ex. H) Currently, Applicant does not 
exchange emails with his brother, but does exchange emails with his brother’s wife. (Tr. 
152, Ex. H) In 2006, Applicant called his brother seven times; in 2007, ten times; in 
2008, six or seven times; and in 2009, once to obtain information necessary for 
Applicant’s security clearance process. (Tr. 153, Ex. I and J) He also included a copy of 
his phone logs showing calls made to India between August 2006 and July 2009. (Ex. I, 
J) Applicant made calls to India during eight of those 36 months. The only time his 
brother has called him was in 2007, to tell him their mother had died. (Tr. 154) His 
brother has never visited the U.S. Applicant’s sister-in-law works as a hotel manager. 
(Tr. 165)  
 
 The Indian Army is three times the size of the U.S. Army and is modeled on the 
British Army. (Tr. 53) The Indian Army is subordinate to civilian control. (Tr. 53) Most 
officers are promoted in the Indian Army through the rank of colonel “pretty much in 
lockstep” with other officers of the same year group at the military service academies. 
(Tr. 54) A colonel assigned to an Indian brigade attends to more administrative matters 
and less front line command or operational work than does a colonel in the U.S Army. 
(Tr. 55) Applicant said his brother was responsible for training, security, and 
administration of his unit. (Ex. 3)  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to India, along with 14 attachments. The facts administratively 
noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not subject to 
reasonable dispute. Those facts are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
 
 India and the U.S. have had close relations ever since India obtained its 
independence from Great Britain in 1947. The United States and India enjoy good 
relations. India is not hostile to the U.S., nor are its interests inimical to the United 
States. Currently, the U.S. is India’s largest trading partner and largest investment 
partner. India provides $126 million in annual development assistance. (Item I at 7, Item 
III at 55) India=s size, population, and strategic location give it a prominent voice in 
international affairs, and its growing industrial base, military strength, and scientific and 
technical capacity on issues from trade to environmental protection are indications that 
India’s power will continue to increase.  
 
5 
 
 
India, the world=s most populous democracy, uses a federal form of government, 
similar to the United States, but with more authority vested in the central government. It 
has a bicameral legislature modeled after Britain=s parliament, and its members are 
selected through open elections involving several political parties. India also has an 
active market-oriented economy, and conducts most of its international trade with the 
U.S. (Item I at 7) 
 
 The U.S. recognizes India as key to strategic interests and has sought to 
strengthen its relationship with India. Since the end of the Cold War, India has been an 
advocate of issues important to non-aligned nations, and is a member of the South 
Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC). (Item I) During the Cold War, the 
U.S. tried to establish a closer relationship with India immediately after Indian 
independence in 1947 until 1954 when the non-aligned movement was formed. (Tr. 73) 
A second attempt at a closer relationship was made in 1962 following a skirmish 
between India and China over the border. (Tr. 74) Both the U.S. and India share a 
concern over the growth of China. (Tr. 57) Over the past five years the two countries 
have been closer partners than anytime previously. (Tr. 57) However, there are 
concerns about India’s relations with Iran, including India’s increasing cooperation with 
the Iranian military, but a much greater concern is Pakistan’s relationship with Iran. 
(Item III at 26, Tr. 63) 
 
 Some countries in pursuit of obtaining intelligence information appeal to the 
ethnic solidarity with the individual being targeted. This is impossible in India since India 
is the most ethnically diverse country on earth. India is even more diverse than the U.S. 
(Tr. 91) There is enormous rivalry among Indian states, among different caste groups, 
and among linguistic groups. (Tr. 91) India does not have one universal language, but 
has 100 languages and five entirely different scripts. It would go against the nature of 
the Indian society for the Indian government to pressure an Indian relative for the 
disclosure of classified U.S. information. (Tr. 90) 
 
According to its constitution, India is a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic 
republic. It is a multiparty, federal, parliamentary democracy with a bicameral parliament 
and a population of approximately 1.1 billion people. (Item II) The U.S. and India are the 
world’s largest democracies, both committed to political freedom protected by 
representative government, and share common interests in the free flow of commerce, 
share a common goal of promoting stability in Asia, and fighting terrorism. While there is 
a threat of terrorism in India, as well as in most areas of the world, the area of India 
where Applicant=s family resides is not listed as an area of safety or security concern, or 
of instability because of terrorism.  
 
Throughout its history, India=s caste system, multi-cultural and multi-ethnic 
population, and the vestiges of colonial domination have challenged India=s ability to 
govern certain parts of the country. India is one of the most terror-afflicted countries in 
the world (Item IV at 4). In 2008, more than 2300 people died from terrorist incidents in 
India (Item III at 49). Terrorism is mainly concentrated in Kashmir, a disputed area 
 
6 
 
bordering Pakistan where radical Muslim activists are present, central India, where 
Maoist rebels are fighting on behalf of landless laborers, and southern India, where 
Hindus and Muslims periodically clash. (Item IV at 5, Tr. 86). As a result of sometimes 
violent separatist movements, provincial law enforcement authorities and military militias 
have used excessive force to maintain order and defeat domestic terrorism. Terrorism 
and separatist activities are generally done in furtherance of internal issues, and are 
most violent in limited and remote geographic regions. Despite these problems, India is 
still an open society in which the rule of law is prominent.   
 
 India considers defeating terrorism and combating violent religious extremism as 
a critical shared security interest with the U.S. (Item III at 55). In 2000, the U.S. and 
India formed a joint working group on counterterrorism. It meets annually and is devoted 
to extending cooperation on areas such as bioterrorism, aviation security, cyber-
security, terrorism, weapons of mass destruction terrorism, and terrorist financing (Item 
III at 49). In 2002, the U.S. and India organized a cyber security forum to safeguard 
critical infrastructures from attack. 
 
There are differences between the U.S. and India over India’s nuclear weapons 
program. The two governments continue to work closely in pursuit of mutual interests in 
such issues as international management of nuclear technology, and preventing the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. (Item III at 36, 51) The Indian government buys most 
of its nuclear technology from the U.S., and it has an excellent record when it comes to 
protecting its nuclear arsenal.  
 
The growth of the U.S. and India’s economic ties has been accompanied by a 
corresponding growth in their strategic relationship. (Tr. 82) In 2005, a U.S. - India Joint 
Statement asserted that as a responsible state with advanced nuclear technology, India 
should acquire the same benefits and advantages as other such states. In 2006, 
Congress passed the Henry J. Hyde United States - India Peaceful Atomic Cooperation 
Act, which allows direct civilian nuclear commerce with India for the first time in 30 years 
(Item I at 11). This agreement “opens the door” for American and Indian firms to 
participate in each other’s civil energy sector. (Id.) Specifically, it enables India to buy 
U.S. nuclear reactors and fuel for civilian use. Also, it removed and/or revised several 
U.S. export requirements for dual-use and civil nuclear items. (Id.) 
 
 In July 2007, the U.S. and India successfully negotiated an agreement on 
peaceful nuclear cooperation. (Item III at 3) This deal is more far-reaching than the 
Hyde Act (Item I at 11, Item III at 7). In August 2007, the International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA) approved the agreement. It has not yet been approved by the 45-
member Nuclear Suppliers Group, a group composed of countries that have nuclear 
energy capabilities who must approve such an agreement under international law (Item 
III at 7). Neither the U.S. Congress nor the Indian parliament has ratified the deal (Id. at 
4-7). 
 
Since 2002, the U.S. and India have held a series of “unprecedented and 
increasingly substantive” combined exercises involving all military services (Item III at 
 
7 
 
47). These exercises ensure stability in southern and southwest Asia and have enabled 
the U.S. to get a “first look” at fighter jets that Russia designed and sold to India (Id.). 
More than 100 U.S. Special Forces soldiers have undergone counter insurgency jungle 
warfare training conducted by the Indian military. For the past seven years, the U.S. and 
Indian navies have participated in joint naval exercises conducted near the Indian coast 
(Id.).  
 
 India purchases more weapons systems than any other developing country (Item 
III at 50). India purchases the majority of its weapons systems from Russia and Israel 
(Item III at 47). The U.S. began selling weapons systems to India in 2002. In 2007, a 
U.S. defense contractor negotiated a $1 billion dollar deal with India for the purchase of 
military transport aircraft along with related equipment, training and services (Item III at 
48). In January 2008, the U.S. approved the deal (Id.). Currently, U.S. defense 
contractors are competing with weapons manufacturers from other countries for a 
contract to sell multi-role, combat aircraft to India (Item III at 48). The deal when 
consummated “could be worth” $10 billion (Id.). 
  
 India has a vibrant civil society, a free press, and a robust, democratic, political 
system (Item II at 15, Item III at 32). However, its judiciary is only “somewhat effective” 
(Id.) India has numerous laws protecting human rights, but lacks a coherent, well-
developed mechanism to enforce them. Serious problems exist including extrajudicial 
killings of persons in custody, disappearances, and torture by police forces (Item II at 2). 
 
Although the Indian government generally respects the human rights of its 
citizens, there remained numerous serious problems and significant human rights 
abuses. (Item III at 70) India=s human rights record has often been uneven. Police and 
security forces have engaged in extrajudicial killings of persons in custody, 
disappearances, torture, and rape. The lack of accountability permeated the 
government and security forces, creating an atmosphere in which human rights 
violations went unpunished. (Item II) A number of violent attacks have been committed 
in recent years by separatist and terrorist groups. 
 
 There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of 
U.S. restricted, dual use technology to India, including technology and equipment which 
were determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the 
development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. (Item VIII—
XIII) Foreign government entities, including intelligence organizations and security 
services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology, and 
acquisition of sensitive U.S. technology by foreign private entities does not slow its flow 
to foreign governments or its use in military applications. 
 
The United States government encourages small and medium size companies to 
expand their business opportunities in India. Many United States based companies, 
including large computer service and software development companies, have subsidiary 
companies and do business in India. Indian immigrants are the fastest growing legal 
 
8 
 
group of immigrants in the U.S. The Indian-American community is well-entrenched in 
several U.S. business sectors.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
9 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) AG ¶ 6 explains the foreign influence 
security concern as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The two conditions applicable to this case are: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion, and  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
 Applicant’s ties to his brother and mother-in-law are limited to telephone calls for 
family news. He has no telephone or email communication with his father and has not 
talked with him since 2003. His contact with his sisters has been minimal and they live 
in New Zealand and Australia. His communications establish ties of affection to his 
brother in India. There is some possibility that Applicant could be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interest of a foreign individual, group, organization, or 
government and the interests of the United States, especially because India has a 
 
10 
 
significant lawless element, who may attempt to harm Applicant’s brother to gain some 
kind of advantage over Applicant.  
 
The government presented sufficient evidence to support the factual allegations 
in the SOR. Applicant=s younger brother, a colonel in the Indian Army, is a citizen of and 
resides in India. Applicant has connections to his father in India, as well as his spouse’s 
relationship with her mother living in India. AG ¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply.  
 
The Government produced substantial evidence of the disqualifying condition 
and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation. Three of 
the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Based on his relationship and depth of loyalty to the United States, Applicant can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of U.S. interests. He has lived in 
the United States since 1985 when he arrived to attend university. After earning two 
advanced degrees, he began working in the U.S. In 2003, he became a U.S. citizen and 
in 2006, so did his wife. When he became a naturalized U.S. citizen he took an oath that 
renounced his Indian citizenship. Both of his children were born in the U.S. In contrast, 
his ties to India have become minimal over the years. He has substantial U.S. property 
and no financial or property interests in India. His communication with his brother is 
infrequent and with his father, even less. His wife communicates with her mother in 
India; however their connections to the U.S. are much stronger.  
 
As to the potential for coercion, available information shows that India is an open 
society, governed through a democratically-elected legislature and executive, checked 
by an independent judiciary. While there are notable problems regarding human rights 
abuses by India, all of the available information shows Applicant=s brother is not likely to 
be subject to coercive methods to obtain information from Applicant.  
 
 
11 
 
                                                          
A Guideline B decision concerning India must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in that country, as well as the dangers existing in India.2 A “current 
and accurate assessment of the ‘geopolitical situation’ and the security/intelligence 
profile of the [foreign] country vis-à-vis the United States is crucial in Guideline B 
cases.”3 Applicant’s relationship with his brother generates a security risk only if the 
contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, pressure or 
coercion (AG ¶ 7(a)). Security clearance decisions must be based on current DoD policy 
and standards (See ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003). 
 
 There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of 
U.S. restricted, dual use technology to India. Foreign government entities, including 
intelligence organizations and security services, have capitalized on private-sector 
acquisitions of U.S. technology and acquisition of sensitive U.S. technology by foreign 
private entities.  
 
 The risk of terrorism in India is a factor to consider in assessing the security risk. 
Over the past five years, India has been victimized by brazen and spectacular episodes 
of terrorism. Terrorism, however, is indiscriminate by nature. The possibility that it may 
be employed against specific individuals, such as the family member of a security 
clearance holder, is higher in countries that openly espouse it, are hostile to the U.S., or 
are controlled partially by terrorist organizations. None of these characteristics apply to 
India.  
 
Although the contested border with Pakistan is a flashpoint for terrorism, and 
pockets of central and southern India experience terrorism stimulated by ethnic and 
political unrest, India remains a robust democracy firmly committed to countering 
terrorism, both domestically, and internationally. Over the years, India has sought U.S. 
counterterrorism assistance and provided terrorism assistance to the U.S. Also, it is 
playing a crucial role in the reconstruction of Afghanistan, and has been unfazed by the 
Taliban’s violent efforts to compel its withdrawal. 
 
 India’s relationship with the U.S. is as close as it has been in India’s 60 years of 
independence. The U.S. and India enjoy close, mutually supportive political and trade 
relations, are working together in the global war on terror, and their interests in 
controlling nuclear proliferation are generally aligned. In the 1990s, the major point of 
contention was development of India’s nuclear program. Now, the U.S., under the Hyde 
Act, is engaging in civilian nuclear commerce with India for the first time in 30 years. 
India and the U.S. have some significant foreign policy differences, particularly with 
respect to Iran. Generally, however, India’s foreign policy and strategic interests are 
congruent with those of the U.S. 
 
India is a democracy. It is not a hostile, totalitarian state seeking to project its 
power worldwide through the brute intimidation or coercion of its citizens domestically 
2 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion).  
3 See ISCR Case No. 07-05686 (App. Bd. November 12, 2005 at 4, footnote 3. 
 
12 
 
and abroad. I am mindful of the information showing India is active in industrial 
espionage. Nonetheless, I conclude that there is little likelihood India, a nation friendly 
toward the United States, will try to leverage Applicant=s relationship with his brother to 
gain access to the information with which Applicant works. Based on the foregoing, I 
conclude SOR & 1.a for the Applicant, and further conclude available information is 
sufficient to mitigate the security concerns raised under Guideline B. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
The Appeal Board requires the whole person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to the 
U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her social ties within the U.S.; 
and many other [factors] raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-00540 
at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). Substantial mitigating evidence weighs towards granting 
Applicant’s security clearance.  
 
Applicant has established his life in the U.S. He has spent his adult life in the 
U.S., having lived here more than 24 years. He has been a naturalized citizen for the 
past six. He earned two advanced degrees from a U.S. educational institution. All of his 
friends, wife, and children live in the U.S. Applicant’s spouse has been living in the 
United States since 1986 and is a naturalized U.S. citizen. His two children were born in 
the United States. He is a successful member of his business community, providing 
services to the U.S. government. He has substantial investments in the U.S. and no 
investments in India. His ties to the United States are much stronger than his ties to his 
brother in India.  
 
Applicant is fully entrenched in the U.S., has no foreign financial interests, and is 
unlikely to compromise his life here. There is no evidence Applicant has ever taken any 
 
13 
 
action that could cause potential harm to the United States. He takes his loyalty to the 
United States seriously. His Indian citizenship was renounced by taking his U.S. oath of 
citizenship. India does not recognize dual citizenship. Applicant has never had an Indian 
identification card. There is no derogatory information about him in the record. 
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the entire record before me shows the 
government=s doubts about Applicant=s suitability to have access to classified 
information are based solely on his brother being a colonel in the Indian Army. 
However, available information is also sufficient to resolve those doubts. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me without questions as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability 
for a security clearance. Accordingly, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant=s request for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Influence:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
