                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02045 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial 
considerations. Accordingly, her request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on November 18, 2008, to request a security clearance required as part of 
her employment with a defense contractor (Item 4). After reviewing the results of the 
ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
On May 12, 2009, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
(Item 1), that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Revised Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG). 
 
Applicant received the SOR on May 19, 2009. She signed a notarized Answer on 
May 26, 2009, and requested a decision without a hearing. In her Answer, Applicant 
admitted to all allegations in the SOR. On July 6, 2009, DOHA Department Counsel 
submitted a file of relevant materials (FORM) in support of the government’s preliminary 
decision to deny Applicant's request to be granted a security clearance. The FORM 
contained eight documents, identified as Items 1 through 8. The FORM and attached 
Items were forwarded to Applicant on July 8, 2009. Applicant was given 30 days from 
the date she received the FORM to respond. She submitted a timely response dated 
July 23, 2009. The case was assigned to me on August 13, 2009, for an administrative 
decision based on the record. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 In his FORM, Department Counsel moved to amend subparagraph 1.g. of the 
SOR to change the alleged amount owed from $900 to $94. The motion is granted.  
 
 Revised allegation 1.g. now reads: 
 
g. You are indebted to a collection creditor [account #] on a 
medical account that was placed for collection in November 
2007 in the approximate amount of $94. As of April 6, 2009, 
this debt had not been paid.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the FORM, I 
make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant, 27 years old, graduated from high school in 2000 and received an 
EMT certificate2 from a technical college in 2002. She worked as an EMT from 2002 to 
2006. She also worked as a customer services representative in 2007 and as an 
electronics technician in 2001-2002 and 2007. When she submitted her security 
clearance application, she was employed as an electronics technician for a defense 
contractor (Item 4).  
 
 In 2005, Applicant married and had a son, who is now three years old. She and 
her husband separated in 2007. Since the separation, her husband has provided less 
than $500 in child support. Applicant does not have the financial resources to finalize 
her divorce or to enforce child support payments (Item 4; Item A).  
2 This acronym might indicate Emergency Medical Technician; however, Applicant does not explain the 
meaning in her security clearance application. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant's debts started to become delinquent in 2002. The SOR alleges 32 
debts and two judgments that together total $26,300. The categories of debts and the 
amounts alleged follow: 
 
Medical: twelve debts, totaling $7,702 (allegations 1.a.–1.g.; 1.j.; 1.r.; 1.z.; 1.dd.; 
1.gg.)  
 
Telecommunications: six debts totaling $1,437 (allegations 1.h.; 1.i.; 1.q.; 1.s.; 
1.y.; 1.ee.) 
 
Utilities: two debts totaling $306 (allegations 1.k.; 1.p.) 
 
Bank creditors: four debts totaling $6,983 (allegations 1.m.; 1.n.; 1.cc.; 1.ff.) 
 
Charge account: one debt totaling $474 (allegation 1.o.) 
 
Retail stores: two debts totaling $3,440 (allegations 1.u.; 1.aa.) 
 
Cash advances: two debts totaling $681 (allegations 1.bb.; 1.hh.) 
 
Judgments: two, totaling $4,875 (allegations 1.v.; 1.w.) 
 
Other creditors (allegations 1.l., 1.t., and 1.x.): three debts totaling $402 
 
 In her Answer (Item 2), Applicant described the status of the debts, without 
providing supporting documentation:  
 
 Paid: allegations 1.x. and 1.bb., totaling $492 
  
 Paying: allegations 1.m., 1.n., 1.o., 1.v., and 1.ff 
  
 Unrecognized creditor: allegation 1.aa 
  
Will contact creditors and make arrangements to pay: allegations 1.s., 1.u., 
1.y., 1.cc., and 1.hh.  
 
Will pay by May 22, 2009: allegation 1.l  
 
Will pay by June 30, 2009: allegations 1.q., 1.r., 1.t., and 1.ee 
 
Delinquent because she was uninsured: allegations 1.a. – 1.g.; 1.j.; 1.z.; 1.dd. 
and 1.gg.  
 
Delinquent because of separation from her husband: allegations 1.h., 1.i., 1.k., 
and 1.w. Applicant plans to satisfy these debts.  
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
 
 Applicant offered no documentation to support her statement that some of her 
jobs did not provide health insurance to cover her medical expenses. Applicant did not 
explain whether these expenses were routine, or they resulted from an unforeseen 
circumstance such as sudden illness, major health problems, or a medical emergency.  
. 
In response to the government’s FORM, Applicant provided information and 
documentation.3 Based on her pay stubs, Applicant's current net monthly income is 
$2,268, which yields an approximate annual net income of $27,200. She submitted a list 
of monthly income and expenses, in which she listed expenses of $2,228 per month 
and a monthly remainder of $40. Applicant did not include any payments of SOR debts 
on this expense sheet (Item C). She also did not provide proof that she had paid the 
debts that she planned to pay in May and June 2009, as described in her Answer. 
 
Applicant provided the following documentation: 
 
Item D: statements related to three medical debts, with hand-written notes 
that Applicant paid each.4  
 
Item E: shows that a debt to a water company for $196.07 is paid. The 
debt was turned over to the state revenue department, which intercepted 
and applied her state income tax refund. This debt is alleged in the SOR 
at ¶ 1.x.  
 
Item F: shows that payment plans were offered to Applicant for two debts: 
$12.48 per month on the debt alleged at ¶ 1.ff. and $24 per month on 
another debt. It is unclear whether this $24-per-month plan relates to the 
debt alleged at ¶ 1.bb. the document includes hand-written notes 
indicating that Applicant paid each. 
 
Item G: bills related to two medical debts, with hand-written notes that 
Applicant paid $10 on each.5 She stated that she does not have formal 
payment plans for them, but expects to put any extra monthly remainders 
toward these debts.  
 
Applicant did not state whether she has participated in financial counseling. 
There is also no indication that she considered or pursued the possibility of bankruptcy, 
which is a legitimate path that an applicant can consider to resolve overwhelming debt. 
3 Applicant's documents are identified as follows: Item A: Applicant's letter dated July 23, 2009; Item B: 
Character references; Item C: Monthly expenses and pay stubs; Item D: medical statements hand-
marked “Paid;” Item E: letter regarding paid water bill; Item F: offers of payment plans, with hand-marks 
indicating amounts paid; Item G: statements regarding medical debts, hand-marked “Paid $10.” 
 
4 It cannot be determined from the record whether these debts are alleged in the SOR. 
 
5 It cannot be determined from the record whether these two debts are alleged in the SOR. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
She did provide three character references from her current supervisor, her technical 
lead, and a former manager. They are aware of Applicant's situation and state that she 
is striving to support herself and her child. They also note that, despite her financial 
problems, she is a dependable and trustworthy person who substantially contributes to 
the mission of her organization (Item B). 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).6 Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors 
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines, commonly referred to as the “whole person” concept.  
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not determinative 
of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable guidelines 
should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they represent 
policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties require consideration 
of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest7 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.8 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the  
government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the government.9 
 
 
6 Directive. 6.3. 
 
7 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
8 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
9 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may 
lead to financial crimes including espionage. Affluence that 
cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern. It may indicate proceeds from financially 
profitable criminal acts. 
 
The evidence contained in the FORM shows that Applicant’s debts, amounting to 
approximately $26,300, started becoming delinquent in 2002, and most remain unpaid. 
There is no evidence that Applicant engaged in frivolous spending, that she failed to pay 
taxes, or that her debts are linked to gambling, drugs, or alcohol. However, her seven-
year history of failing to meet her financial obligations supports application of 
disqualifying conditions AG ¶19 (a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG 
¶19 (c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).  
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following conditions that can potentially mitigate security 
concerns are relevant:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 As of the date the SOR was issued, Applicant had numerous debts. Although 
they started accruing in 2002, her financial problems are not in the distant past, 
because many of her debts remain unpaid. Applicant is presently making efforts to pay 
her debts; however, with her limited income and resources, it cannot be predicted that 
her situation will be resolved, or that new delinquencies will not occur in the future. AG ¶ 
20(a) cannot be applied. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is relevant because Applicant’s separation from her husband in 
December 2007 had a negative effect on her financial situation, and it is a condition that 
she could not have predicted. However, some of Applicant's debts became delinquent 
before and during her marriage. Therefore, it appears that her separation was not the 
only factor that caused her delinquencies. After the separation, Applicant's husband has 
provided almost no support. Consequently, she has been the sole provider for herself 
and her child for the past year-and-a-half. Applicant does earn a limited income, which 
also contributes to the difficulty in bringing her debts under control. Despite the 
demands on her income, it appears that Applicant is making an effort to resolve her 
debts and act responsibly under the circumstances. Partial mitigation is available under 
AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
 It does not appear from the record that Applicant received financial counseling to 
assist her in developing a budget, establishing payment plans, or resolving her debts. 
AG ¶ 20(c) cannot be applied.  
 
 Applicant has taken some steps toward resolving her debts; she is not ignoring 
her obligations but is trying to manage them within the framework of her limited income. 
However, her documentation that she paid or is paying debts is of limited value to 
support her claims because it consists of hand-written notes on the creditors’ 
statements, rather than cancelled checks, bank statements showing amounts 
withdrawn, statements showing decreased balances owed, or other substantial 
evidence. The only debt that is conclusively shown to be paid (allegation 1.x.) was 
satisfied by the state action of applying her income tax refund, and does not constitute 
an effort by Applicant. In addition, the evidence does not show that the bulk of 
Applicant's debts are resolved, or in the process of being resolved, or that she will be 
able to resolve them in the future. Only partial mitigation is available under AG ¶ 20(d). 
Overall, the partial mitigation available under AG ¶ 20(b) and (d) is insufficient to 
outweigh the fact that Applicant carries a substantial debt load with no real plan in place 
to resolve it. I find against the Applicant on Guideline F. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited Guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Applicant is 27 years old. Her financial inexperience, marriage and motherhood 
at a relatively young age, and her separation followed by the lack of child support, all 
contributed to the large debt load that she accrued over the past several years. 
Applicant was completely candid when she completed her security clearance 
application and listed numerous delinquent debts; her trustworthiness is not in question. 
However, many of Applicant's debts accrued before and during her marriage in 2005 
and she did little to meet those obligations. A substantial amount of debt remains 
unpaid, with no plan in place to resolve it.  
 
Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations. This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant 
cannot or will not attain the type of financial stability necessary to justify the granting of 
a security clearance. The award of a security clearance is not a once-in-a-lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. A clearance is not recommended based on Applicant’s current 
circumstances, but should she be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established a record of 
payments with supporting documentation, or otherwise addressed the obligations, she 
may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security worthiness. 
 
The delinquent debts that Applicant admits and are listed in her credit reports are 
a security concern. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. A fair and commonsense 
assessment of the available information bearing on Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance shows she has not satisfied the doubts raised by her substantial 
indebtedness. Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.w.   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.x.    For Applicant  
  Subparagraphs 1.y. – 1.hh.  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
