 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-02297 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on December 15, 2008. On 
April 24, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny her application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on May 5, 2009; answered it on May 20, 2009; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on May 
26, 2009. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on June 30, 2009, and the case 
 
2 
 
 
was assigned to me on July 1, 2009. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on July 2, 2009, 
scheduling the hearing for July 28, 2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A through K, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record 
open until August 14, 2009, to enable her to submit additional documentary evidence 
regarding the delinquent mortgage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j (Tr. 62). She did not submit any 
additional evidence. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on August 5, 2009. The record 
closed on August 14, 2009.  
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 The SOR listed only Applicant’s first and last names. On my own motion, without 
objection from Department Counsel, and in accordance with Applicant’s preference, I 
amended the SOR to list her full name (Tr. 5-6).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR 
except SOR ¶ 1.h. Her admissions in her answer and at the hearing are incorporated in 
my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old analyst for a defense federal contractor. She received 
an associate’s degree in information technology networking and security management 
from a technical college in June 2005 and a bachelor’s degree in computer networking 
in February 2007. She began work toward a master’s degree in management 
information systems but could not afford to continue it (Tr. 52). She has been employed 
by her current employer for about six months (Tr. 52-53). She has been married since 
March 2006, and has one child and one stepchild. She has never held a security 
clearance. 
 
 The SOR alleges ten delinquent debts totaling about $31,899. Applicant admitted 
all the debts except the $17 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h. She admitted that she has 
shown “some lack of self-control” with her finances (Tr. 33). She testified most of the 
delinquent debts began to accumulate around February 2008, when her husband’s job 
was cut back to 10 or 15 hours per week (Tr. 58). They had a baby at about the same 
time, and Applicant was drawing reduced pay while on maternity leave. Her husband’s 
work hours did not increase for about six months. Her husband is now working three 
part-time jobs (Tr. 53). She was unaware of the full extent of their indebtedness until 
she received the SOR (Tr. 34).  
 
 Applicant negotiated payment plans for the medical debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a 
through 1.f. As of the date of the hearing, all the medical debts had been paid. 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i was the result of a voluntary repossession of a 
truck, and it is being collected by garnishment of her pay, in the amount of $1,080 per 
 
3 
 
 
month (AX F; AX K). Applicant testified she contacted the lender in an effort to make 
payment arrangements, but the garnishments were imposed before they reached an 
agreement (Tr. 38-39).  
 
 Applicant and her spouse avoided foreclosure by negotiating a loan modification 
agreement for their delinquent home mortgage, but the agreement was cancelled when 
they failed to make the first monthly payment of $2,370. They have contacted another 
lender in an effort to renegotiate the loan, but have not reached an agreement (Tr. 40-
41). The outstanding balance on the mortgage is $293,442 (AX G). 
 
 Applicant’s most recent credit report dated March 16, 2009, reflected four student 
loans in a deferred status, with balances of $52,997, $3,500, $3,500, and $2,625 (GX 3 
at 2, 4). These loans were not reported as delinquent and were not alleged in the SOR. 
 
 The table below summarizes the evidence concerning the delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a Medical $82 Paid AX B 
1.b Medical $123 Paid AX A at 2-3; AX B; 
Tr. 35-36  
1.c Medical $551 Paid AX B 
1.d Medical $200 Paid AX B 
1.e Medical $133 Paid AX B 
1.f Medical $84 Paid AX C; Tr. 36 
1.g Jewelry $1,100 Making payments  AX A at 3; AX D; 
Tr. 36-37 
1.h Credit card $17 Paid AX E 
1.i Truck 
repossession 
$4,697 Pay Garnished AX A at 5, 9, 11; 
AX F & K; Tr. 38-40
1.j Home mortgage Past due $24,912 Loan modified but 
Applicant failed to 
make first payment 
AX G; Tr. 41 
 
 Applicant submitted a monthly budget reflecting family net income of $5,260 and 
expenses of $4,603, leaving $657 per month to pay the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 
1.i, and 1.j (AX K). One of their two car payments ($680 per month) is for a sport utility 
vehicle which is worth less than the amount of the loan. The other car payment ($350 
per month) is for a four-year-old luxury import car (Tr. 55). The loan on this car was 
obtained by Applicant’s mother-in-law, who has better credit and was able to secure a 
lower interest rate. The budget does not provide for their house payment (Tr. 54). 
Applicant admitted that they could cut their expenses further by eliminating some items 
such as cell phones and satellite radio service (Tr. 56-57). Applicant and her spouse 
have not sought or received financial counseling (Tr. 59). 
 
 
4 
 
 
 A coworker from a former job described her as resourceful, a quick study, and a 
hard worker (AX H). Another colleague from a former job commented favorably on her 
integrity, responsibility, and ambition, characterizing her as a leader rather than a 
follower (AX I). Her current supervisors describe her as conscientious and hard-working 
(AX J). A current coworker and social friend testified she is very responsible, dedicated, 
and trustworthy (Tr. 65-66).  
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
 
5 
 
 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Several disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant. AG ¶ 19(a) is 
raised by an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts.” AG ¶ 19(c) is raised by “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” AG ¶ 19(e) is raised by “consistent 
spending beyond one=s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis.” 
Applicant’s financial history raises these three disqualifying conditions, shifting the 
burden to her to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving 
it never shifts to the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 
2005).   
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts were recent, numerous, did 
not occur under circumstances unlikely to recur, and are not yet fully resolved.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that ‘the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
 
6 
 
 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. There is no evidence that 
Applicant’s medical bills related to childbirth were unexpected or an emergency. Her 
spouse’s loss of income, however, was beyond her control. She has reacted 
responsibly, settling all the medical bills, negotiating payment agreements on other 
debts when possible, and attempting to renegotiate the home mortgage. I conclude this 
mitigating condition is established. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established, because Applicant has not sought or received 
counseling, and her financial situation is not under control. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). An applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish resolution of each and every debt alleged in the SOR. See ADP Case 
No. 06-18900 (App. Bd. Jun. 6, 2008). An applicant need only establish a plan to 
resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. ISCR 
Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). There also is no requirement that 
an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid first. Id. This mitigating condition 
is partially established. Applicant has made a good-faith effort to resolve her debts, but 
she does not yet have a viable plan to resolve the delinquent home mortgage.  
 
Whole Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is well-educated and intelligent. She was candid and sincere at the 
hearing. She has worked hard to resolve her financial problems, but she is paying the 
price for her admittedly poor decisions in the past. She is a good candidate for financial 
counselling, but she has not sought it. She has a large car payment and owes more 
than the car is worth. She is in grave danger of having her home foreclosed, and she 
has no plan in place to avoid foreclosure. She has no reserve funds for unexpected 
expenses. She will face further financial obligations when her student loans are no 
longer deferred. See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) (Debts not 
alleged in the SOR may be considered in whole person analysis.). She has shown no 
reasonable likelihood that she will achieve financial stability in the foreseeable future. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on her financial problems. Accordingly, I 
conclude she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
