  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00233 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used illegal drugs starting in April 2007. Her last use of marijuana was 
in January 2009. Not enough time has passed for Applicant to have rebutted or 
mitigated the government’s security concerns under drug involvement. This is not to say 
that with additional time without further drug use, she would not qualify for a clearance. 
However, that time has not yet arrived. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
 
1 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 14, 2009, detailing security concerns under drugs 
and personal conduct. 
  
 On April 14, 2009, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
June 10, 2009, I was assigned the case. On July 1, 2009, DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing scheduling the hearing which was held on July 29, 2009.  
 
 The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 4, which were admitted into 
evidence. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Ex. A through Ex. J, 
which were admitted into evidence. The record was held open to allow additional 
information from Applicant. On July 29, 2009, additional material was submitted. 
Department Counsel had no objection to the material, which was admitted into the 
record as Ex. K. On August 4, 2009, the transcript (Tr.) was received. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admits the factual allegations in the SOR. 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. After a thorough 
review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 22-year-old student who has worked part-time in inventory control 
for a defense contractor since September 2008. She is seeking to obtain a security 
clearance. Applicant’s work performance has been outstanding. (Ex. F) She quickly 
mastered the tasks, took initiative, is dedicated, has keen analytical skills, and took on 
additional responsibility. Her work is both quick and efficient. Applicant is dedicated, 
conscientious, intelligent, trustworthy, and her time management skills are excellent. 
(Tr. 35, Ex. F) Applicant completes her work while remaining on the dean’s list at 
school. (Tr. 36, Tr. F)  
 
 Applicant is an art institute senior. She has recently moved onto campus. (Tr. 49, 
Ex. D) The chair of her department, dean of academic affairs, and her academic advisor 
state: she was one of the brightest and most distinguished students, admired by her 
peers and teachers. (Ex. A) She is an intelligent, energetic person who does not shy 
away from taking on new challenges. She shows great leadership skills and 
enthusiasm. She is a motivated young woman held in high esteem.  
 
 Applicant ranks in the top 10 percent of juniors and seniors. (Tr. 23) Her 
cumulated grade point average is 3.6 placing her in the honors category. (Tr. 32, Ex. B, 
E) In the spring of 2009, Applicant was elected president of the college chapter for the 
upper classmen’s academic honor society, a national college honor scholarship society. 
(Ex. B, G, H, I) (Ex. C) Applicant has been involved in fund raising activities, social 
events, charitable events, and community food drives with her honor society. (Tr. 35, 
Ex. J) The society also works with at-risk youth. (Tr. 40) 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 In 2005, following high school, Applicant went to a large state university in 
another state, which was a big change for her. Applicant discovered the large university 
was not for her. At the end of 2005, following one semester, Applicant returned home 
and fell in with the wrong crowd. The people she met and associated with were those 
not attending school. In April 2007, Applicant first tried marijuana. (Tr. 50) She was 
working in a movie theater when she attended a party at the home of two co-workers.  
 
 In June 2007, Applicant was living at home when she met others who had a 
negative influence on her. (Tr. 44, 51) They were visiting the area for the summer and 
left in August 2007. (Tr. 51) She used marijuana with these individuals three or four 
times a week. (Tr. 51, Ex. 3) Applicant no longer sees or associates with these 
individuals since they have moved to the other coast. Applicant was working at a 
restaurant. After that group left, Applicant still associated with people who used drugs 
from the movie theater and restaurant. (Tr. 52) Her marijuana use declined to once 
every couple of months. (Tr. 51) Applicant no longer associates with these individuals 
but now associates with fellow students. Applicant stated she was a much healthier and 
happier person now that the negative influence is out of her life and she has met new 
friends. (Rex. 2)  
 
 On October 7, 2008, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) in which she disclosed her illegal drug history. At a 
Halloween party in 2008, Applicant used marijuana. (Tr. 53) Shortly thereafter, she was 
interviewed about her drug usage, at which time she revealed all her use including her 
October usage. (Tr. 54) Her last use of marijuana occurred in January 2009 with a high 
school acquaintance. (Tr. 62) Both of these uses occurred after she had applied for a 
security clearance. Applicant was honest, forthcoming, and cooperative in discussing 
her illegal drug usage.  
 
 Between December 2007 and February 2008, Applicant used Clonazepam three 
times. (Tr. 46) Applicant first used it out of curiosity. In December 2007, during a panic 
attack, Applicant took one tablet of Clonazepam, which she obtained from a friend who 
had a prescription for the drug. The drug calmed her down. During the third incident, 
Applicant was shaking and crying uncontrollably when her mother gave her one tablet of 
Clonazepam. Her mother had a prescription for the drug. When Applicant took the drug 
she stopped crying, felt better, relaxed, and returned to normal. (Ex. 3)  
 
During the summer of 2007, Applicant tried ecstasy and oxycodone one time 
each, the result of peer pressure. (Tr. 55) She obtained the oxycodone from a friend 
who had her wisdom teeth removed. (Tr. 60) Between July 2007 and July 2008, 
Applicant used cocaine three times. Each use occurred at a friend’s home. (Ex. 3) 
Applicant believes cocaine to be “unbelievably dangerous and addictive.” (Ex. 2)  
 
 Applicant’s father died the week she started her current job. When her father 
died, she realized how short and precious life is and decided not to waste it on 
dangerous and harmful pursuits. (Ex. 2) She made a commitment to a healthy lifestyle 
and joined a gym. She has sought therapy to help her with the grief of losing her father.  
 
3 
 In a November 2008 interview, Applicant stated she might continue occasional 
social use of marijuana if marijuana was present. She stated she had no intention to 
seek out marijuana, purchase marijuana, or use any other illegal drugs in the future. 
(Ex. 3) In February 2009, Applicant stated she had no interest, under any 
circumstances, to use marijuana or other illegal drugs in the future. (Ex. 4) Following the 
hearing, Applicant submitted a pledge never to use illegal drugs in the future. (Ex. J) 
Applicant understands the government’s zero tolerance policy towards illegal drugs. (Tr. 
63) Applicant no longer associates with any of the individuals with whom she had used 
illegal drugs. (Tr. 63)  
 
 Applicant’s grandfather is the assistant facility security officer for the company 
where Applicant works. (Tr. 68) Applicant’s grandmother has recently died and 
Applicant is helping her grandfather with the arrangements and throughout this period. 
(Tr. 69) Applicant states her illegal drug use were choices made by a young, immature, 
and foolish teenager. She sees her past usage as shameful and humiliating. (Tr. 21) 
Applicant has yet to graduate from college. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
4 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 Revised adjudicative guideline (AG) ¶ 24 articulates the security concerns 
relating to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
(a) any drug abuse; 
(b) testing positive for illegal drug use; 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence; 
(e) evaluation of drug abuse or drug dependence by a licensed clinical 
social worker who, is a staff member of a recognized drug treatment 
program; 
 
5 
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by 
a duly qualified medical professional; 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and, 
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use. 
Starting in April 2007, Applicant used marijuana for the first time. During the 
summer of 2007, she used it three or four times a week. She also experimented with 
other drugs using cocaine three times, Clonazepam three times, ecstasy, and 
oxycodone once. In August 2007, when Applicant’s associates returned home to the 
other coast, her use of marijuana greatly declined, but did not end. She used it at a 
Halloween party in 2008 after she had completed her e-QIP and last used it in January 
2009. AG ¶ 25(a) applies.  
AG ¶ 25(g) does not apply because Applicant had applied for a clearance, but 
did not have a clearance during her last two uses. However, it does go to the question 
of judgment for someone to use marijuana after applying for clearance and after having 
been interviewed about her drug use. This conduct is discussed under personal conduct 
below.  
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and, 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
 
6 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
  AG ¶ 26(b) (1), (2), and (4) have some applicability. Applicant no longer 
associates with those who use illegal drugs. Her associates have returned to the other 
coast. She no longer associates with those individuals she knew from the movie theater 
and restaurant. She is an honor student associating with other students. She has signed 
a statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.  
AG ¶ 26(a) only partially applies because her illegal drug use of certain drugs 
appears to be infrequent. Her use of cocaine, Clonazepam, oxycodone, and ecstasy 
appear to be experimental and infrequent. Additionally, they were last used more than 
two years ago. However, her use of marijuana was more frequent and more recent. Her 
marijuana use did not occur under unusual circumstances and her use does cast doubt 
on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 The major concern is that Applicant’s last used marijuana eight months ago. 
There are no “bright line” rules for determining when conduct is “recent.” The 
determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the totality of the record within 
the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 
months before the hearing was not recent. If the evidence shows “a significant period of 
time has passed without any evidence of misconduct,” then an administrative judge 
must determine whether that period of time demonstrates “changed circumstances or 
conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of reform or rehabilitation.”2 I do not fine eight 
months to be a significant period of time.  
                                                          
2 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
 
7 
 
Personal Conduct  
 
 Revised adjudicative guideline (AG) ¶ 25 articulates the security concerns 
relating to personal conduct: 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 The last two times Applicant’s used marijuana occurred after she had started her 
security clearance process. It shows questionable judgment for someone to use 
marijuana after applying for clearance and after having been interviewed about her drug 
use. 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing]. It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
 
8 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
 None of the mitigating factors apply. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply because the 
conduct of concern was marijuana usage after having applied for a clearance. There 
were no allegations of falsification or omission. The record is clear that Applicant was 
always honest and forthcoming as it related to her illegal drug usage. AG ¶ 17(b) does 
not apply because there was no failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment. 
 
 The use of illegal drugs was not minor, her last use was recent, and her use does 
cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 17(c) does not 
apply. AG ¶ 17(d) only partially applies because Applicant has acknowledged the 
behavior and no longer associates with those who use illegal drugs. However, it is too 
soon to find the behavior is unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 17(e) only partially applies because, 
although Applicant has taken steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress by no longer associating with drug users, the question is her 
use, and not the possibility of vulnerability, that was the security concern.  
 
 AG ¶ 17(f) does not apply because her illegal drug use was substantiated. AG ¶ 
17(g) partially applies because Applicant no longer associates with persons involved in 
criminal activities. However, it was her illegal drug usage and not merely her association 
with drug users that was of security concern.  
 
Whole Person 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
9 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a college senior, an 
honor student, and president of an honor society. Her work supervisor states she is 
dedicated, intelligent, trustworthy, and does outstanding work all while being on the 
dean’s list at school. Her instructors and faculty members state she is a bright and 
distinguished student who shows great leadership skills and enthusiasm. She is a 
motivated young woman held in high esteem, and active in charitable events.  
 
Applicant’s drug use was contributed to by her youth, immaturity, and by peer 
pressure. She is completing her senior year in college, which often has a maturing 
effect on an individual. College graduation often forms a line of demarcation in a 
person’s life between youth and adulthood. As she stated her illegal drug use were 
choices made by a young, immature, and foolish teenager. 
 
Applicant asserts she is drug free, intends to remain drug free, and, as she 
matures, the factors leading to her drug usage, including peer pressure, are no longer 
as large an influence on her life. Applicant’s intentions are good. The recency of her last 
use makes it difficult to ascertain the veracity of her assertion. Her last marijuana use 
was eight months ago. She may indeed stay drug free. However, it is simply too soon to 
find illegal drugs are no longer a part of her life. 
 
The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is 
based on current disqualifying and mitigating conditions. Although the Applicant=s 
evidence of rehabilitation is insufficient at this time, should she in the future be afforded 
an opportunity to reapply for a security clearance, with the passage of sufficient 
additional time, continued rehabilitation, and no future incidents of illegal drug usage or 
misconduct, she may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security worthiness. 
But that time has not yet arrived.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant. This usage is  
included in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
Subparagraph 1.c—1.f: Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
11 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_____________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
