Consisting of the FORM, Items 1-11.1
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February2
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)
effective within the DoD on 1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-00472
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is denied.1
On 16 August 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline F,
Financial Considerations.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a decision2
without hearing. The record in this case closed 7 January 2012, the day Applicant’s
response to the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) was due. He submitted
no response. DOHA assigned the case to me 7 February 2012. 
W ithout documentation, it is difficult to see how this can be so. As executor of the estate, Applicant would not3
be personally liable for any of the debts of the estate. It is unlikely that the estate was large enough to be
subject to estate tax, and if it was, Applicant would not be personally liable for any amounts due. Sale of estate
assets would not generate taxable income unless they had appreciated between the time of his father’s death
and the sale of the assets. Applicant does not disclose when the assets were sold, so it is impossible to
assess if the assets could have appreciated enough to generate a $21,000 tax lien.
Again, without documentation, it is difficult to see how this can be so. Applicant’s July 2010 clearance4
application shows that he married in August 2007, but had never been married before. The clearance
application also shows that Applicant had two stepchildren, but does not show—and Applicant nowhere
claims—that he adopted the two children. In his September 2010 subject interview, Applicant stated that he
had just recently gone through a divorce. But there is no indication in his clearance application that any divorce
was contemplated or pending. Further, the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR are Applicant’s individual
accounts.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations. He is a 49-year-old production
control officer employed by a U.S. defense contractor since June 2010. He has not
previously held an industrial clearance. He served in the U.S. military from March 1986
to March 1990, during which time he held a clearance.
 
The SOR alleges, Government exhibits (Items 9-11) substantiate, and Applicant
admits nine delinquent accounts totaling nearly $32,000. The bulk of the debt consists
of a $21,422 Internal Revenue Service (IRS) lien entered against Applicant in June
2010. The remaining delinquent debt accrued between July 2006 and December 2007.
Applicant disclosed most of his financial problems in his July 2010 clearance application
(Item 6). Applicant states, without corroboration, that he has been negotiating with the
IRS for 18 months without result. He does not intend to address any of the remaining
debt until he has resolved his IRS issues.
Applicant attributes his financial problems to a variety of circumstances, which he
has neither corroborated nor adequately explained. In his September 2010 interview
with a Government investigator (Item 7), Applicant explained that his father died in 2001
and Applicant inherited his estate, for which Applicant served as executor. Applicant
claims that some of the debt to the IRS is due to the sale of some of his father’s assets.3
The rest of the debt to the IRS is due to taxes and penalties from Applicant prematurely
selling shares of his retirement account.
Applicant also attributes his financial problems to legal expenses incurred and
increased child-support ordered in August 2007, when the mother of his now 19-year-
old daughter sued for increased support. Finally, he states that he recently went through
a divorce and was ordered to pay attorneys fees for both parties, pay all the credit card
accounts, and pay child support.4
Applicant has not sought credit or financial counseling. He presented no
personal financial statement or budget. He presented no work or character references.
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
¶19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;6
¶20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that7
it is  unlikely to recur . . . 
3
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guideline is Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.5
Analysis
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has an extensive history of
financial difficulties, which are ongoing, and seem unlikely to be resolved any time
soon.6
Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple, and the immediate causes of his
problems are recurring.  Applicant has not corroborated any of the claimed7
circumstances beyond his control, or shown how those circumstances contributed to his
financial problems. As he has not corroborated any of his claimed contacts with the IRS,
or taken any action regarding the other debts, he has not responsibly addressed his
¶20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and8
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that9
the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.10
4
debts.  Applicant has received no financial or credit counseling, and has presented no8
budget.  Applicant has either not been in contact with his creditors or has failed to9
corroborate any of his claimed contacts. None of the debts are likely to be paid, much
less in a timely, good-faith effort.  Applicant has not even attempted to deal with any of10
the smaller debts, evidence enough that he is a long way from resolving his financial
problems. I conclude Guideline F against Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-i: Against Applicant
Conclusion
Under the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
