 
1 
  
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06586 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant had four collection 
accounts, which totaled approximately $58,000. He mitigated the security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on January 29, 
2015, the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing financial considerations 
security concerns. On March 2, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have 
the matter decided without a hearing. On June 17, 2015, Defense Office of Hearings and 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (Sept. 1, 2006 AG) effective 
within the DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
Appeals (DOHA) Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM contained six attachments (Items). On January 5, 
2016, Applicant received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to 
object to the Government’s evidence and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the potentially disqualifying conditions. On November 4, 2016, Applicant responded to the 
FORM with a 24 page response. The response was admitted into evidence, without 
objection, as Items A through F. On August 1, 2017, I was assigned the case.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.2 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted a $16,066 judgement, a $26,039 
charged-off credit card account, and two collection accounts in the amounts of 
approximately $4,800 and $11,000. The SOR delinquent debts total approximately 
$58,000. After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old production supervisor who has worked for a defense 
contractor since May 2010. He seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Item 3) He is married 
and has two children. (Item 3)  
In Applicant’s March 2014 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP), he indicated he was working with a debt resolution company to address his 
delinquent obligations. (Item 3) He stated he was paying $558 every two weeks. He 
indicated he owed approximately $63,000 to the four creditors listed in the SOR. In his e-
QIP he stated,  
Over extended my credit and couldn’t afford to pay them. They raised the 
interest rate. Had to put one of my sons in private school. Had to start 
supporting my Mother in Law after my Father in Law passed. I tried to pay 
each month but I was only going backwards. 
 In Applicant’s May 2014 Personal Subject Interview, he freely volunteered that in 
2013 he reviewed his finances and realized he was only paying the interest on his credit 
card accounts and not reducing the balance owed. (Item 4) His son was struggling in 
school and he was placed in a private school for two years with tuition of $8,000 per year. 
                                                          
2 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
  
 
3 
(Item 4) The tuition was put on a credit card (SOR 1.a, $16,000). (Items 4, 5, and 6) As 
of March 2014, the balance owed on this account was $5,852. (Item A) He has agreed to 
pay $250 monthly on the balance. (Item A) 
 In August 2013, Applicant sought the services of a debt resolution company. The 
company told him to stop all payments on his credit cards so that the company could 
make settlement offers on the accounts. (Item 4) Applicant asserts that prior to this advice 
he had never been late on payments and had never stopped making payments to his 
creditors. (Item 4) He has always been current on his $1,889 monthly mortgage payments 
and utility bills. (Items 4 and 6) After two or three months with the debt resolution 
company, settlement agreements were reached with the creditors.  
Applicant’s checking account is debited $558 every two weeks by the debt 
resolution company. (Item C) The debited amount is paid into a trust account from which 
the debt resolution company makes disbursements to the SOR creditors. (Item F) The 
total debt of $68,710 was reduced to $27,484 through settlement negotiations. (Item C) 
The repayment plan included all four SOR debts. (Item C) plus two debts not listed in the 
SOR. The repayment plan included a $7,152 debt also owed to the creditor listed in SOR 
1.d and a $5,651 debt also owed to the creditor listed in SOR 1.a. (Item F) 
 The $26,000 charged-off debt (SOR 1.b) resulted from using his credit card to start 
a business. (Items 4, 5, and 6) A settlement agreement with this creditor was reached 
whereby he would pay $8,932. He is paying $380 monthly on this debt. (Item E) He used 
the credit card listed in SOR 1.d ($11,101) for household expenses such as gasoline and 
groceries. (Items 4 and 6) The bank card listed in SOR 1.c ($4,817) was used to install 
solar panels on his home’s roof, to supply hot water, and for an attic fan.  
 Applicant’s April 2014 credit report lists the two collection accounts listed in SOR 
1.c and 1.d and lists two charged-off accounts (SOR 1.a and 1.b). (Item 5) The credit 
report also lists 24 accounts as “pays as agreed.” (Item 6) There is no evidence of 
Applicant having received financial counseling.  
In April 2014, Applicant reached a settlement agreement with a credit card 
company where he would pay $160 monthly on a $3,069 debt. (Item B) This agreement 
settled a $7,672 debt, which was not listed on the SOR, but which is evaluated for the 
purpose of determining Applicant’s conduct in resolving his financial obligations. 
 
 Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
4 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudication process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weight of a 
number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that the 
individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the whole-person concept.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
5 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding 
classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides 
an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed-upon 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt free, 
but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
The SOR lists a judgment and two additional delinquent obligations totaling 
approximately $58,000. AG ¶ 19 includes two disqualifying conditions that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” The Government’s evidence and 
Applicant’s own admissions raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). The 
burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
the security concerns. (Directive ¶ E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a 
mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See 
ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005)). 
 
 Four of the seven Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 
are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
In Applicant’s March 2014 e-QIP he listed his financial problems and explained 
how the problems arose. In August 2013, seven months before completing the e-QIP he 
sought financial assistance to address his delinquent accounts. He sought debt resolution 
 
6 
was more than a year before his May 2014 interview. He has made a good-faith effort to 
resolve his delinquent debts. He agreed to have $558 debited from his checking account 
every two weeks and paid into a trust account. From this trust account the debt resolution 
company makes monthly payments to the four SOR creditors. 
  
Until told by the debt resolution company to stop making payments on his credit 
card accounts, Applicant had always made his monthly payments in a timely manner. He 
made minimal payments, but the amount owed was not being reduced. His 2014 credit 
report reflects the four delinquent SOR obligations, but also reflects 24 accounts as being 
“paid as agreed.” There were only four delinquent accounts. One account was used to 
pay for his son’s tuition at a private school. Such an expense is unlikely to recur. Another 
account was to open a business, something that is also unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) has 
some applicability. 
 
As previously stated the largest debt ($26,000) was due to attempting to start a 
business. Applicant has taken steps to address his delinquent accounts. AG ¶ 20(b) has 
some applicability to this debt because a business downturn is an unexpected financial 
condition largely beyond one’s control.  
 
There is no evidence of financial counseling, however, there are indications the 
problem is being resolved or is under control. Applicant provided evidence of what 
responsible steps he has taken to pay or resolve his delinquent obligations. Having 
reached settlement agreements with the four creditors and making payments in 
accordance with those repayment agreements demonstrates that AG ¶ 20(d) applies.  
 
  A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). The adjudicative guidelines do not require that an 
individual make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, pay the debts alleged 
in the SOR first, or establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need 
only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). The 
SOR debts have not been fully paid, but he has demonstrated a good-faith effort in his 
history of making regular payments on his debts, and has the means to continue to 
resolve them.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
7 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 Applicant knew he had financial problems and took steps to address those 
problems prior to completing his e-QIP and prior to his interview. He started paying $558 
every two weeks into a trust account which makes payment to the four SOR creditors. 
This amounts to payments of approximately $14,500 yearly, not an insignificant sum. 
Applicant is attempting to address his financial problems. Other than the amounts owed 
to the four SOR creditors, he has paid his mortgage, utilities, and other accounts in a 
timely manner. He only stopped paying these four credit card accounts on advice of the 
debt resolution company in order to secure settlement agreements. It was this advice that 
caused the accounts to become delinquent.  
/ 
The issue is not simply whether all the delinquent obligations have been paid—it 
is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security 
clearance. (See AG & 2(c)) Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the financial considerations security 
concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
