 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05883 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 27, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 13, 2013, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SCA). On December 2, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines F, G, and E. The action was 
taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on February 21, 2017, and 
again on April 1, 2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The 
case was assigned to me on August 17, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing on September 8, 2017. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled on September 27, 2017. The Government offered Government 
 
2 
 
Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 9, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on 
his own behalf and presented Applicant Exhibit (AppX) A. DOHA received the transcript 
of the hearing (TR) on October 5, 2017. The record was left open for the receipt of 
additional evidence. On September 29, 2017; on October 30, 2017; and on December 
1, 2017; respectively, AppXs B~D were submitted, and received without objection. The 
record closed at that time. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix 
A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, 
in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG 
promulgated in SEAD 4. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted, in part, and denied, in part, the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1., and 
2. He admitted SOR allegation ¶ 3. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. (GX 3 at page 5.) 
He has been employed with the defense contractor since November of 2015. He has 
held a security clearance since about June of 1992. (TR at page 15 line 3 to page 16 
line 7, and GX 3 at page 29.) 
 
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
  
 1.a. and 1.b. Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for 
tax years 2012~2015 in a timely fashion. (TR at page 16 line 8 to page 18 line 7, at 
page 20 lines 3~20, and AppXs E and D.) He attributes his tardy filings to being “lazy.” 
(TR at page 17 lines 13~18.) Applicant was also tardy in filing his tax returns for tax year 
2016, which was filed after his September hearing, in October of 2017. (AppX B.) 
 
 1.c. and 1.d. As of August 2017, Applicant owes $10,038 in delinquent taxes for 
tax year 2010; $14,663 in delinquent taxes for tax year 2011; $5,078 in delinquent taxes 
for tax year 2012; and $295 in delinquent taxes for tax year 2014. (AppX B.) In March of 
2017, Applicant avers he has “been making close to $1,000 [monthly] payments” to the 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), but has submitted no supporting documentation in this 
regard. (TR at page 18 line 8 to page 19 line 17, and at page 23 lines 19~25.) 
                                                          
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted data, and 
controlled or special access program information.” 
 
3 
 
Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption 
 
 2.a.~2.e. Applicant first started consuming alcohol while serving in the U.S Navy 
at the age of about 21. (TR at page 26 line 8 to page 32 line 5.) He used to drink “seven 
or eight beers” at home in one sitting. He currently consumes “three or four beers” in 
one sitting on weekends. (Id.) As a result of this consumption, in 1996 Applicant was 
ordered to attend alcohol counseling after an alcohol-related incident at a port of call. 
(TR at page 26 line 8 to page 32 line 5.) In 1999, Applicant was found guilty of Driving 
Under the Influence (DUI). In 2005, he was arrested for DUI, but found guilty of a 
reduced charge; and in 2011, Applicant was again arrested for DUI, but pled guilty to a 
reduced charge. (Id.) More recently, in 2014, he was found guilty of a second DUI, has 
not completed a court-ordered alcohol-abuse-related program, and Applicant is still on 
probation until 2019. (TR at page 26 line 8 to page 32 line 5.) 
 
Guideline E – Personal Conduct 
 
 3.b. In July of 2008, Applicant received a written reprimand for an incident he 
claims he does not recall. (TR at page 32 lines 6~16, and at page 35 line 20 to page 36 
line 6.) 
 
 3.a. In March of 2014, Applicant received a second written reprimand and was 
suspended for two days for sexual harassment; an allegation he denies, claiming he 
considered the complaining victim “as a sister . . . my friend.” (TR at page 32 line 17 to 
page 33 line 24.)  
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
 
4 
 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” 
  
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing 
multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 
5 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
  Applicant is consistently late in filing his Federal and state income taxes. He 
attributes his tardiness to being lazy. Applicant currently owes over $30,000 in back 
taxes. The evidence is sufficient to raise this disqualifying condition.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s income tax problems are ongoing, as he is consistently late in his 
filings. He has not established that he addressing the significant back taxes he owes. 
Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(g) has not been established. This allegation is found against 
Applicant. 
 
 
 
6 
 
Guideline G - Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Alcohol Consumption is set out 
in AG ¶ 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 22 contains two conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual's 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder  
 
 Applicant has two DUI convictions, and three other alcohol-related incidents 
between 1996 and 2014. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing 
disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate those concerns. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 23 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. None of these conditions apply. Applicant is still on probation as a result of 
his most recent DUI, and is not complying with the terms of that probation. This 
allegation is also found against Applicant. 
 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
 
7 
 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; 
 
  Applicant has received two letters of reprimand, one for inappropriate behavior. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise this disqualifying condition.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17. None of them apply. Applicant appears to 
still be in denial as to his inappropriate behavior. This allegation is found against 
Applicant.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 
8 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F, G, and E in my whole-person analysis. Applicant appears to be 
preforming well at his job. (AppX A.) 
 
However, overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations, Alcohol 
Consumption, and Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.~1.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.~2.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a. and 3.b.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s national security  
eligibility. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
