KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the
Judge.  Rather, it contains new evidence in the form of a narrative statement and a document
updating the status of his Chapter 13 bankruptcy.  The Board cannot consider Applicant’s new
evidence on appeal. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 15-06006.a1
DATE: 06/08/2018
DATE: June 8, 2018
In Re:
-----------------------
Applicant for Public Trust Position
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ADP Case No. 15-06006
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a trustworthiness designation. 
On March 22, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision—trustworthiness concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a decision on the written record.  On March 19, 2018, after considering the record,
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Claude R. Heiny denied
Applicant’s request for a trustworthiness designation.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Rather, it contains new evidence in the form of a narrative statement and a document updating the
status of his Chapter 13 bankruptcy.  The Board cannot consider Applicant’s new evidence on
appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case
is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge.  Therefore, the
decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan        
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale           
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy            
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
