 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01313 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guidelines E (personal conduct) 
and J (criminal conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 25, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines E and J. 
On May 2, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR. On May 24, 2017, Department 
Counsel was ready to proceed. On March 20, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me.  
 
On April 2, 2018, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing for 
May 8, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GE) 
1 and 2 were admitted in evidence without objection. However, I sustained 
Applicant’s objections to GE 3 and 4, which were Office of Personnel Management 
Personal Subject Interviews, on the grounds of authenticity and lack of foundation. 
(Tr. 13-15) Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A(1)  and 
B(1), which were admitted without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I held 
 
2 
 
the record open until May 25, 2018, to afford Applicant an opportunity to submit 
additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE A through F, which were 
admitted without objection. On May 16, 2018, DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old functional analyst employed by a defense 
contractor since August 2016. He seeks to regain his security clearance as a 
requirement of his continued employment. (Tr. 16-18)  
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in 1985. He estimates that he 
completed 60 college credit hours. (Tr. 18-19) Applicant served in the U.S. Marine 
Corps from 1987 to 2007, and retired honorably as a gunnery sergeant (pay grade 
E-7). He had multiple combat tours in Iraq and Afghanistan. Applicant receives an 
80% Veterans Administration (VA) disability for post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD) and combat-related injuries. (Tr. 11-20, 22-25, 37; AE A, AE C) He 
successfully held a security clearance for 16 of the 21 years he served in the Marine 
Corps. (Tr. 34) Applicant was married in 2003 and that marriage ended by divorce in 
2009. (Tr. 19-20, 41; AE B) He has a six-year-old daughter and pays $800 in 
monthly child support. (Tr. 20)  
 
Personal Conduct/Criminal Conduct 
 
 The SOR lists 11 allegations under personal conduct and cross-alleges 10 of 
those 11 allegations under criminal conduct spanning a nine-year period (2006-
2014). The first allegation alleged that Applicant deliberately failed to list the 
offenses that follow on his April 25, 2014 security clearance application (SF-86). 
(SOR ¶ 1.a) 
 
 With regard to the falsification allegation, Applicant did not answer his SF-86 
accurately when he failed to list his alcohol-related convictions. In his SOR answer, 
he stated that his failure was inadvertent and unintentional adding, “I was hurrying 
thru [sic] this questionnaire to get it submitted.” He testified credibly on this point 
and his explanation is corroborated by other mistakes when completing the same 
security clearance application that were not alleged as falsifications. Applicant 
acknowledged these mistakes adding that he promptly admitted his omission during 
his background investigation interview. (SOR answer; Tr. 46-50) 
 
 Summarized, the remaining allegations consist of being convicted of driving 
under the influence in 2005; being charged with driving without an operator’s license 
and failure to wear a seat belt in 2006; being charged with driving with a revoked 
license and speeding in 2006; being convicted in 2009 of driving while impaired, 
driving left of center, and civil revocation of driver’s license (charged in 2007); being 
convicted of driving with a revoked license and speeding in 2008; being convicted of 
 
3 
 
assault in 2010 (charged in 2009); being charged with driving with a suspended 
license in 2010; being convicted of operating a vehicle with no insurance and driving 
with a revoked driver’s license in 2010; being convicted of driving with a revoked 
driver’s license in 2013 (charged in 2012); and being charged with violation of 
probation in 2014. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.k) 
 
 When Applicant returned from his last combat tour in Iraq, he was withdrawn 
and according to his wife, he was a different person. His multiple combat tours had 
begun to weigh on him and he was haunted by what he had experienced. Several 
months after he returned from his last combat tour, his wife filed for divorce. He 
suffered from depression “about his physical state.” (Tr. 25-26, 36-37) Applicant 
sought treatment from the VA for treatment for his PTSD and for his physical 
injuries. He takes medication daily to “take the edge off” the pain. (Tr. 27) The 
pattern of offenses documented in his SOR began shortly after his last combat tour 
in Afghanistan.  His most serious offenses are his 2005 driving under the influence 
and his 2007 driving while impaired arrests. (Tr. 31-32, 39-43) 
 
  Applicant recognizes that his conduct has been unacceptable. He accepts full 
responsibility for his actions and has taken corrective action indicative of 
rehabilitation. (SOR answer; 43-44) Applicant stopped drinking completely three 
years ago in 2015 and does not intend to drink again. He does not keep any alcohol 
in his house nor does he frequent bars. Seeing a close friend go to jail for driving 
under the influence and unable to see his daughter motivated Applicant to quit 
drinking. He does not want to suffer a similar fate. (Tr. 32-35, 50-51, 53) Because of 
his 2007 driving while impaired arrest, he was not allowed to reenlist in the Marine 
Corps. This prompted his retirement. (Tr. 43) 
  
 Retiring from the Marine Corps and having a young daughter were life-
changing experiences for Applicant. He stated, “…I need to be a role model for my 
daughter. The last thing I need for her to do is have to come visit me in jail for 
something that could have been avoided.” (Tr. 33) Applicant no longer associates 
with the people with whom he drank. (Tr. 35-36) During visitation with his daughter, 
he typically engages in activities such as taking her to the pool, playing pool, playing 
video games, and doing homework with her. (Tr. 33) 
 
 After his 2005, alcohol-related arrest, Applicant was ordered to complete an 
alcohol assessment and to attend a substance abuse and alcohol class. He did not 
receive an alcohol dependent or adverse diagnosis. (Tr. 35, 51-52) Applicant no 
longer drives and depends on friends to get around. (Tr. 34, 44) He reapplies 
annually with the department of motor vehicles to have his driver’s license 
reinstated and will continue to do so until his license is reinstated. (Tr. 45) Applicant 
is no longer on probation. (Tr. 54) 
  
Character Evidence 
 
 As noted, Applicant is devoted to his six-year-old daughter. He submitted 
father-daughter photographs of himself spending time with her. (Tr. 28-29; AE(1), 
 
4 
 
AE B(2) He also submitted his Marine Corps fitness reports from 2004 and 2005 
that document above average performance and a Navy Commendation Medal 
Citation for meritorious service as an instructor from 2005 to 2007. (AE D – AE F) 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), 
which became effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a 
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by 
Department Counsel.” The applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain 
a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail 
to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
  
Analysis 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, 
or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance 
process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance 
process. 
 
Three personal conduct disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 are 
potentially applicable. Those three disqualifying conditions provide:   
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct 
investigations,   . . . [to] determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness;1 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
                                                          
1The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, 
stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the 
burden of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not 
establish or prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; 
and (c) a Judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether 
there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of 
mind at the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the 
Judge to conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under 
Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present 
evidence to explain the omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. 
June 9, 2004)). 
 
6 
 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of: .  .  . (3) a pattern of . . . 
rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect 
the person's personal, professional, or community standing.  .  .  .   
 
AG ¶ 16(a) is not established. Applicant’s SOR alleges that he failed to disclose 
his 2005 and 2007 alcohol-related arrests on his April 24, 2014 SF-86. He credibly 
testified that he hurriedly completed his SF-86 and that any omissions he may have 
made were inadvertent and not deliberate. Adding credence to his explanation, he also 
made other mistakes on his SF-86 that were not cited as falsifications. Applicant 
promptly acknowledged his omissions during his background investigation interview.   
 
AG ¶¶ 16(d) and (e) apply. Applicant’s two alcohol-related arrests in 2005 and 
in 2007, and his eight mostly traffic-related offenses committed from 2006 to 2014 
raise security concerns about his pattern of rule violations. There is substantial 
evidence that Applicant engaged in conduct that adversely affects his personal, 
professional, and community standing. Further analysis concerning applicability of 
mitigating conditions is required.    
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur;   
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of 
questionable reliability. 
 
 
7 
 
AG ¶ 17(e) mitigates the security concern raised under AG ¶ 16(e). I do not 
believe Applicant could be coerced or pressured into release of classified 
information by threats of public disclosure of his history of alcohol-related offenses 
and mostly traffic-related offenses. Those offenses are matters of public record and 
are documented in his security file.   
 
With regard to the remaining alcohol and mostly traffic-related offenses, it is 
difficult to ignore what Applicant experienced as a result of his multiple combat tours 
in Iraq and Afghanistan. His post-deployment conduct cost him his marriage and his 
career in the Marine Corps. He found himself in a state of depression and “haunted” 
by his memories. He suffers from PTSD as well as from combat-related injuries and 
receives an 80% VA disability rating. Applicant realized his life was spiraling 
downward and sought professional help from the VA. He quit drinking completely 
three years ago. His primary focus is being a responsible father and setting a good 
example for his daughter. In short, Applicant has regained control of his life and has 
not had any similar missteps in the last four years. AG ¶ 17(c) applies in part and 
AG ¶¶ 17(d) and (e) fully apply. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 articulates the security concern concerning criminal conduct: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
  
The Government established its case under Guideline J through Applicant’s 
admissions and the evidence presented. A review of the evidence supports 
application of two criminal conduct disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 31(a) “a pattern of 
minor offenses, any one of which on its own would be unlikely to affect a national 
security eligibility decision, but which in combination cast doubt on the individual’s 
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness;” and AG ¶ 31(b) “evidence (including, but 
not limited to, a credible allegation, an admission, and matters of official record) of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the individual was formally charged, 
prosecuted, or convicted.”  
 
  Four criminal conduct mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 32 are potentially 
applicable: 
   
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
  
(b) the individual was pressured or coerced into committing the act and 
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
 
8 
 
(c) no reliable evidence to support that the individual committed the 
offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, restitution, 
compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or higher 
education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement. 
 
  The discussion under personal conduct is incorporated in this section. For the 
same reasons, AG ¶ 32(a) is partially applicable and AG ¶ 32(d) fully applies.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). The discussion in the Analysis 
sections under Guidelines E and J are incorporated in this whole-person section. 
However, further comments are warranted. 
Security clearance adjudications are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Applicant recognizes that his past behavior 
has been unacceptable and is determined to move forward in a positive way. In 
reaching my final decision, I gave considerable weigh to Applicant’s 20 years of 
honorable service in the Marine Corps and his multiple combat tours. He has paid a 
heavy price for his post-deployment conduct, but has demonstrated that he is moving 
forward in a positive way. I recognize and applaud the efforts Applicant has made and 
encourage him to continue with his current course of action.  
 
 Applicant has mitigated the personal conduct and criminal conduct security 
concerns. I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
 
9 
 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances in this case, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
Robert Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
