 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 16-03457 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Meutzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
06/15/2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the personal conduct security concerns or the financial 
considerations security concern. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 7, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines F and E.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 10, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on November 9, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 
22, 2017, scheduling the hearing for May 11, 2018. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were admitted after 
Applicant offered clarifications on those documents, and called one witness via the 
telephone.  Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented two documents, which I 
marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, and admitted into the record. DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 22, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. He also denied SOR 
allegation ¶ 2a. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor. In 2006, he obtained 
an associate’s degree from a technical college. In 2012, he obtained his undergraduate 
degree.  He has been employed with the defense contractor since May 2015. He has 
never held a security clearance. He married on January 3, 2015 in Ghana.  (GX 1) He 
has one son. (Tr.30) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was charged in or about January 2015, with credit 
card fraud: Use Card> $200, a felony, and credit card larceny, a felony.(SOR 1.a); 
Applicant was terminated from his employmernt in February 2015 for violating Standards 
of Business Ethics and Conduct after a search of his computer found pornographic 
materials, as well as unauthorized programs/software that can be used for hacking. (SOR 
1.b) Finally, the SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted on a charged-off account in the 
amount of $14,445. (SOR 2.a) 
 
 In December 2014, Applicant traveled to Ghana for his wedding. He returned 
sometime in February 2015. When he returned to the United States, he was arrested in 
the airport for credit card fraud (six counts). (GX 3). A police investigation report had been 
made regarding identity theft and fraudulent purchases in the amount of $3,700  for Apple 
phones, among other items by several persons. 
 
 Applicant disclosed on his 2015 SCA that a friend from Ghana asked him to bring 
a phone when Applicant went to Ghana for his marriage. The friend asked Applicant to 
pick up the phone at UPS and put Applicant’s name on the box. Applicant went to UPS 
and picked up the box. When Applicant returned from Ghana, he told the police, he had 
no knowledge of any credit card theft.  At the same time, he stated that he picked up six 
phones and watches from Macy’s to take to Ghana. 
 
 The investigation report, authored by a police officer, who was assigned a credit 
card fraud case stated the phones were picked up by Applicant on December 14, 2014. 
The UPS customer service associate stated that the he completed the transaction and 
provided the full name of Applicant as the person who picked up the package. He has 
 
3 
 
seen Applicant in the UPS several times picking up packages. (GX 6) Other police records 
were checked and after a search warrant, several computers were seized and receipts 
and torn-up receipts were found in Applicant’s trash can. (GX 6) The receipts were from 
Macys for in-store pick up online orders. The orders were placed by other persons with 
Applicant as an alternative pickup person. There were approximately 12 orders.  
 
 During his subject interview, Applicant told the interviewer that a friend asked him 
to pick up three phones and two chargers to take to Ghana. (GX 5) The items were 
delivered to UPS and the friend provided Applicant’s name as the person authorized to 
pick up the package. Applicant hired a lawyer and the charges were nolle prose 
(dismissed) as no one appeared at the hearing. (GX 6) 
 
 Applicant claimed that he tried to do the friend a favor and had no knowledge of 
any credit card forgery. He also stated at the hearing that since the charges were dropped, 
this allegation cannot be found against him. (AX A) 
 
 As to SOR 1.b, Applicant was terminated in February 2015 from his employment. 
The reason for termination was a violation of company policy. He is not eligible for rehire. 
After the employer learned of Applicant’s charge and arrest with identity theft, a review 
was made of the internet traffic on Applicant’s work station. The review uncovered the 
presence of several unauthorized programs and files present on the workstation; several 
of which were used for hacking. The review also uncovered several internet artifacts that 
showed orders placed online, as well as packages, being redirected. The investigation 
also found pornographic material. When asked, Applicant stated those files were 
accidentally introduced into the software system and that he shared a computer with a 
co-worker. The internet history shows active web searching and downloading of cell 
phone un lockers.(GX 4) 
 
 As to the pornographic material found, Applicant stated this he was on a news site 
(MYJOYONLINE) to see what was new with the minister in Ghana. Something popped 
up. It was EMPRESS_LEAK. (GX 7) Applicant replied it was not a pornographic site, but 
an adult only site. He also said that the site might have changed from a news station and 
now is a pornographic station. (Tr. 80) 
 
Financial 
 
 Applicant’s credit report reveals a defaulted educational loan assigned to an FA-
PEAKS in the amount of $14,445, which was opened in 2010.  The first major delinquency 
was noted in 2012. Applicant stated that he had no idea who this agency was and he did 
not owe them any money. He stated that he is now taking more undergraduate courses 
and his student loans are consolidated and current. His credit report confirms that. 
However, he called them and learned that it was for a student loan to his technical 
institution. He believes since there was a lawsuit against them for fraudulent loans that 
he does not owe them any money. (AX B) He denies that he took out a loan for his 
education at ITT. He stated that he sent in a dispute form. He also called the collection 
agency. Nothing has been resolved. 
    
 
4 
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.These are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant obtained a degree from a technical college in 2011. The college 
had some trouble and a lawsuit was filed for fraudulent loans. The collection 
company states that Applicant owes $14,445. Applicant contacted them after he 
received the SOR, as he claims to have had no knowledge of the delinquent 
account. He has new student loans from a later date that are consolidated and 
current. He called the collection agency and learned they were from ITT. He first 
stated that he did not owe them, due to the lawsuit that claims fraudulent loans. 
He did receive a degree. When he called the collection agency, he disputed the 
amount, but then stated he would try to pay it. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 including: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
6 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s only delinquent debt is the student loan. He has new student loans and 
has them consolidated and current. It is not clear if he took out a loan and for how much 
money. The collection agency holding the loan would settle for a smaller amount. 
Applicant has disputed the loan. He is seeking counsel. Nothing has been resolved. He 
has not demonstrated that future financial problems are unlikely. No mitigating conditions 
have been established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. These are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
 
7 
 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
 
8 
 
(2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is 
illegal in that country; 
 
(3) while in another country, engaging in any activity that, 
while legal there, is illegal in the United States; 
 
  Applicant was charged and arrested for six counts of credit card fraud. Although 
the charges were dismissed as no one appeared at the hearing and he denied the 
charges. I find sufficient evidence in the record to state that Applicant was involved with 
the criminal incidents. He was clearly identified by UPS for picking up various packages 
on several occasions. He also stated that it was only one phone, then it was three. There 
were watches with receipts found in his home for the various watches that he ordered 
online and picked up at the store. Applicant was terminated in February 2015 based on 
what was found on his computer, including pornography. He told several versions of why 
he was not the one culpable. The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 including: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
 
9 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
 
After reviewing the information and the mitigating conditions in this case, I 
do not find that any of them apply. 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant did not present clear information at the hearing concerning any of the 
alleged events. I did not find his testimony credible.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns as well as the 
Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1b:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against  Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
