 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
---------------- )  ISCR Case No. 16-03523 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  
Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant:  
Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
The Edmunds Law Firm 
 
 
June 19, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the concerns related to foreign influence, personal conduct, and 
financial considerations. His request for national security eligibility and a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 9, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
 
2 
 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines B, E, and F.1 The SOR 
further informed Applicant that based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national security eligibility for a 
security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR, with attachments, on March 17, 2017, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. (Answer.) Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on April 28, 2017. The case was assigned to me on May 9, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
June 12, 2017, scheduling the hearing for August 23, 2017. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 4, which were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf, called three additional 
witnesses, and submitted Applicant Exhibits A through J, which were also admitted 
without objection. The record was left open for receipt of additional documentation. 
Applicant presented two documents, which I marked Applicant Exhibits K and L, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
August 31, 2017. 
 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 By email dated August 31, 2017, the Government requested I take administrative 
notice of certain facts relating to the People’s Republic of China (China). Department 
Counsel provided a nine page summary of the facts, supported by relevant excerpts 
from eleven Government documents pertaining to China, identified as HE I. The 
documents provide elaboration and context for the summary. I take administrative 
notice of the facts included in the U.S. Government reports. They are limited to matters 
of general knowledge, not subject to reasonable dispute. Applicant’s counsel indicated 
that there was no objection to my considering HE I in an email also dated August 31, 
2017. The facts so noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact.  
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted to SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a, 2.b, 3.a, 3.b, and 3.c. He admitted 
in part and denied in part SOR allegation ¶ 1.b. He denied SOR allegation ¶ 2.a. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 53 years old and divorced with one child. He is a retired senior 
master sergeant (E-8) in the Air Force Reserve. Applicant has a Bachelor of Science 
degree. He is attempting to retain the security clearance he currently holds. 
 
                                            
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under either set of guidelines. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant is of Chinese descent, but he and his family were refugees from 
Vietnam. His family left Vietnam in approximately 1979. Eventually, Applicant arrived in 
the United States. He joined the Air Force in the early 1980s. Applicant became a 
naturalized American citizen in 1985, while a member of the Air Force. (Tr. 56-57, 96-
100; Government Exhibit 1 at Sections 9, 15.)   
 
Paragraph 1 – Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he has, or had, foreign contacts or financial interests.   
 
 1.a. From 2002 to 2008 Applicant was self-employed in the electronics field. His 
major contract was with a Japanese corporation. The general manager for the contract 
was a Japanese citizen, hereafter referred to as Mr. A. Applicant closed his firm in 
December 2008 because of the downturn in the economy and shortly afterward began 
working for an American firm, Company One. Applicant and Mr. A continued to 
correspond by email on an occasional basis until 2016, primarily about sports. (Tr. 58-
59, 156; Government Exhibit 1 at Section 13A.) 
 
 In early 2011 Mr. A contacted Applicant. Mr. A at that time was stationed in a 
European country. He asked Applicant for a loan of approximately $40,000 so he could 
arrange to conclude his affairs in Europe and return to Japan. Applicant had the funds 
available and transferred the money to Mr. A in July 2011. Applicant loaned an 
additional $10,000 to Mr. A in 2013. The loans were repaid in full by Mr. A in May 2016, 
as shown by banking documents. Applicant has had no contact with Mr. A since 2016. 
Applicant does not intend to transfer money to Mr. A again. (Tr. 58-66, 102-103; 
Government Exhibit 1 at Section 20A; Government Exhibit 2 at 3-4; Applicant Exhibit K.)  
 
 1.b. Applicant admitted that he has relatives in China. The contacts are distant 
relatives of Applicant’s father. Applicant and his father visited these people once, in 
1992. Applicant’s father, who is deceased, asked Applicant to maintain contact with 
these family members. Applicant does this by calling them on Chinese New Year, and 
other special occasions. He had dinner with one of them seven years ago, when he was 
in China on business. He has had no other personal contact with these people, since 
the initial visit. (Tr. 66-69, 118-123; Government Exhibit 2 at 4-5.) 
 
 Applicant does not have relatives in Thailand. His connection with Thailand was 
a single friend. The friend lived with Applicant in the United States for a while in 
approximately 1992, then went home to Thailand. This person emailed Applicant to ask 
for a $1,000 loan in early 2017. Applicant had no desire to lend money to this person, 
and did not respond to the email. Before that event, Applicant’s last contact with this 
person was in 2014 or 2015 by email. Applicant last saw this person ten or twelve years 
ago during a trip to Thailand. (Tr. 69-71, 116-117; Government Exhibit 2 at 5.) 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Paragraph 2 – Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
 2.a. Applicant traveled to China on personal leave between October 11, 2012, 
and November 12, 2012. The Government alleged that Applicant failed to follow his 
employer’s security policies and regulations regarding foreign travel with regard to this 
trip. Applicant denied this allegation. 
 
 He stated in his Answer: 
 
Prior to leaving for my vacation, I contacted Human Resources at 
corporate [Company One] and asked them whom I should inform about 
my travel plans. They provided me with a lady’s name whom I contacted. I 
know that I checked with this person at least twice before I left to ensure 
that all necessary paperwork was completed. . . . At the time, I did not 
know that we had a local person handling this task. . . . I believe that I 
complied with my reporting requirements as I notified corporate Human 
Resources of my travel plans and completed the necessary paperwork 
with them. I believe that there was a lack of communication with the local . 
. . Group and corporate on my plans. In the future, I will ensure to notify all 
local and corporate parties.2 
 
 Because he was going on an international trip, Applicant was informed by an 
email dated September 17, 2012, from the Export Compliance Coordinator at corporate 
headquarters that he had to receive an International Travel Briefing and complete a 
Checklist (not otherwise described). There is no information as to how the Export 
Compliance Coordinator knew of Applicant’s trip to China. Corporate records show that 
Applicant received the travel briefing on September 18, 2012. Applicant testified that he 
filled out the “Foreign Travel Request Form,” and returned it to the office that had 
contacted him. At that time he also asked whether there was anything else he had to 
do, and was informed there was not. (Tr. 86-87, 126-127; Government Exhibit 3 at 5-7, 
24.) 
 
 Earlier, on February 8, 2012, Applicant signed a form entitled “Reporting 
Responsibilities,” and returned it to his group security officer. Part of that form states: 
 
I ALSO UNDERSTAND THAT I MUST REPORT TO MY SSO/CSSO 
ANY: 
 
-FOREIGN TRAVEL AT LEAST 30 DAYS IN ADVANCE (to receive 
advance warning of any force protection conditions and related travel 
briefing). (Government Exhibit 3 at 1-2.) (Capitalization and emphasis in 
original.) (See Tr. 126-127, 156.) 
 
                                            
2 Applicant’s work location with his group was in a different state than the corporate headquarters of 
Company One. 
 
5 
 
 Based on the information he received from corporate Human Resources (HR), 
Applicant stated that he did not realize that he also had to contact his group security 
officer. During his trip he had reason to contact his supervisor, who is located at 
corporate headquarters. The supervisor contacted the security officer, and then told 
Applicant that he had to fill out the travel form after his return. According to Applicant, he 
filled out another copy of the “Foreign Travel Request Form,” and returned it to the 
security officer. After his trip Applicant was told by the security officer that he was to 
inform this security officer prior to overseas trips. He replied in an email dated 
November 17, 2012, “I didn’t know who to report to prior to my vacation so I called HR 
and they provided me with the forms to fill out and that’s why I thought they were the 
right people to talk to.” (Tr. 81-87, 128-131; Government Exhibit 3 at 3-7.) 
 
 Applicant’s “Foreign Travel Request Form” for this trip is found on pages 11-14 of 
Government Exhibit 3. It is unclear from the record whether this is the form he returned 
to HR, or the one he subsequently gave to his security officer. (Tr. 131-132.) 
 
 2.b. When Applicant went to China he carried with him a piece of company 
equipment. This item of equipment was not classified, but was controlled. More 
specifically, Applicant was supposed to obtain a “hand-carry letter” for the equipment 
before going to China. The letter is for the information of U.S. Customs and Border 
Protection. He did not obtain such a letter. The Government alleges that the 
requirement to obtain a hand-carry letter was a company security policy or regulation. 
No such specific written policy was provided. The requirement is contained within the 
email sent to Applicant by his company’s Export Compliance Coordinator on September 
17, 2012. (Tr. 88-89; Government Exhibit 3 at 6-7, 24-26.) 
 
 On September 18, 2012, Applicant informed the person who sent him the 
September 17, 2012 email that he would be traveling with this piece of equipment. 
Despite Applicant indicating to the proper person at the company home office that he 
would be taking this piece of equipment with him, he was not provided with a hand-carry 
letter by that office. Nor was Applicant informed that he should not take the piece of 
equipment with him. Applicant testified that he forgot sending this email, and forgot he 
had the piece of equipment with him, which is rather small. (Tr. 90-92, 133-139, 147-
151; Government Exhibit 4.) 
 
 The record is fragmentary, but it appears there was some concern expressed 
about Applicant having this piece of equipment with him in China. What the express 
concern was, and whether it was resolved, is unclear from the record. (Tr. 140-143; 
Government Exhibit 3 at 24-32.) 
 
Paragraph 3 – Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he has engaged in financial acts that show poor judgment on his 
part. Applicant admitted the factual elements of all three subparagraphs, but denied that 
his acts had security significance. 
 
 
6 
 
 3.a In approximately 2009 Applicant lent about $65,000 to his then sister-in-law. 
This loan was to allow the sister-in-law to open a frozen yogurt shop. The sister-in-law 
eventually paid Applicant approximately $7,000 on the loan. The rest of the loan was 
unpaid and the shop closed. Applicant vehemently stated he would not lend this person 
money ever again. (Tr. 71-76.) 
 
 3.b. In November 2013 Applicant lent $42,000 to his sister. This money was so 
his sister could buy a house at a discounted rate. Starting in March 2014 Applicant’s 
sister began paying this money back on a monthly basis. She made consistent 
payments and completely paid back this loan in February 2016, as shown by banking 
documents. (Tr. 77-79, 151-152; Government Exhibit 3 at 32; Applicant Exhibit L.) 
 
 3.c. The Government alleges that Applicant’s conduct lending money to Mr. A, 
discussed under subparagraph 1.a, above, also has security significance under this 
guideline. 
 
 Applicant made the following general statement concerning his finances, “I only 
loan money to people when I have money. I never take - - I never put my family in 
jeopardy.” (Tr. 76.)  
 
 Applicant submitted documentation showing that he is financially stable now, and 
that he was financially stable at the time of the transactions discussed above. Applicant 
showed that his earnings were from a habit of savings and good investments. His 
current net worth is well over $600,000. (Tr. 79-80, 104-116; Applicant Exhibits J, K, 
and L.) 
 
Mitigation 
 
 Applicant had a very successful career in the Air Force, retiring in 2013 as a 
senior master sergeant. His awards included the Meritorious Service Medal, and two Air 
Force Achievement Medals. (Applicant Exhibits H and I; Tr. 100-101.) 
 
 A chief master sergeant in the Air Force, who served with Applicant, provided a 
letter of recommendation. He has known Applicant for over 23 years and states 
Applicant is “honest, reliable and trustworthy.” (Applicant Exhibit A at 7.) 
 
 Applicant has served for several years as chairman of the board of a non-profit 
organization, which is involved in international humanitarian efforts. The founder and 
president of the organization testified, and provided a letter on Applicant’s behalf. He 
has known Applicant for many years and stated, “I have never had any reason to 
question [Applicant’s] character, honesty, ethics, [or] loyalty to country or life values.” 
(Applicant Exhibit A at 6; Tr. 35-45.) (See Tr. 41-53.) 
 
Applicant Exhibit A contains six additional letters of recommendation. They are 
all from co-workers of Applicant, either with Company One or Company Two. They all 
recommend Applicant for a position of trust, stating that he is honest, and trustworthy. 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant’s current supervisor at Company Two testified on Applicant’s behalf. 
He has been Applicant’s supervisor since November 2015. He testified that Applicant is 
ethical and reliable. (Tr. 14-23.) 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor at Company One also testified on Applicant’s behalf. He 
has worked with Applicant since 2009. The witness described Applicant as having 
exemplary character, stating Applicant is “one of the finest people I have ever met.” (Tr. 
24-33.) 
 
China 
 
I take administrative notice of the facts set forth in the Administrative Notice 
documents concerning China, which are incorporated herein by reference.  
 
China is a large and economically powerful country, with a population of over a 
billion people and an economy growing at about 10% per year. China has an 
authoritarian government, dominated by the Chinese Communist Party. It has a poor 
record with respect to human rights, suppresses political dissent, and engages in 
arbitrary arrests and detentions, forced confessions, torture, and mistreatment of 
prisoners.  
 
China is one of the most aggressive countries in seeking sensitive and protected 
U.S. technology and economic intelligence. It targets the United States with active 
intelligence gathering programs, both legal and illegal. As a result, it is a growing threat 
to U.S. national security.  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
 
8 
 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 - Guideline B (Foreign Influence) 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject 
the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or 
personal conflict of interest. 
 
  Applicant worked for a citizen of Japan, and lent that person money. Applicant 
has distant relatives in China. He also had prior contact with a person from Thailand. 
The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
China is known to be aggressive in attempting to obtain American technology. 
Accordingly, Applicant’s remote family connections in that country could have the 
potential to generate a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion under AG ¶ 7(a).3 
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
                                            
3 The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, 
disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in a foreign country and an applicant 
has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence 
and could potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
10 
 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant has minimal contact with his distant relatives who live in China. He has 
not seen any of them in seven years and has no desire to see them in the future. His 
contact with them is by telephone several times a year, primarily on holidays. AG ¶¶ 
8(a), (b), and (c) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) also applies. Applicant lent a former co-worker from Japan 
approximately $50,000 several years ago. This person has completely repaid the loan. 
Applicant did this one time, and will not do so again. There is virtually no potential for 
influence, since the money was repaid in full. 
 
Applicant is a proud American citizen, as well as a veteran of the Air Force. He 
would immediately report any attempts to influence him. (Tr. 94-97) 
 
Applicant has completely mitigated the security significance of the presence of 
his distant relatives in China, as well as his one-time loan of money to Mister A. 
Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant. 
 
Paragraph 2 - Guideline E (Personal Conduct) 
 
The security concerns pertaining to the personal conduct guideline are set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleges that Applicant’s conduct during his leave to China in 
2012 showed poor judgment on his part. This is because he failed to notify his branch 
security officer of the trip, and failed to obtain a hand-carry letter concerning a piece of 
company equipment. The record is clear that Applicant’s company’s home office was 
fully informed in advance of his overseas trip. He received an email from the Export 
Compliance Coordinator of his employer setting forth specific requirements he had to 
meet to travel overseas, including obtaining a hand-carry letter. In answer to that email 
 
11 
 
Applicant stated that he was planning to travel with the piece of company equipment in 
question here. The record also shows that he received a travel briefing around the same 
time. 
 
Applicant acknowledges he has a certain amount of personal responsibility here. 
However, it is also true that a reasonable person could rely on the appropriate 
personnel at corporate headquarters, when specifically notified by a traveler of pertinent 
facts, to have made sure the traveler was fulfilling all of the company requirements. 
 
The only disqualifying condition that is arguably applicable to this case under AG 
¶ 16 is: 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
 
The following mitigating condition is also arguably applicable under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Applicant did not conceal from his employer the fact that he was traveling to 
China, or that he was carrying with him a piece of corporate equipment. This was a one-
time event, and the company also bears a certain amount of blame for the problem. 
Applicant has mitigated this allegation as well and Paragraph 2 is found for him. 
 
Paragraph 3 – Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
 
12 
 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 The Government’s concern under this paragraph seems to be that Applicant was 
lending money to people in a potentially frivolous way. He lent money to a former work 
associate, his sister, and his then sister-in-law. Two of these people paid Applicant back 
in full. His sister-in-law paid back $7,000 of her $65,000 debt. Financial records of 
Applicant show that he was on solid financial footing each time he made a loan. As 
stated, his current financial situation is more than stable. 
 
 None of the disqualifying conditions exactly describe the situation here. AG ¶ 19 
describes only one condition that could arguably raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(e) consistent spending beyond one’s means or frivolous or irresponsible 
spending, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant 
negative cash flow, a history of late payments or of non-payment, or other 
negative financial indicators. 
 
 One mitigating condition under AG ¶ 20 also arguably applies: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s conduct in lending substantial amounts of money to relatives and a 
former work associate was not inherently improper, or cause for financial concerns. 
While the Applicant lent a considerable amount of money over several years, it is 
important to note that his overall financial health remained good during the entire period, 
and that two of the people involved repaid him in full. He made a mistake in regard to 
his sister-in-law, and learned a hard lesson. He has fully mitigated this allegation. 
Paragraph 3 is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
13 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(b), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines B, E, and F in my whole-person analysis. He committed no misconduct, has 
no significant foreign relationships, and exhibited no potential for coercion or duress. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for national security eligibility and a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the Foreign Influence, Personal Conduct, 
and Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.c:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Wilford H. Ross 
Administrative Judge 
