 
1 
                                         
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
       )  ISCR Case No. 16-03993 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance   ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate security concerns arising under 
Guidelines F (financial considerations) and G (alcohol consumption), and to refute 
security concerns under Guideline E (personal conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.            
 
Statement of the Case 
  
On January 8, 2016, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SF 86) or security clearance application (SCA). (Government Exhibit 
(GE) 3) On January 30, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant under 
Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 2, 1992; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, effective on September 1, 
2006 (Sept. 1, 2006 AGs). (GE 1) The SOR set forth security concerns arising under 
Guidelines F, G, and E.  
 
On February 8, 2017, Applicant provided a response to the SOR. (GE 2) He 
requested a hearing. (Transcript (Tr.) 12) On June 16, 2017, Department Counsel was 
ready to proceed. On December 5, 2017, the case was assigned to me. On January 10, 
 
2 
                                         
 
2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, 
setting the hearing for February 6, 2018. (HE 1) Applicant’s hearing was held as 
scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered 15 exhibits; Applicant offered 9 
exhibits; there were no objections; and all proffered exhibits were admitted into evidence. 
(Tr. 16-22; GE 1-15; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-AE I). On February 15, 2018, DOHA 
received the hearing transcript. After the hearing, I received nine exhibits, which were 
admitted without objection. (AE J-AE S) On June 28, 2018, the record closed. (AE L; AE 
R) 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued Security Executive Agent 
Directive 4, establishing in Appendix A the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position on or after June 8, 2017. The new AGs supersede the previous AGs. Accordingly, 
I have evaluated Applicant’s security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.1 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 2.a, 
and 2.b. He also provided mitigating information. (HE 3)   
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old information technology engineer, and he has worked for 
his current employer since March 2017. (Tr. 6-7; GE 3) He has not had any periods of 
unemployment in the previous five years. (Tr. 7) In 1994, Applicant graduated from high 
school, and he has one semester of college. (Tr. 6; GE 3) He has not served in the military. 
(Tr. 7) In 2004, Applicant married, and in 2013, he divorced. (Tr. 8) His children are ages 
13, 14, and 21. (Tr. 8, 14) He pays $1,300 monthly for child support. (Tr. 8) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
From 2009 to 2014, Applicant was overseas, and he was not aware of his 
delinquent debts. (Tr. 22) The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling $33,222, and the 
record establishes the status of Applicant’s accounts as follows: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b allege two judgments owed to the same financial creditor, 
which were filed in 2010 for $6,763 and in 2012 for $5,831. Applicant denied any 
knowledge of these two judgments, and he said he never had accounts with this creditor. 
(Tr. 24) He said he was deployed to Afghanistan when the debts were incurred. (Tr. 24) I 
asked Applicant to go back to the court and the creditor to verify the accuracy of the 
                                            
1 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my 
decision in this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/SEAD4 20170608.pdf.    
 
2 Some details were excluded to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is available 
in the cited exhibits. 
 
3 
                                         
 
judgments. (Tr. 39-42) The creditor provided an IRS Form 1099-C for 2017 indicating the 
amount of debt cancelled is $4,401. (AE L) On June 6, 2018, the creditor provided a 
satisfaction filed with the court for the $5,831 judgment. It is unclear whether the IRS Form 
1099-C applied to the $5,831 judgment, the $6,763 judgment, or some other debt 
because the account number on the IRS Form 1099-C does not match the account 
numbers on the judgments. As of June 28, 2018, Applicant indicated the $6,763 debt was 
unresolved. (AE P-AE R) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a medical judgment filed in 2012 for $1,993. Applicant paid the 
debt, and on April 12, 2018, the creditor filed a satisfaction with the court. (Tr. 26; AE C; 
AE D; AE M) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a medical judgment filed in 2013 for $14,764. Court records 
reflect the judgment was for medical services. (GE 11; AE N) Applicant initially denied 
that he ever had an account with the medical creditor. (Tr. 27, 37) Applicant said he 
checked the court records and was unable to locate a copy of the judgment. (Tr. 31) I 
asked Applicant to go back to the court and the creditor to verify the accuracy of this 
judgment. (Tr. 39-42) After his hearing, he provided documentation showing a law firm 
obtained a default judgment on behalf of the medical creditor in January 2013. (AE N) 
Garnishment was ordered in November 2013. (AE J at 6) In 2014 and 2015, payments 
were made under the garnishment, and the garnishment was released in June 2015. (AE 
J at 6-10) On March 28, 2018, Applicant wrote that he accepted responsibility for the 
judgment. (AE N) The reason he did not address this debt for several years was because 
he believed that his insurance had covered the medical bill. (AE N) On May 1, 2018, 
Applicant proposed to the creditor that he make a substantial payment followed by 
payments designed to resolve the debt in 12 months. (AE N) On June 28, 2018, he said 
the creditor was not pursuing the debt and had closed the account because Applicant 
does not live in the state where the creditor does business. (AE N) He did not say that the 
creditor had rejected his payment of the debt.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.e alleges a past-due debt for $2,660 for delinquent child support. (Tr. 34) 
Applicant’s January 2018 credit report reflects his child support debt is paid. (Tr. 34-36; 
GE 2; SOR response) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f alleges an unpaid fine for $1,000 and court costs of $211. Applicant paid 
the fine and court costs. (Tr. 33; AE E) 
 
Applicant’s January 2018 credit report includes a good credit score and numerous 
debts in paid as agreed or current status. (AE B) This credit report does not list any 
judgments from creditors. (AE B) 
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b allege Applicant had convictions for driving while intoxicated 
(DWI) in September 2011 and April 2015. For the first DWI, he fell asleep at a light, and 
the police stopped him. (Tr. 43) His blood alcohol content (BAC) for the second DWI in 
October 2014, was between .15 and .20. (AE E at 2) He conceded that he had two 
 
4 
                                         
 
convictions for DWI. (Tr. 45) On May 18, 2016, he successfully completed alcohol 
counseling, and he promised not to drive after consuming alcohol. (Tr. 44-45; AE S) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 SOR ¶ 3.a alleges Applicant failed to disclose his judgments in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.e on his January 8, 2016 SCA. Applicant’s January 8, 2016 SCA asked “In the past 
seven (7) years, [have] you had a judgment entered against you?” (GE 3) Applicant 
answered no.  In the comments section, he disclosed that he had a history of delinquent 
child support and “As far as the medical bill, I am looking into it further to make sure I am 
fully responsible for the 18K+ amount before I start paying it. Still very unclear how my 
medical [insurance] did not cover any of the associated cost.” (GE 3)  
 
Applicant said he was unaware of the judgments because he was deployed. (Tr. 
45) He said he had “no recollection of these judgments that obviously aren’t mine,” and 
he learned about them through the security clearance process. (Tr. 46) He had no reason 
to borrow money because he had ample funds through his overseas employment. (Tr. 
46) Applicant disclosed his two DWI convictions on his SCA. (GE 3)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant was part of his employer’s teams that received two awards. (AE H; AE 
I) The awards indicate his teams made important contributions to national defense.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control 
access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual 
is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The President 
has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
 
5 
                                         
 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Clearance 
decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole or 
in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President, Secretary of Defense, and DNI have established for issuing a clearance. 
  
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” 
ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, 
on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
The Appeal Board explained the scope and rationale for the financial 
considerations security concern in ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012) 
(citation omitted) as follows: 
 
6 
                                         
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might 
knowingly compromise classified information in order to raise money in 
satisfaction of his or her debts. Rather, it requires a Judge to examine the 
totality of an applicant’s financial history and circumstances. The Judge 
must consider pertinent evidence regarding the applicant’s self-control, 
judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting the national secrets as 
well as the vulnerabilities inherent in the circumstances. The Directive 
presumes a nexus between proven conduct under any of the Guidelines 
and an applicant’s security eligibility.  
 
  AG ¶ 19 includes three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability to satisfy debts”; “(b) unwillingness to 
satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so”; and “(c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the burden 
shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not responsible for 
the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). The record establishes the disqualifying conditions in AG           
¶¶ 19(a), 19(b), and 19(c) requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of 
mitigating conditions. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable in this case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago,3 was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
                                            
3 A debt that became delinquent several years ago is still considered recent because “an applicant’s 
ongoing, unpaid debts evidence a continuing course of conduct and, therefore, can be viewed as recent for 
purposes of the Guideline F mitigating conditions.” ISCR Case No. 15-06532 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2017) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 15-01690 at 2 (App. Bd. Sept. 13, 2016)). 
 
7 
                                         
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
The DOHA Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving 
the applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of 
a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access 
to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
  
The SOR alleges six delinquent debts totaling $33,222. Applicant provided proof 
of resolution of four debts. In addition, SOR ¶ 1.a for $6,763 is probably not resolved. 
Applicant received an IRS Form 1099-C for 2017 indicating the amount of debt cancelled 
for this creditor is $4,401; however, this document probably does not relate to the $6,763 
debt because the account number does not match the account number on this judgment. 
Applicant admitted responsibility for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d, a medical judgment for 
$14,764.4 He was negotiating a settlement of this debt. Applicant said the creditor closed 
the account because he lives in a different state. Of course, this does not mean the 
creditor will not accept payment or settle the debt. Applicant has an obligation to make 
more effort to resolve this debt. 
 
Applicant made sufficient progress resolving his delinquent debts. He has a good 
credit score. His January 2018 credit report reflects numerous paid debts and current 
accounts. There are clear indications that his financial problem is being resolved, and his 
finances are under control. Future financial problems are unlikely to occur. AG ¶ 20(d) is 
established, and financial considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
  
                                            
4 The Appeal Board has indicated that promises to pay off delinquent debts in the future are not a 
substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially 
responsible manner. ISCR Case No. 07-13041 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 19, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-
0012 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999)). A promise to pay debts is given greater weight when there is a track 
record of paying other debts. 
 
8 
                                         
 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
AG ¶ 21 describes the security concern about alcohol consumption, “Excessive 
alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness.” 
 
AG ¶ 22 provides for two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying as follows: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s alcohol 
use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use disorder; 
and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption5 of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder. 
 
Applicant had convictions for DWI in September 2011 and April 2015. His BAC for 
the second DWI in October 2014, was between .15 and .20. AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c) are 
established.   
 
AG ¶ 23 lists four conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations; 
 
                                            
5 Although the term “binge” drinking is not defined in the Adjudicative Guidelines, the generally 
accepted definition of binge drinking for males is the consumption of five or more drinks in about two hours.
 
The definition of binge drinking was approved by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
(NIAAA) National Advisory Council in February 2004. See U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, NIAAA 
Newsletter 3 (Winter 2004 No. 3), http://www.pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Newsletter/winter2004/ 
NewsletterNumber3.pdf. “Binge drinking is the most common pattern of excessive alcohol use in the United 
States.” See the Center for Disease Control website, (stating “The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and 
Alcoholism defines binge drinking as a pattern of drinking that brings a person’s blood alcohol concentration 
(BAC) to 0.08 grams percent or above. This typically happens when men consume 5 or more drinks, and 
when women consume 4 or more drinks, in about 2 hours.”), https://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/fact-sheets/binge-
drinking.htm. 
 
9 
                                         
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
AG ¶¶ 23(a), 23(b), and 23(d) are established. On May 18, 2016, he successfully 
completed alcohol counseling, and he promised not to drive after consuming alcohol. He 
is motivated not to engage in irresponsible, immature, and illegal conduct. He consumes 
alcohol responsibly. Additional alcohol-related problems are unlikely to occur and do not 
cast doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or judgment. Guideline G 
security concerns are mitigated.       
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire . . . used to conduct investigations,  .  .  . 
[or to] determine security clearance eligibility . . . [.]”   
 
Applicant’s January 8, 2016 SCA asked “In the past seven (7) years, [have] you 
had a judgment entered against you.” (GE 3) Applicant answered no.  In the comments 
section, he disclosed that he had a history of delinquent child support and a large medical 
debt.  He placed DOD on notice that he had financial problems. He also disclosed his two 
DWI convictions on his SCA, which is an indication of his willingness to disclose 
derogatory information on his SCA.  
  
Applicant was careless when he completed his SCA; however, I do not believe 
Applicant intentionally failed to disclose or intended to conceal his delinquent debts on 
his January 8, 2016 SCA. Applicant refuted personal conduct security concerns. 
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
 
10 
                                         
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
     Under AG ¶ 2(c), “[t]he ultimate determination” of whether to grant a security 
clearance “must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines” and the whole-person concept. My comments under Guidelines F, G, 
and E are incorporated in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) 
were addressed under those guidelines but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old information technology engineer, and he has worked for 
his current employer since March 2017. He has not had any periods of unemployment in 
the previous five years. Applicant graduated from high school, and he has one semester 
of college. His children are ages 13, 14, and 21. He pay $1,300 monthly for child support. 
He served overseas for five years, including in Afghanistan, on behalf of the United 
States. His team received two awards. He contributed to national security. There is no 
evidence of security violations or use of illegal drugs while holding a security clearance.  
 
There is some important evidence against approval or reinstatement of his access 
to classified information. Applicant had convictions for DWI in September 2011 and April 
2015. His BAC for the second DWI in October 2014, was between .15 and .20. Applicant 
admitted responsibility for the six delinquent debts totaling $33,222 listed on his SOR. 
Two substantial debts remain unresolved.      
 
The evidence supporting his approval of access to classified information is more 
persuasive than the evidence against approval of access to classified information. 
Applicant completed an alcohol-counseling program, and he does not drive after 
consuming alcohol. He resolved four of six delinquent SOR debts. He understands that 
he needs to resolve the remaining two SOR debts.6 His actions show financial 
responsibility and judgment, and he has established his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18.  
                                            
6 The Government has the option of following-up with more questions about Applicant’s finances, 
including directing Applicant to providing documentation proving that the two remaining judgments are 
resolved. The Government can re-validate Applicant’s financial status at any time through credit reports, 
investigation, and interrogatories. Approval of a clearance now does not bar the Government from 
subsequently revoking it, if warranted. “The Government has the right to reconsider the security significance 
of past conduct or circumstances in light of more recent conduct having negative security significance.” 
ISCR Case No. 10-06943 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2012). This footnote does not imply that this decision to 
grant Applicant’s security clearance is conditional. 
 
11 
                                         
 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, 
and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude 
that financial considerations and alcohol consumption security concerns are mitigated. 
He refuted personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
 
