 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-04013 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan Edmunds, Esq.  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant, a 
naturalized U.S. citizen from India, has demonstrated sufficient financial and familial ties 
to the United States to mitigate the foreign influence concerns raised by his connections 
to India. He has also mitigated the concerns raised by the two security violations he 
received in 2014. The violations were inadvertent, and did not result in the compromise 
of classified information. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 2, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the foreign influence and handling protected information 
guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended 
that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to 
revoke or deny Applicant’s security clearance.  
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing, 
convened on February 13, 2018, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 5, and 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A through J, without objection.  I received the transcript (Tr.) on 
February 22, 2018. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Amended Adjudicative Guidelines 
  
While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about India. Without objection from Applicant, I approved the request. The relevant facts 
are highlighted in the Findings of Fact section, below.2  
 
Withdrawal of SOR allegation  
 
 Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶ 1.b. I granted this motion without 
objection from the Applicant.3   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 70, has worked for federal contracting companies since 2009 and has 
had access to classified information since then. He has worked for his current employer 
since October 2017. He completed his most recent security application in June 2013, 
disclosing relatives and assets in India and eight trips to that country between 1979 and 
July 2011. The background investigation revealed that Applicant also inherited a home 
in India from his parents in 1997 valued at $90,000.  These familial relationships and 
assets are alleged under the foreign influence guideline. The investigation also 
developed information that Applicant’s former employer cited him for two security 
violations in May and June of 2014, which are alleged under the handling protected 
information guideline.4  
                                                          
2 The Government’s administrative notice summary and attached documents are admitted to the record 
as HE II. 
  
3 Tr. 19-20. 
 
4 Tr. 10, 26; GE 1.  
 
3 
 
 Applicant, a naturalized U.S. citizen since 2006, is originally from India, a 
parliamentary democracy that shares significant strategic interests with the United 
States, including counter-terrorism cooperation. The two countries have increased trade 
in goods and services, cooperate on nuclear policy, and engage in mutual efforts to 
address pollution and climate change. Although largely positive, the relationship 
between the United States and India is not without its concerns. India is an avid 
collector of U.S. proprietary information, and there have been several criminal cases of 
industrial espionage arising out of India, both from private sources and from the 
government itself. Terrorist activity occurs in India, and the country is one of those most 
persistently targeted by foreign and domestic terrorist groups. India has some significant 
problems with human rights. India has good diplomatic relations with Iran and supports 
that country’s efforts to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. India’s largest 
supplier of military systems and spare parts is Russia. Historically the relationship 
between the United States and India has been favorable and beneficial to both 
countries.5 
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in 1976 to attend graduate school. He 
married his wife, also a native of India, in 1981. She is also a naturalized U.S. citizen 
who has worked as a civilian employee of the Government for 21 years. The couple’s 
two adult sons are U.S. citizens by birth. Applicant and his wife both have siblings in 
India. Applicant’s only surviving sibling is a sister who is 75 years old. She has never 
worked outside the home. Applicant maintains contact with her twice per month by 
telephone. She is financially independent, but Applicant occasionally helps her with 
medical expenses. Applicant’s other sister died in early 2018.6  
 
Applicant’s wife has four siblings, each of whom are citizens and residents of 
India. Applicant met his in-laws at his wedding in 1981. Since then, he has only seen 
one sister-in-law when she came to the United States to visit in the 1980s. Applicant 
does not maintain independent contact with his in-laws. They do not speak a common 
language. Applicant believes that his wife talks to her siblings frequently, but he cannot 
verify the amount of contact. Since 2003, Applicant and his wife have maintained 
separate households. Applicant’s wife lives in the family home in State 1, and Applicant 
rents an apartment in State 2, where his job is located. When possible, he returns home 
twice per month.7 
 
Applicant admits having a bank account in India worth approximately $65,000, 
containing the proceeds of the 2011 sale of a vacant lot he purchased in 1974. 
Applicant reported the proceeds of the sale to the IRS, as required. He also owns a 
house that he inherited from his parents in the late 1990s valued at approximately 
$90,000. In order to transfer the money in the bank account to a U.S.-based bank, 
Applicant would have to appear in-person at the bank in India. Concerned about the 
security ramifications of a trip to India, Applicant has chosen to keep the money in the 
                                                          
5 GE 1; HE II. 
 
6 Tr. 24, 26, 34-35, 45, 47-51. 
 
7 Tr. 36, 44, 47, 53-61, 74, 97-99.  
 
4 
 
account untouched. He has also chosen to retain the home he inherited because it 
requires significant improvements and repairs before it can be sold. Over the years, the 
home has remained empty except for his sisters’ brief visits to their hometown. Since 
2017, Applicant has allowed a family to live in a portion of the home rent-free.8  
 
Applicant’s India-based assets composes approximately 6% of his net worth. 
Applicant’s U.S.-based assets, which include his paid-off home in State 1, his retirement 
savings, and other saving accounts, are valued at approximately $2.7 million. In 
addition, Applicant and his wife continue to work full time, earning a joint income of 
approximately $300,000 annually.9  
 
Security Violations 
 
 The SOR also alleges that between May and June of 2014, Applicant committed 
two security violations. In May 2014, Applicant was working alone in a secured 
laboratory when he began to feel ill. Concerned about getting sick in the lab, Applicant 
exited the lab to rush to the restroom. On his way out of the lab, Applicant attempted to 
secure the lab as required. However, he managed to properly engage only one of the 
two required locks. Applicant was away from the lab for approximately 15 minutes. After 
leaving the restroom, he went outside for fresh air before returning to the lab. When he 
returned to the lab, security was there already there investigating a possible security 
violation. At the conclusion of the investigation, Applicant was issued a security 
violation, but was not ordered to perform any corrective action or attend training.10 
 
 In June 2014, Applicant was inside another secured space to speak with the 
laboratory manager about a potential security violation that occurred in the lab the day 
before. Applicant entered the secured area with his cellphone, forgetting the device was 
clipped to his belt. Applicant and the lab manager became aware of the phone when it 
beeped during their conversation. The lab manager immediately reported the possible 
violation to the security department and accused Applicant of lying about having the 
phone and trying to avoid another security violation in a matter of days. The security 
department confiscated Applicant’s phone and examined it. Applicant was issued a 
security violation, but the security department noted that the device had not been used 
while Applicant had been inside the secured space. After this security violation, 
Applicant lost his opening and closing privileges for the lab. He left the job soon after, 
citing his treatment after the June 2014 incident.11  
 
 In the eight years Applicant has had access to classified information, he has had 
no other security violations or infractions.12 
                                                          
8 Tr. 32-34, 37, 63-72, 99-102; AE G. 
 
9 Tr. 26, 29, 73  
 
10 Tr. 37-39; GE 3. 
 
11 Tr. 39-41, 81, 89-93; GE 2, GE 4. 
 
12 Tr. 76. 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites  
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
  
Foreign Influence 
 
 “[F]oreign contacts and interests, including . . . business, financial and property 
interests, are a national security concern if they result in a divided allegiance [or] . . . 
may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.” Applicant maintains a close relationship 
with his sister who is a resident and citizen of India. He also holds substantial business, 
financial, and property interests in India. Although the relationship between the United 
States and India is largely favorable, India has a documented history of collecting U.S 
proprietary information. Also, Indian citizens have been involved in several criminal 
cases of industrial espionage against the United States. Based on these facts, 
Applicant’s connections to India raises a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion or personal conflict of interest.13  
 
 However, the evidence here mitigates these concerns. Although Applicant’s 
relationship with his sister cannot be considered casual, she does not hold a position or 
engage in activities that could place Applicant in a position of having to choose between 
his foreign relative and U.S. interests. Applicant’s relationships with his in-laws, 
however, can be considered casual and infrequent as he has only seen them once 
during his 37 years marriage and cannot communicate with them without his wife’s 
assistance as a translator.  
 
 The concerns raised by Applicant’s substantial financial interests in India are also 
mitigated. Applicant acquired the properties before he became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
and before he required national security eligibility. While the value of the assets are not 
insubstantial, these assets are not necessary to Applicant’s daily maintenance, nor does 
he require the Indian assets to comfortably provide financial assistance, when needed, 
to his sister. Given Applicant’s annual household income, his total U.S.-based assets, 
as well as his regular and candid disclosure of them to the U.S. Government, it is 
unlikely that his Indian assets could be effectively used to influence, manipulate, or 
pressure him.14 
 
Handling Protected Information 
 
 Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for handling 
protected information, which included classified and other sensitive information and 
raises doubt about an individuals’ trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness, 
and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. Applicant’s 
two security violations in May and June 2014 are sufficient to support a finding that 
Applicant failed to comply with the rules for the protection of classified or sensitive 
                                                          
13 See AG ¶¶ 7(a), and (f). 
 
14 AG ¶ 8(f). 
 
7 
 
information.15 However, these incidents are mitigated by the passage of time. Both 
incidents occurred four years ago. Both were inadvertent and did not result in the 
compromise of classified or sensitive information. Ultimately, the security violations do 
not cast doubt on Applicant’s ongoing security worthiness.16   
 
Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s ability to protect and 
handle classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have considered the whole-
person factors in AG ¶ 2(d). Applicant’s familial and financial ties to the United States 
outweigh his ties to India. He has not demonstrated divided loyalties between the two 
nations. Although Applicant received two security violations in a short time frame, they 
did not occur under circumstances that indicate an inability or unwillingness to abide by 
the rules established for handling or safeguarding of classified information. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Handling Protected Information  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.b:     Withdrawn 
 
Paragraph 2, Foreign Influence:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
15 AG ¶ 34(g). 
 
16 AG ¶ 35(a).  
