KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: In her appeal brief, Applicant states that three days before the record closed she
submitted receipts showing accounts had been paid off. Adverse decision remanded.
CASENO: 16-02555.a1
DATE: 06/06/2018
DATE: June 6, 2018
In Re:
------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-02555
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
December 3, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On March 14, 2018, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant states that she submitted documentary evidence to the Judge that did not make it
into the record.  At the hearing, the Judge left the record open for 15 days for Applicant to submit
additional matters.  Tr. at 64-65.  In the decision, the Judge noted that she did not submit any
additional matters.  In her appeal brief, Applicant states that three days before the record closed she
submitted receipts showing accounts had been paid off.  Given her contention that the record is
incomplete, we conclude the best resolution of this appeal is to remand the case to the Judge for
further processing consistent with the Directive.  Applicant has raised other issues that are not ripe
for consideration at this time.
Order
The Decision is REMANDED.    
Signed: Michael Ra’anan              
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale                  
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                     
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
2
