 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03936 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Spouse, Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, and 
Guideline F, financial considerations, but failed to mitigate the security concerns under 
Guideline E, personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 27, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, Guideline E, personal conduct, and 
Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. On June 8, 2017, new 
AG were implemented and are effective for decisions issued after that date.1 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous AG, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective June 8, 2017. 
My decision would be the same if the case was considered under the previous AG. 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 24, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on August 23, 2017. Due to a 
hurricane and delays associated with federal funding, the hearing was scheduled and 
canceled several times. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued the 
final notice of hearing on April 2, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 18, 
2018. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2. Applicant testified and offered 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A. There were no objections to any of the exhibits offered, and they 
were admitted into evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript on April 26, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old. He holds a bachelor’s degree and a master’s degree. He 
served in the military for four years and was honorably discharged. He was married from 
1980 to 2015 and has three grown children. He remarried in 2016. His wife is a citizen of 
Azerbaijan and has permanent resident status in the United States. She has a daughter 
who is a naturalized citizen of the United States and two grandsons. Applicant has worked 
for federal contractors since 1984 and has held a security clearance during that time.2  
 
 In approximately 2010, Applicant’s employer required him to move from State A to 
State B. If he declined he would be fired. The project he was assigned had numerous 
problems and was very stressful. He was not given any relocation reimbursements. He 
moved in June 2010. He owned a house in State A. He could not sell his house because 
the mortgage was more than the amount he would be able to sell it for. He and his wife 
were living in a small apartment in State B.3  
 
In 2012, the tenants that were living in Applicant’s house in State A were repeatedly 
late in paying the rent on the house. They eventually moved out without paying what they 
owed. Applicant’s health was declining, and he was hospitalized while on a work trip. In 
2013, he and his wife separated. He was responsible for two households and payments 
on his home in State A. He withdrew money from his pension plan to pay bills. There were 
tax consequences to his withdrawal from his pension plan. He failed to timely file his 2013 
federal and state income tax returns. He requested his accountant file an extension, but 
it was done late. At around the same time, he was transferred to another state, which 
required another move. He and his wife did not reconcile, and they started divorce 
proceedings in December 2014. Their divorce was final in April 2015.4  
 
                                                          
2 Tr. 24-27. 
 
3 Tr. 29-30. 
 
4 Tr. 64, 67. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant had hoped his house in State A would fund his retirement. He had 
invested all of his savings into the house and intended to sell it for a profit. When his 
tenants rented it they expressed an interest in purchasing it. Instead they damaged the 
house. Applicant testified he spent his savings to repair the damages.5  
 
 Applicant filed both his 2013 federal and state income tax returns late, but before 
the extension expired. He arranged to pay his state income taxes through an installment 
agreement and completed payment in October 2014. He delayed paying his Federal 
income taxes because of other bills. Money was withheld by the IRS and some payments 
were made in 2015 before a five-year installment agreement was implemented in 2016. 
Applicant made monthly payments and then made a lump-sum payment to resolve the 
balance he owed on his Federal tax debt. He withdrew money from his pension plan to 
make the lump-sum payment. There was no penalty associated with the withdrawal 
because of his age. Applicant testified that 2013 was the only year he failed to file his tax 
returns timely. He no longer has a tax debt to the IRS.6 
 
 Sometime in early 2013, while separated from his wife, Applicant posted a profile 
on an Internet dating site because he was lonely. He met several people from Ghana who 
were persistent in maintaining contact with him. He began chatting with them. From 2013 
to 2015, Applicant provided approximately $20,000 in financial support to Person X from 
Ghana that he met online. At the time, he believed this person was a woman. In 2015, he 
learned the person was a man participating in a fraudulent Internet scheme (SOR ¶ 1.a). 
He testified that he gave Person X money because he would talk to him. He explained 
that you can be anyone you want to be when you are online, and you do not have to be 
yourself. Person X told Applicant that he did not have much money. Applicant said he is 
a “soft touch.”7 He never met Person X. Applicant admitted that after learning of the scam 
and false identity of Person X, he gave him an additional $75 because Person X was 
hungry.8 
 
Applicant testified that around mid-2015, he was diagnosed with a deadly cancer. 
He had no one to take care of him, so he decided because he was not going to live long 
he would travel to Ghana to meet Person X, which he did in October 2015. He was also 
corresponding with another woman, Person Y, from Ghana at the time. He had questions 
about his contacts in Ghana that he wanted answered. Applicant later learned he was 
misdiagnosed and at that time did not have a deadly cancer.9  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 64-65. 
 
6 Tr. 66-74; GE 2; AE A.  
 
7 Tr. 34. 
 
8 Tr. 31-32, 54, 61-64; GE 2. 
 
9 Tr.41-44. 
 
 
4 
 
 
After Applicant arrived in Ghana, he could not locate Person X. He learned that 
Person Y with whom he had been corresponding was actually two women. Before he 
traveled to Ghana, Person Y had been pressuring him to pay a sum of money for a wife, 
which he said he was not interested in. He became aware that the contacts he had in 
Ghana were part of romance schemes that were run by an organized crime syndicate. 
He was taken to a place to meet a woman, but soon realized the armed men were there 
to extort money from him. Applicant was concerned he would be killed. The men took him 
to a bank so he could withdraw money on the guise it was for meeting and marrying a 
woman, but Applicant was acutely aware it was extortion. He paid the men approximately 
$3,600. He had no intention of marrying a woman, but his original intent was to meet and 
talk with a woman. Applicant testified that after the men left him at his hotel, he reported 
the incident to the police, but they were corrupt and also wanted money from him. 
Applicant believes the police are part of the fraudulent romance schemes.10 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c 
and 1.d)  
 
After this incident, Applicant provided approximately $800 in financial support for 
Person Y. He was in the United States and was aware that she had already extorted 
money from him through her cohorts. He communicated with her for about four more 
months. He testified she told him she had a broken leg, and her father was diabetic. He 
said he saw a photo of her with a broken leg.11 (SOR ¶ 1.b) 
 
 From approximately December 2015 to February 2016, Applicant provided 
approximately $2,000 in financial support to a third woman from Ghana whom he met 
online. He later learned that she provided false information about her identity to him and 
was part of a fraudulent Internet scheme. He testified that he provided her support 
because she has two children. He knew it was a scam when he sent her money. He 
explained that he felt sorry for people who lived in poverty and was trying to help her. He 
admitted that at the time he was thinking about finding a spouse in Ghana. (SOR ¶ 1.e) 
The last financial payment made to any person from Ghana was in January 2016. 
Applicant confirmed that he was making these fraudulent payments while he was aware 
he owed delinquent state and Federal taxes. He no longer communicates with anyone 
from Ghana. He reported these contacts on his security clearance application and also 
reported his foreign travel.12  
 
 Applicant’s current wife immigrated to the United States and was sponsored by her 
daughter who came on a student visa. His wife is a permanent resident of the United 
States. Her daughter married and became a U.S. citizen. Applicant met his current wife 
online in March 2014, and met her in person the next day. They had several dates. She 
returned to Azerbaijan from May 2014 until November 2014. She traveled again to 
Azerbaijan from January 2016 to February 2016. Their relationship became serious when 
she returned in February 2016. Applicant’s wife intends on applying for naturalization 
                                                          
10 Tr. 39, 44-54, 61. 
 
11 Tr. 32-33, 35-39. 
 
12 Tr. 35-38, 55-61, 64. 
 
5 
 
 
when she is eligible. She owns an apartment in Azerbaijan worth approximately $500,000. 
She returns to Azerbaijan to check on the property because she cannot trust someone to 
do it for her. Her only family is Applicant, her daughter, and two grandchildren. She is 
financially self-sufficient. She and Applicant began living together in February 2016 and 
married in April 2016. She was unaware of any of the fraudulent romantic schemes that 
Applicant was involved in. She learned of them after they were married.13  
 
 Applicant attributed his decisions to a stressful period in his life. He has learned a 
lesson. He is sorry for his past conduct. He is currently battling stage 4 renal cancer. He 
likes his job and believes he has made major contributions to the industry.14  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
                                                          
13 Tr. 75-90. 
 
14 Tr. 74, 90-92. 
 
6 
 
 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
resulted in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts 
and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or 
interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as 
whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive 
information or is it associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information;  
 
 
7 
 
 
(e) shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship 
status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(i) conduct, especially while traveling or residing outside the U.S. that may 
make the individual vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or coercion b a 
foreign person, group, government, or country. 
 
 Applicant’s wife is a citizen of Azerbaijan. She is a permanent resident of the United 
States. Her daughter and two grandchildren are citizens and residents of the United 
States. She owns property in Azerbaijan, but there was no evidence that Applicant has 
an interest in it. The evidence is insufficient to conclude that Applicant’s association with 
his wife creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion. There is insufficient evidence to conclude his connections with her 
create a potential conflict of interest. I find no disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant’s 
wife.  
 
 Applicant communicated online and later traveled to Ghana to meet people he met 
online. He was unaware of their true identity. He sent money to several people he met 
online who were from Ghana and part of a fraudulent scheme. Money was extorted from 
him while he was in Ghana. After becoming aware of the fraudulent scheme, he provided 
money to people who were involved in the scheme. AG 7(i) applies.  
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of the disqualifying 
condition, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut it or otherwise prove mitigation. The 
following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying 
security concerns based on the facts: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
Applicant was made vulnerable to exploitation, manipulation, pressure and 
coercion through his online communication with foreign nationals who were perpetrating 
 
8 
 
 
a fraud. He became involved in their schemes and provided them money. Applicant has 
ceased all contact with them. He understands the consequences of his actions. Based on 
all of the facts, I do not believe that the risk of foreign influence continues to exist. The 
above mitigating conditions apply. However, Applicant’s conduct and actions regarding 
these contacts more appropriately will be addressed under the personal conduct guideline 
and whole-person analysis.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.15 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following are 
potentially applicable: 
  
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file his 2013 Federal and state income tax return. He 
owed Federal income taxes for tax year 2013 that were not paid timely. The above 
disqualifying condition applies.  
 
                                                          
15 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
9 
 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is compliance with those arrangements.  
  
Applicant had many stressors taking place in his life from 2013 to 2015. He was 
overwhelmed with heath issues; marital issues; delinquent rental payments by his 
tenants; and job stressors. He withdrew money from his pension plan, which created tax 
consequences. He was late in obtain a filing extension. Applicant filed his delinquent 2013 
tax returns, paid his state taxes and was on a payment plan with the IRS to satisfy his tax 
liability. He recently made a lump-sum payment to resolve the outstanding balance. His 
conduct, although somewhat concerning because he was making payments to foreign 
nationals while he owed taxes, appears to be an aberration. I find the above mitigating 
conditions apply.  
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
 
10 
 
 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information;  
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual group. Such conduct includes: 
(1) engaging in activities which if known, could affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
From 2013 to 2015, Applicant sent approximately $20,000 in financial support to a 
person from Ghana he met online and believed to be a woman, but later learned was a 
man participating in a fraudulent Internet scheme. In 2015, he provided $800 to woman 
from Ghana he met online and later learned provided him false information about her 
identity and was part of a fraudulent Internet scheme. He traveled to Ghana in 2015 to 
meet a woman and get to know her. While there $3,600 was extorted from him from a 
man that was part of a fraudulent scheme. Despite later becoming aware of the fraud 
perpetrated on him, from December 2015 to February 2016, Applicant provided 
approximately $2,000 in financial support to a third woman from Ghana who he met online 
and knew was part of the scheme. Additionally, after learning of the fraud, Applicant 
provided another $75 to one of his perpetrators. Applicant became aware that the 
schemes were being conducted by an organized crime syndicate in Ghana.  
 
Applicant’s conduct raises concerns about his willingness to engage in risky activity 
without understanding the full ramifications of his actions. These activities involved 
traveling to a foreign country while holding a security clearance. Despite becoming aware 
of the criminal element, he continued to pay money to some of his perpetrators. His 
questionable judgment and actions raise concerns under the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying 
security concerns based on the facts: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to the untrustworthy, 
 
11 
 
 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate the 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and  
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, has 
ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt on upon the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations.  
 
 Applicant was going through a difficult period in his life when he began 
communicating with people online who were from Ghana. His contact with criminal 
elements in Ghana was unwitting and has ceased. He no longer communicates with 
anyone from Ghana. The issue is not his communication, but risks that he took by 
traveling there and sending money with little knowledge of who he was actually 
communicating with. He did this all while holding a security clearance. Applicant’s conduct 
is not minor or infrequent. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness or good judgment. AG ¶ 
17(g) applies. AG ¶ 17(c) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged his behavior and has taken positive steps to alleviate the 
factors that contributed to his inappropriate behavior. Although it appears Applicant has 
put this chapter of his life behind him, and his vulnerability is reduced, his repeated 
questionable judgment and decisions over several years when there were obvious 
warning signals continue to be a concern. Applicant was overwhelmed with issues in his 
life and somewhat distraught when he was making poor decisions. It is too soon to 
conclude that his life is sufficiently stable that he will not succumb to similar conduct in 
the future. Even after becoming aware of the fraudulent schemes, he continued to provide 
money to two of the perpetrators. It does not appear that Applicant’s conduct was illegal. 
However, his repeated association with unknown foreign nationals; traveling to a country 
to meet them; and providing them significant amounts of money while he had a tax liability 
at the time showed poor judgment. I find AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) have some application. 
Although there is some mitigation, I do not find it is sufficient to mitigate the personal 
conduct concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
12 
 
 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines B, E, and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 60 years old. He is a veteran and has worked in the defense industry 
since 1984. He has held a security clearance during this time. Applicant appears to be a 
nice, hard-working, honest man who was vulnerable and taken advantage of. Applicant’s 
decision-making during a period when things were not going well in his life raises 
questions about his judgment. His willingness to send money to people he did not know 
before he paid his delinquent tax debt; his risky behavior of traveling to a foreign country 
to meet people he met online; providing money to foreign people he did not know; and 
after becoming aware of their fraudulent schemes, he continued to provide money raise 
concerns about his judgment that are not mitigated. All of his conduct occurred while 
holding a security clearance. 
 
Applicant has filed his delinquent tax returns and paid his delinquent tax debt. His 
wife is a permanent resident of the United States with some financial ties to Azerbaijan, 
but her emotional ties are in the U.S. I have considered Applicant’s lack of judgment as it 
relates to the three Guidelines alleged and although individually the factual aspects may 
not be disqualifying, his lack of judgment in each is a concern. Therefore, I find the 
security concerns raised under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline B, 
foreign influence, are mitigated. However, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts about Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. 
For the reasons stated above, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the personal conduct 
security concerns under Guideline E.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
 
13 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:  For Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.c:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
