 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03904 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Leon J. Schachter, Esq. 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to timely file his federal and state income tax returns for five 
consecutive years. He failed to demonstrate good judgment, reliability, and ability to 
comply with the law. He has a problem complying with well-established government 
rules. His evidence is insufficient to establish a track record of financial responsibility. 
The financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his most recent security clearance application (SCA) on 
January 14, 2016, seeking the continuation of his clearance required for his position 
with a federal contractor. He was interviewed by a government investigator on June 14, 
2016, and answered a set of interrogatories on March 1, 2017 (GE 2). After reviewing 
the information gathered during the background investigation, the Department of 
Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 21, 2017, alleging 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant answered the 
SOR on June 23, 2017, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge from 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). 
 
 
2 
 
 
DOHA assigned the case to me on January 17, 2018, and issued a notice of 
hearing on March 9, 2018, setting the hearing for April 18, 2018. The hearing was held 
as scheduled. At the hearing, the Government offered two exhibits (GE 1 and 2). 
Applicant testified and submitted 107 pages of exhibits (AE A through RR). All exhibits 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 3, 
2018. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
At the hearing, the Government moved to amend the SOR to be in conformity 
with the evidence. Department Counsel moved to strike the phrase “at least,” and to add 
the year “2016” after 2015 on both paragraphs 1.a and 1.b. Without objections, I 
granted the motion as requested. As a grammatical correction, a comma and the word 
“and” were inserted between the years “2015, and 2016.” 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR allegations ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, and submitted comments 
and documents in mitigation. He denied, however, that his financial issues are relevant 
to his ability to protect classified information and to his eligibility for a clearance. His 
SOR admissions, and those at the hearing, are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of the record evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old information assurance manager - senior security 
manager working for a federal contractor. He graduated from high school in 1977. He 
earned an associate’s degree from a military academy in 1979, a bachelor’s degree 
from a well-known academic institution in 1982, and a master’s degree from a service 
post-graduate school in 1988. He married in 1982 and divorced in 1993. He has two 
adult children.  
 
Applicant received a Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) commission after 
completing his bachelor’s degree, and served on active duty in the Marine Corps for 
over 10 years. He was honorably discharged due to a medical condition. Applicant 
excelled during his academic and service years receiving numerous accolades, 
commendations, medals and awards (honor society and fraternity memberships and 
dean’s list). While in the service, Applicant held a top-secret clearance with access to 
sensitive compartmented information (SCI) between 1983 and 1991. He held eligibility 
for a public trust position after 2004, and a secret clearance for a period after 2007.  
 
Applicant has been employed by the same federal contractor since 2002. Except 
for the security concerns raised in the SOR, there is no evidence of any other issues of 
concern. Applicant is an accomplished professional with specialized knowledge, 
excellent performance, and dedication. He provided incident-response services and 
computer emergency services for Fortune 100 companies. Between 2007 and early 
2011, he was the IT security manager for a sensitive federal agency. In 2012, he 
 
3 
 
 
managed the security of one of the largest networks in the world, another federal 
agency. His performance evaluations indicate that Applicant “frequently exceeds 
expectations” and “far exceeds expectations” (role model performance). (AE A1 through 
A9) 
 
Applicant testified that for many years he has served in an increasingly chaotic 
and hostile customer environment, diligently accomplishing his assigned work missions. 
He currently supervises 17 employees, but in the past supervised a staff of about 40. 
He has established a solid reputation as a hard-working, honest, dedicated, trustworthy 
employee, who cares about the security of the United States. Applicant’s references 
and friends do not believe that the SOR allegations are reflective of his character, 
patriotism, and willingness and ability to protect classified information. He also has 
distinguished himself with his involvement in the community and performing volunteer 
work for numerous church and secular organizations. His references strongly 
recommended his continued eligibility for access to classified information. (AE H1 
through H4) 
 
In his response to Section 26 (Financial Record) of his 2016 SCA, Applicant 
disclosed financial problems related to state tax assessments for tax years 2007 and 
2011, his domicile determination, and incorrect withholdings by his employer for tax 
years 2007 through 2011.  
 
The record evidence established that Applicant failed to timely file his federal and 
state income tax returns for tax years 2012 through 2016. He filed federal and state 
income tax returns for tax years 2012 and 2013 in March 2017. (Tr. 95, AE J1 and J2) 
He filed federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2014, 2015, 2016, and 2017, 
the day before his hearing on April 17, 2018. (Tr. 88) 
 
Applicant testified that between 1992 and 2011, he never had any problems with 
timely filing his income tax returns. He filed the income tax returns in question late 
because of what he described were severe complications beyond his control.  
 
In 2007, Applicant moved out of his home state (H) to work and live in state (A). 
He filed federal and state A income tax returns for tax years 2007 through 2011. 
Applicant moved back to his home state (H) in 2011. In 2012, state H asked Applicant to 
file an income tax return for 2009, and he was assessed for delinquent taxes, penalties, 
and interest. Applicant appealed the tax assessment claiming that in 2009 he was a 
domiciliary of state A. In 2013, Applicant lost his appeal, and he was determined to be a 
domiciliary of state H. In 2015, state H assessed taxes against Applicant for tax year 
2011. He paid the tax year 2009 assessment in 2013, and the tax year 2011 
assessment in 2015.  
 
Applicant explained he failed to timely file his 2012 and 2013 income tax returns 
because of the assessments. He waited for his appeal to be decided before filing for tax 
years 2012 and 2013. But by the time his appeal was decided, he had other tax 
 
4 
 
 
complications that led him to delay filing his 2012 and 2013 income tax returns until 
2017.  
 
Between 2007 and 2011, Applicant’s employer made significant mistakes with 
Applicant’s state income tax withholdings, sometimes withholding taxes for the wrong 
state, or doing so in the incorrect proportions, and for the wrong periods. Applicant 
explained that he was working in an extremely challenging work environment and he 
was unable to take time from work to do his taxes. He waited until he had a break in his 
work schedule in 2015 to sort out his incorrect withholdings problem. Applicant was 
concerned about filing inaccurate tax returns and being accused of submitting false 
returns. He took the time to correct his withholdings problems before filing his 2012 and 
2013 returns. 
 
Applicant attributed his failure to timely file his 2014, 2015, and 2016 income tax 
returns to issues related to stock sales between 2014 and 2016. Applicant received 
stock awards every year from his employer since 2003. He started selling shares to pay 
for his IRS and state delinquent taxes and assessments in 2014. Applicant explained he 
had enormous difficulty establishing the cost basis because of stock-splits, company 
spin-offs, and reverse splits. Researching, gathering the information, and determining 
the accurate basis of his stock created a huge obstacle to his ability to file. He needed 
to track back how he acquired the shares to determine the tax treatment to apply to the 
sold shares. At his hearing, Applicant testified in excruciating detail about all the 
extensive work he had to go through to determine the cost basis. He believed he had a 
moral obligation to be as accurate and detailed as possible. He did not want to submit 
false tax returns. (AE CC and QQ) 
 
Applicant testified he prepared his 2014 federal income tax return in 2017. He 
averred he filed the state portion of it, but did not file the federal return because he 
believed it was wrong. It took Applicant from 2014 until two days before his hearing to 
find the error. He then filed his delinquent federal and state returns. Applicant stated 
that he has used over 270 leave hours, plus his time during the weekends, to work on 
his taxes and file his late returns. I note that in 2015, he took about a two to three-week 
vacation to Europe. 
 
In 2014, Applicant owed his state $195, and in 2015, $551. He averred the state 
owes him $111 for 2016, and $510 for 2017. He believes he will have refunds from the 
IRS for 2014, $497; for 2015, $2,500; for 2016, $4,308; and for 2017, $6,690. As of his 
hearing, the IRS had not acknowledged receipt of the delinquent tax returns. 
 
During his June 2016 interview with a government investigator, Applicant 
discussed his tax problems and provided her with a copy of his 2016 tax-filing plan. 
However, he was unable to comply with his tax-filing plan because of the complexities 
of determining the cost basis for the shares he sold. 
 
At the suggestion of his attorney, Applicant retained the services of a certified 
public accountant (CPA) to help him with his tax problems on May 18, 2017. Applicant 
 
5 
 
 
averred that the CPA told him that only Applicant could determine the cost basis of his 
shares because it required having knowledge of specific corporate events that only 
Applicant would have. The CPA offered Applicant consultation assistance, but Applicant 
was told only he could determine the cost basis of his shares. (Tr. 82-85)  
 
Applicant did not seek professional tax assistance to file his tax returns before 
May 2018, because he did not know what to ask for. (Tr. 83) When asked why he did 
not provide his tax records to a professional tax preparer and have him determine the 
cost basis and prepare the tax returns, Applicant responded that he did not understand 
the sequence of events.  
 
Applicant self-prepared his income tax returns for tax years 2012 through 2017. 
He explained that he did not file his 2012 and 2013 income tax returns until March 2017, 
because he has handling too many problems at once. (Tr. 95) He sought no 
professional assistance to determine the cost basis of the sold stock or to prepare his 
tax returns. Applicant’s decision not to use the services of a professional tax preparer 
was not because of his lack of financial assets. He had ample savings and funds to pay 
for a professional tax preparer. (Tr. 89-90, and AE K) 
 
Policies 
 
The SOR was issued under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; and DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) 
(January 2, 1992), as amended. The case will be adjudicated under the National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), applicable to all adjudicative 
decisions issued on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in SEAD 4, App. A ¶¶ 2(d) and 
2(f). All available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, must be considered.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; SEAD 4, ¶ E(4); SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 1(d) and 2(b). Clearance 
decisions are not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are 
merely an indication that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the 
Government has established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern for financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in the record. He failed to 
timely file his federal and state income tax returns for tax years 2012 through 2016. He 
filed his 2012 and 2013 income tax returns in March 2017. He filed his 2014, 2015, and 
2016 income tax returns in April 2018. He believes he is now current or is making 
payments on both his federal and state taxes. AG ¶ 19 provides a disqualifying 
condition that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(f) 
failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns or 
failure to pay . . . . income tax as required.” The record established the disqualifying 
condition, requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.  
 
7 
 
 
Six mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
  
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2013).  
 
 Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s failure to file 
his income tax returns started in 2012 and continued until 2018, when he filed his 
income tax returns for tax years 2014 through 2016. He failed to file his taxes for five 
consecutive years. Thus, his behavior was frequent. 
  
 I considered that Applicant believed he was a domiciliary of state A. He was likely 
surprised by the assessment levied on him by state H for his 2009 income tax return in 
2011. Applicant did not have the knowledge to handle his income tax returns or to 
 
8 
 
 
dispute the 2011 state’s assessment. He failed to exercise due diligence when he did 
not hire a professional tax preparer in 2012 to help him resolve his tax domicile 
problems. It appears that Applicant did not file his income tax returns for tax years 2012 
and 2013 waiting for the outcome of his appeal. The state resolved the appeal against 
Applicant in 2013, but he still failed to file his income tax returns for tax years 2012 and 
2013 until 2017. 
 
 Applicant testified that his employer’s mistakes with his state income tax 
withholdings also prevented him from timely filing his tax returns. Again, Applicant failed 
to avail himself of the assistance of a tax professional to help him resolve his 
withholdings problems. Applicant explained that he was working in an extremely 
challenging work environment and was unable to take time from work to do his taxes. 
He elected to wait until he had a break in his work schedule in 2015, to sort out his 
incorrect withholdings problem. His priorities were not in resolving his tax problems, but 
in his job. I note that in 2015, Applicant took about a two to three-week vacation to 
Europe.  
 
Applicant attributed his failure to timely file his 2014, 2015, and 2016 income tax 
returns to issues related to stock sales between 2014 and 2016. He testified he had 
enormous difficulty establishing the cost basis for the sold shares. He had to track back 
how he acquired the shares to determine the tax treatment applicable to the sold 
shares. Applicant testified in detail, and presented extensive documentation, about all 
the work he had to go through to file his tax returns. He believed he had a moral 
obligation to be as accurate and detailed as possible. He was concerned about filing 
inaccurate tax returns and being accused of submitting false income tax returns. (AE 
CC and QQ) 
 
 Notwithstanding, Applicant’s failure to timely file his federal and state income tax 
returns resulted primarily from his lack of diligence. Applicant could have complied with 
the law by filing his tax returns on time, and indicating to the IRS and his state, that he 
was concerned about the accuracy of his returns and that he would file corrected 
returns in the near future. He was negligent by failing to seek professional assistance to 
help him determine the cost basis and to timely file his income tax returns. I note that 
even after he was advised to hire a CPA to assist him with his taxes in 2018, Applicant 
elected to determine on his own his shares’ cost basis and to prepare and file his 
income tax returns. 
 
 I find Applicant failed to demonstrate financial responsibility under the 
circumstances. A reasonable person facing Applicant’s problems would have hired a tax 
professional to help him resolve all of his tax problems and to file his tax returns timely. 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
  
 Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 20(c) partially applies, but it does not fully mitigate 
the security concerns. Applicant did not seek professional tax assistance to file his tax 
returns before May 2018. He briefly consulted with a CPA at the suggestion of his 
counsel, but ultimately he did all the work to determine the cost basis and filed his own 
 
9 
 
 
tax returns. Applicant testified of his telephonic contacts with the IRS when they called 
to inquire about his delinquent tax returns. However, Applicant presented no 
documentary evidence of any contacts with the IRS until 2018, or of arrangements 
entered with the IRS to file or pay his taxes. Applicant presented evidence showing he 
filed his late income tax returns in 2018. However, his evidence does not show that the 
filed returns have been accepted by the IRS and that his tax issues are resolved.  
 
 During his 2016 interview, and at his hearing, Applicant acknowledged that he 
knew he was required to file his income tax returns yearly. During his interview, he 
stated that he mistakenly believed that because he did not owed any money, he had not 
violated the law. He promised to timely file his returns and pay his taxes in the future. 
 
 Applicant neglected his legal obligation to timely file his income tax returns during 
an extended period. “Failure to comply with federal and state tax laws suggests that an 
applicant has a problem with abiding to well-established Government rules and 
regulations. Voluntary compliance with rules and regulations is essential for protecting 
classified information.” ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). This is 
true even if the returns have been filed. See ISCR Case No. 15-03481 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Sep. 27, 2016).  
 
 Applicant received credit for his recent income tax filings and payment 
arrangements with the IRS and his state tax authorities. Because of his recent efforts, 
mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(g) is raised by the facts and it applies. Notwithstanding, in 
light of the evidence as a whole, AG ¶ 20(g) does not mitigate the financial 
consideration security concerns. 
 
 Applicant’s repeated failure to file his federal and state income tax returns in a 
timely manner does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability 
required of persons granted access to classified information. See, ISCR Case No. 14-
01894 at 5 (App. Bd. Sept. 27, 2016). In sum, Applicant failed to demonstrate financial 
responsibility. The financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(d). I have 
incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of 
these factors were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
Applicant, 59, has been employed with federal contractors since 2002, and has 
held a clearance intermittently since 1983. Because of his over 30 years holding a 
clearance, his military service, and work for federal contractors, Applicant was aware he 
was required to maintain his financial responsibility to be eligible for a clearance. He 
failed to demonstrate good judgment and reliability. His failure to timely file his tax 
 
10 
 
 
returns shows that he has a problem complying with well-established government rules. 
His evidence is insufficient to establish a track record of financial responsibility. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:      AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security interests of the United States to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
