 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 . )  ISCR Case No. 16-02940 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds 
 
 
06/11/2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under misuse of information technology 
and personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 3, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines M and E.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, (AG) effective June 8, 2017, which I applied in this case. My decision would be 
the same if the case was considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines. 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 27, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on December 4, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 12, 2018, scheduling the hearing for April 10, 2018. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which 
were admitted after Applicant offered clarifications on those documents. Applicant 
testified on his own behalf and presented 16 documents, which I marked Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AE) A through P, and admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on April 18, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b. He denied SOR allegation ¶ 1.a 
and SOR ¶-2.b. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 36-year-old project manager of a defense contractor. He has been 
employed with the defense contractor since 2017. He received his undergraduate 
degree in 2004. (AE D) He held a security clearance for ten years. He is married, and 
has one son and one daughter. (AE J; K) Applicant completed his security clearance 
application (SCA) in October 2015. (GE 1) 
 
 The SOR alleges that in violation of company policy, Applicant loaded 551 
megabytes of encrypted data onto his corporate computer system from a non-secure 
personal home network in approximately November 2014. (GE 3) When investigated, 
the uploaded data was found to contain pornographic material (GE 4). Applicant was 
terminated for the violations alleged in 1.a in or around February 2015. The SOR 
alleges that under personal conduct, 2.a, that Applicant falsified his 2015 SCA in 
response to Section 13A- Employment Activities for omitting the fact that he was 
terminated after uploading pornographic material to a government computer; and that 
under 2.b during a personal subject interview in November 2015 he provided false 
answers to an authorized investigator concerning his termination by omitting he 
uploaded pornographic material to a government computer. (GE 2) 
 
 Applicant disputed the term “corporate” computer, but acknowledged that he 
loaded encrypted data from a secure personal home network computer. In January 
2015, his hard drive was removed from the government computer for investigation. 
downloaded. He further admitted that he loaded 551 megabytes of data, but not all was 
composed of pornographic material, if any, as suggested by the allegation. (Tr. 22) He 
claims he downloaded pictures of his wedding. He downloaded some on his lunchbreak. 
He stated it is highly possible that a few “unsavory” photos could have popped up based 
on a previous subscription to a men’s digest website. He stated that sometimes when 
he followed that website, that pornographic windows and links, which were not blocked 
by DOD servers, would open up. (Answer)He said this is likely what happened, but he 
did not knowingly download 551 megabytes of pornographic material to his work 
computer. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant no longer subscribes to the above-mentioned men’s website and 
realizes that it was a foolish thing to access his personal home network from work.  He 
views his home network as secure, but he no longer access anything from his home 
network from anything outside of his personal devices. He completed a cybersecurity 
awareness course in April 2017. (AE C) 
 
 As to SOR 1.b, Applicant admitted that he was terminated. He received two 
termination letters, both dated February 4, 2015. Each letter is written by the same 
person. One letter states that the termination is involuntary without cause due to lack of 
funding. The other letter, dated February 4, 2015, states that Applicant will be 
involuntarily terminated with cause for loading pornographic material on a government 
computer. It is not signed. (AE P) 
 
 When Applicant completed his October 2015 SCA, and answered Section 13A-
Employment, he answered “Yes” he was fired due to misuse of government resources 
and also that he believed believed there were political issues. In his testimony, he 
stated that he did not intentionally falsify the SCA in this section because he believed 
that was a sufficient answer and one letter of his termination stated that he was 
terminated involuntarily without cause. In hindsight, he believes he should have added 
more information or been more specific and noted with cause. 
 
 When Applicant was interviewed in November 2015, he provided the investigator 
with the information that he knew. He noted that she was using an old SCA for the 
interview and noted that she needed to get the newest one. He stated that he was 
terminated for misuse of government computers.  
 
 Applicant submitted many awards and certificates from his years of employment 
with his former employer. (AE F) He also signed a statement of intent to not download 
unauthorized contents onto a government-owned computer. (AE B) He also submitted 
five letters of recommendation. He volunteers in the community. (AE G) 
 
     Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s 
national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Use of Information Technology 
is set out in AG ¶ 39:  
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology includes any computer-based, 
mobile, or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, 
manipulate, protect, or move information. This includes any component, 
whether integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, 
software, or firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations.  
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 40. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) unauthorized entry into any information technology system; and 
 
(e) unauthorized use of any information technology system. 
 
 
While technically none of these exactly fir the nature of the case, these are 
Both potentially applkicablle. 
 
 AG ¶ 41 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 including: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done solely in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness; 
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification to 
appropriate personnel; and 
 
(d) the misuse was due to improper or inadequate training or unclear 
instructions. 
 
I find that AG ¶ 41(a) is applicable. The behavior happened under unusual 
circumstances several years ago and it was inadvertent. Applicant has worked 
with different government agencies for over ten years and has not had any 
violations. He believed he was uploading wedding pictures, but acknowledged 
that he followed a men’s site that that sometimes pops up with unsavory pictures. 
He no longer follows that site. He took another cybersecurity course in April 
2017. He signed a statement of intent to never misuse information technology or 
download unauthorized content onto government-owned computers. He has 
mitigated the concerns. 
 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
 
6 
 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. These are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
 
7 
 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
individual may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
This includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
(2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is 
illegal in that country; 
 
(3) while in another country, engaging in any activity that, 
while legal there, is illegal in the United States; 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
  Applicant did not intentionally falsify his security clearance application in 2015. 
He listed that he was fired for misuse of government equipment. He received a letter of 
termination that stated that he was fired without cause for lack of funding .A second 
unsigned letter stated that he received another letter that spoke about the unearthing of 
pornographic material. He had no real knowledge of this. The record is murky and I do 
not find that he intentionally misled the Government.   
 
  Applicant noted in Section13A-Employment that he was fired. He believed it was 
for the misuse of his government equipment. He believed that was a sufficient answer. 
He stated that he was terminated for cause. In hindsight, he realizes that he could have 
 
8 
 
been more specific. I found his testimony credible. During his personal interview in 
2015, the agent had an old SF-86. Applicant provided her with the recent one and 
pointed out that he had been fired for misuse of government computers. He answered 
every question that the agent asked. I find that Applicant did not intentionally falsify his 
SCA or the 2015 interview. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines M and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a distinguished history of working in the defense industry and is 
respected by his employers. He performs well at his job. He is married and has two 
children. He has taken a cybersecurity course recently. He has held a security 
clearance for ten years. I found him credible in his testimony and demeanor. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the Personal Conduct security concerns and Misuse of 
Technology concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
9 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2b:   For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
