KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Once alleged debts were either admitted by Applicant or proven by record evidence,
the burden shifted to Applicant to mitigate the security concerns arising from those debts. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  As the Judge correctly found, Applicant’s bankruptcy petition only
addresses four of the alleged debts.  The mere fact that debts may no longer appear on
Applicant’s credit reports generally does not establish meaningful, independent proof of their
mitigation. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 16-00090.a2
DATE: 06/11/2018
DATE: June 11, 2018
In Re:
------------------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 16-00090
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 4, 2016, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On October 13, 2017, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Eric H. Borgstrom denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
On January 16, 2018, we remanded the case.  On March 8, 2018, the Judge issued a Remand
Decision, denying Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant again appealed pursuant
to the Directive.
Applicant raised the following issue in his latest appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse
decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm the
Judge’s Remand Decision.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant, who is 46 years old, has been working for a defense contractor since 2012.  He
has been consistently employed since 2006.  He served in the military for less than two years and
received a general discharge.  He has never been married and has a minor child.
The SOR alleges that Applicant has two Federal tax liens (one for about $64,000 and the
other for about $5,500) and 16 other delinquent debts totaling about $45,000.  He admitted the tax
liens and one other debt, and denied the remaining debts.  The two liens were filed in 2011.  In 2005,
Applicant did not have any taxes withheld from his pay and later did not have funds available to pay
the taxes.  He failed to file his income tax returns for 2006 and 2007.  No evidence was presented
that he filed the missing tax returns or corrected his Federal income tax withholdings.  Credit reports
establish the 16 other alleged debts that became delinquent between 2007 and 2014.  
In early 2017, Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy.  The bankruptcy petition includes the
two alleged tax liens and two other alleged debts.  It also lists delinquent Federal taxes totaling
almost $100,000 for 2005-2012.1  Applicant began making payments on the bankruptcy soon after
its filing.  In mid-2017, the bankruptcy plan was confirmed.  Applicant has continued to make
bankruptcy payments through a monthly automatic payroll deduction.  
Applicant attributed his financial problems to “poor tax management” and his fiancee’s
unemployment.  Decision at 3.  He provided no details about the timing of her unemployment.  No
documentary evidence was provided about his debt-resolution efforts before 2017 or about the
resolution of the 14 alleged debts not included in the bankruptcy.
1 We note that Applicant’s bankruptcy petition does not specifically list the two alleged Federal tax liens. 
The tax liability from those liens appears to be included in the listed tax debt of about $100,000 for 2005-2012.  
2
The Judge’s Analysis
Applicant’s delinquent debts total over $114,000, became delinquent between 2007 and
2014, and remain delinquent.  He presented no documentary evidence that he attempted to resolve
those debts before 2017.  While his fiancee’s unemployment was a condition beyond his control, he
failed to demonstrate that he acted responsibly under the circumstances.  There is no evidence that
he sought credit counseling.  His financial problems apparently are not under control because his
monthly bankruptcy payment exceeds his listed monthly remainder.  He filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy
and has been adhering to the bankruptcy plan for one year; however, 14 of the alleged debts remain
unaddressed.  No documentary evidence was presented of the missing Federal income tax returns. 
He has complied with the bankruptcy plan to repay delinquent Federal income taxes for 2005-2012. 
Mitigating condition 20(g) applies to the alleged tax liens.2  He has not demonstrated that he
rectified his poor decision-making.  Nor has he provided a satisfactory explanation for the delay in
addressing his delinquent debts.  
Discussion
Applicant contends the Judge erred by considering debts that were no longer valid and have
been mitigated.  He indicated that he listed in his bankruptcy petition all debts that were present on
recent credit reports from the three credit reporting agencies, and those debts are being resolved
through the bankruptcy.  We do not find Applicant’s argument persuasive.  First, because the
purported credit reports upon which the bankruptcy petition is based were not offered into evidence
and are not part of the record, Applicant’s statements regarding those credit reports constitute new
evidence that the Appeal Board cannot consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  Second, the Judge’s material
findings about the alleged debts were based on substantial evidence or constitute reasonable
inferences or conclusions that could be drawn from the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-
03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).  Once alleged debts were either admitted by Applicant or
proven by record evidence, the burden shifted to Applicant to mitigate the security concerns arising
from those debts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  As the Judge correctly found, Applicant’s bankruptcy
petition only addresses four of the alleged debts.  The mere fact that debts may no longer appear on
Applicant’s credit reports generally does not establish meaningful, independent proof of their
mitigation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03612 at 3 (Aug. 25, 2015).  Debts may fall off credit
reports merely due to the passage of time.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 6 (App. Bd. Oct.
26. 2006).  We find no reason to disturb the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant failed to demonstrate
that he was responsibly addressing the alleged debts not listed in his bankruptcy petition. 
Applicant also contends that the Judge erred in concluding he provided no documentary
evidence of filing his income tax returns for 2006 and 2007.  He argues that all of his past tax returns
had to be filed for the tax debts to be listed in his bankruptcy petition.  We note, however, that 11
U.S. Code § 1308 provides that debtors petitioning for Chapter 13 bankruptcy are only required to
file tax returns for tax periods within four years of the bankruptcy filing.  Applicant has not
2 Directive, Encl. 2, App A ¶ 20(g) states, “the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those arrangements.”
3
established that the Judge erred in concluding Applicant failed to establish that he filed his Federal
income tax returns for 2006 and 2007.  
Applicant further contends that the Judge did not consider that his tax liability is being
resolved through this bankruptcy.   We find this contention has no merit.  The Judge found that
Applicant’s tax debt was listed in his bankruptcy petition and concluded that mitigating condition
20(g) applied to the tax debts.  
Additionally, Applicant argues the Judge erred in concluding that he sought no credit
counseling because all debtors must undergo such counseling to file Chapter 13 bankruptcy.  We
note that Applicant checked a block in his bankruptcy petition indicating that he had received a
briefing from an approved credit counseling agency, but did not have a certificate of completion. 
The checked block also reflected that he was required to file a copy of the certificate of completion
within 14 days of the bankruptcy filing.  Applicant Exhibit (AE) C.  Furthermore, he argues that
Judge erred in concluding he presented no evidence of correcting his tax withholdings by pointing
to his pay statement in the record that showed his tax withholdings had been corrected.  One
company pay summary for an unspecific period in 2018 reflected that he earned a total of about
$7,450 and paid about $950 and $315, respectively, in Federal and state income taxes.  AE D.   Even
if the Judge erred in concluding Applicant sought no financial counseling and failed to correct his
tax withholdings, such errors were harmless because they likely did not affect the outcome of the
case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 11-15184 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2013).  In this regard, we note the
Judge’s adverse decision is largely based on Applicant’s delay in addressing his financial problems
and in his failure to demonstrate that he has taken responsible action to resolve the alleged debts not
listed in the bankruptcy petition.  The Judge did not err in his overall conclusion that Applicant
failed to mitigate the alleged security concerns.  
Applicant’s appeal brief fails to establish the Judge committed any harmful error.  The Judge
examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The
decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only
when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national
security.”
4
Order
The Decision AFFIRMED.    
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
