 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01932 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant incurred more than $293,000 in delinquent debt over the past 20 years, 
most of which she has been unable or unwilling to repay. Resulting security concerns 
were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the testimony, pleadings and exhibits, 
national security eligibility is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On November 13, 2015, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 12, 2016, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on December 29, 2016 (Answer), and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) assigned the case to me on April 24, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing on July 10, 2017, setting the hearing for July 25, 2017. On that date, 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified but offered no documents 
into evidence. I granted Applicant’s request to leave the record open until August 25, 
2017, to permit submission of additional evidence. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on August 1, 2017. On August 23, 2017, Applicant submitted an exhibit 
containing five documents, which was marked Applicant Exhibit (AE) A and admitted 
without objection.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented new adjudicative 
guidelines that came into effect on June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
determinations issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as promulgated in 
Appendix A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the 
new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. This decision is issued 
pursuant to, and cites, the new AG; but my decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is employed as a receptionist by a U.S. defense contractor, and is 
applying for a security clearance in connection with that work. She admitted the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.f. She denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.d, 
and 1.e. (Answer.) Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in the findings below.  
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. She and her ex-husband divorced in 2010, after 20 
years of marriage. They have four adult children. She incurred substantial student loan 
debts while attending classes to become certified in court reporting from 1993 to 1998. 
She worked, part time, as a self-employed court reporter from 1998 until 2012. She has 
no military or Federal government service, and this is her first application for a security 
clearance. She has worked in her current position, as a subcontractor and direct 
employee, since October 2012. (GE 1; Tr. 30-33.)  
 
 As alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) entered a tax 
lien against Applicant in 2015 for an amount in excess of $235,000. That this debt 
remains unpaid is not disputed. Applicant explained that the lien arose from about six 
years’ worth of delinquent taxes that she and her ex-husband, a self-employed 
commercial fisherman, failed to pay during the late 1990s and early 2000s. She claimed 
that they had entered into an offer in compromise (OIC) agreement with the IRS 
sometime in 2007. The agreement required a lump-sum payment of some $30,000 to 
 
 
 
 
3 
$50,000, which they made, and that they timely file Federal returns and pay their taxes 
for the succeeding five years. Applicant provided a letter from her Certified Public 
Accountant (CPA) stating that she had promptly filed and paid her Federal taxes since 
she became his client in 2009. However, she claimed that her ex-husband had not 
complied with the OIC requirements to timely file and pay his taxes during those years, 
thereby defaulting on the OIC agreement and causing the IRS to file the lien in 2015. 
She provided no documentation corroborating that the OIC existed, or supporting her 
assertion that the IRS does not hold her responsible for this marital debt despite having 
filed the tax lien against her and confiscated her subsequent refunds. After researching 
the issue, her CPA provided the following advice to her on December 1, 2015:  
 
I don’t believe you can do much with the IRS, since you were married for 
the years the taxes are due. I believe you have recourse against [ex-
husband]. You should consult an attorney and proceed from there. One 
other thought was that you could write a letter to the IRS stating the facts 
that you have filed and paid all the required returns and that at the time of 
your divorce the back taxes were covered under a current OIC. And since 
that time, due to his negligence/non filing the OIC has been rejected. This 
might keep them from coming after you to collect the liens.    
  
Applicant offered no evidence that she either sought recourse against her ex-husband 
or corresponded with the IRS concerning the tax lien, as advised by her CPA. The lien 
remains on file and in effect, and since 2014, the IRS has been confiscating her annual 
income tax refunds to apply toward this tax debt. She reduced her tax withholding for 
2016 to reduce her annual forfeited refund to around $300, from around $1,200 each for 
the 2014 and 2015 tax years. This substantial Federal income tax debt remains 
unresolved. (GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; AE A; Tr. 24-28, 40-47, 49-50.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c allege two delinquent Federal student loan accounts, which 
total more than $58,000 and have been placed for collection. Applicant admitted these 
allegations, and said she entered into the loans to pay for her court-reporter schooling in 
the 1990s. The original loan amounts totaled $54,701. Applicant testified that she had 
contacted the collection agent by telephone and the loans were placed in forbearance 
until sometime in early 2018. However, she also testified that her last payment toward 
these loans had been in 2007. This would preclude her having completed rehabilitation 
of those loans from their defaulted status, as required to obtain deferment or 
forbearance of required payments. In the absence of any documentary evidence 
supporting her claim that the loans are no longer in default, her explanation lacks 
credibility. These significant Federal debts remain unresolved. (GE 2; GE 4; GE 6; Tr. 
29, 35-38.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e allege two delinquent credit card accounts, which Applicant 
denied on the basis that she had paid them. Record evidence supports her claim that 
she repaid the $397 account (¶ 1.d) in February 2016 after it had been charged off by 
 
 
 
 
4 
the creditor.1 However, all record documentary evidence contradicts Applicant’s claim to 
have repaid the delinquent $337 credit card account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. This account 
remains unresolved, and Applicant did not provide post-hearing evidence concerning its 
status as she said she would. (GE 2; GE 4; GE 6; Tr. 38-39; 50; AE A.) 
  
 Applicant admitted that in 2007 she fraudulently opened a credit card account 
and incurred about $5,000 in charges under her former father-in-law’s name, as alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.f. She said that she did this because her ex-husband became upset and 
took control of their marital funds when she told him she wanted a divorce, and she 
needed the credit to feed their children. After being confronted by a police officer 
investigating the matter, she agreed to repay her in-laws the $5,000 and no formal 
criminal charges were filed against her. She said that she would get a statement from 
her former in-laws confirming that they had been repaid, but did not submit such 
evidence. (GE 1; GE 6; Tr. 28-30, 39-40; AE A.)  
 
  Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling, other than working with 
her CPA to file her post-2008 income tax returns. She submitted no budget documents 
or other evidence from which to meaningfully evaluate her current or future solvency. 
She submitted an August 2017 Transunion credit report showing three open credit card 
accounts in good standing and no delinquencies; however, her unresolved accounts 
discussed above were all reflected on Equifax and/or Experian credit reports. (AE A; GE 
2; GE 4.)   
 
 Applicant submitted good-character letters from two friends who have known her 
well for many years. Each writer described her high opinions of Applicant’s character, 
integrity, reliability, trustworthiness, motivation, and ability to properly deal with sensitive 
information. (AE A.) Applicant’s testimony and demeanor during her hearing were 
sincere, open, and forthright.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
                                            
1 Applicant told the investigator, during her January 27, 2016 subject interview, that she could not recall 
any specifics regarding this account, but would investigate and pay any delinquent amount. She opened 
the account in December 2012, had exceeded the $300 account limit, and had last made a payment 
toward the delinquent balance in July 2014. (GE 2; GE 4; GE 6.) 
 
 
 
 
5 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 establishes that an “applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has 
the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
 
 
 
 
6 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes five conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, filing deceptive loan statements and other 
intentional financial breaches of trust; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant has been employed in her current position since October 2012. She 
failed to document payments toward more than $293,000 in delinquent debts she owes 
to the Federal government for unpaid income taxes and student loans. She recently 
repaid one charged-off $397 credit card debt. However, she failed to provide the 
documentation she said would corroborate her claims to have repaid more than $5,300 
in other credit card debt, most of which she incurred by committing identity fraud. 
Applicant’s serious financial issues date back over the past 20 years, and largely 
continue without an evident prospect of resolution. These facts establish prima facie 
support for the foregoing disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to 
mitigate those concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes six conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
7 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant continues to owe more than $293,000 in unpaid Federal income tax 
and student loan debt, which she cannot afford to pay. Her credit card fraud occurred 
under unique circumstances involving her separation and divorce, and she is unlikely to 
resort to such behavior again. Only those concerns arising under SOR ¶ 1.f were 
mitigated under AG ¶ 20(a). 
 
Most of Applicant’s delinquent debt arose before her divorce, which was not a 
condition largely beyond her control since she initiated it. She failed to demonstrate 
responsible action to resolve either her income tax or her student loan delinquencies 
during the past six years of employment in her current position. Her only payments 
toward the large tax lien have been involuntary forfeitures of subsequent refunds, which 
she has taken steps to minimize in the future. Accordingly, she failed to establish 
mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(b) or (g).  
 
Applicant repaid the credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d in February 2016, 
which remains part of her history of financial issues, but standing alone was 
substantially mitigated under AG ¶ 20(d). She provided no evidence of financial 
counseling, to indicate that her significant Federal indebtedness is being resolved, or to 
substantiate a reasonable basis to dispute her responsibility for her remaining 
delinquent debts. Accordingly, mitigation was not established under AG ¶¶ 20 (c) or (e). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for her choices that resulted in substantial debt that she has been 
unable or unwilling to repay. She continues to owe more than $293,000 in delinquent 
debt that she accumulated and failed to resolve over the past twenty years. Her friends 
provided strong character references. However, there is insufficient evidence of 
rehabilitation or compliance with debt-resolution agreements. The potential for pressure, 
exploitation, or duress remains undiminished. Overall, the evidence creates significant 
doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
                                        
         
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
