 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 16-01640   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sean M. Bigley, Attorney At law, Bigley Ranish, LLP 
 
 
June 11, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On April 10, 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On September 30, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DoD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 The Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 20, 2016, and requested 
a hearing before an Administrative Judge.  DOHA received the request on January 4, 
2018, and the case was assigned to the undersigned Administrative Judge that same 
day.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 12, 2018, scheduling the hearing for 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
February 8, 2018.  At the hearing the Government presented seven exhibits, referred to 
as Government Exhibits 1 through 7, which were admitted without objection.  The 
Applicant presented five exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through E, which 
were admitted without objection.  He also testified on his own behalf.  DOHA received 
the transcript of the hearing (TR) on February 20, 2018.  Based upon a review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.   
  
 The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implements new adjudicative 
guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions issued on or 
after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented by SEAD 4. I considered the previous 
adjudicative guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new AG, effective 
June 8, 2017, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would 
be the same under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to 
the new AG. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 41 years old and is unmarried.  He holds the position of Field 
Technician.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his 
employment.    
 
Guideline G – Alcohol Consumption 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because his 
excessive use of alcohol led to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and raised questions about his reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information.  
 
 Applicant began consuming alcohol between the ages of 15 and 17.  Although he 
did not like the taste, he consumed it anyway.  By the age of 21, he started going out 
with friends to drink at social settings, and occasionally at bars.  As time passed, his 
alcohol consumption increased.  In November 1997, he moved to Las Vegas where he 
lived until May 1998, and consumed alcohol about two to three times a month.  In May 
1998, he then moved back to California where he has worked for various government 
contractors in various capacities on a military base.  Applicant has been working on 
base for his current employer since 2015.     
 
 Over the past eight years, as a result of his abusive drinking, Applicant has been 
arrested on three separate occasions, twice for Driving Under the Influence (DUI) and 
 
 
3 
 
 
once on a Domestic Violence charge.  His first arrest for DUI occurred in January 2010.  
Applicant explained that he drove some friends to a bar for drinks.  While at the bar, 
Applicant consumed about three beers and a shot or two of whiskey.  After four or five 
hours, and after drinking a couple glasses of water, Applicant felt slightly “buzzed,” but 
believed that he could drive.  Applicant was subsequently pulled over by the police, 
arrested, and taken to jail.  He only spent enough time in jail in order to allow the officer 
to do his paperwork, and was released.  Applicant was charged with (1) Driving Under 
the Influence of Alcohol, and (2) Driving While Having a BAC of .08% or higher.  The 
charge was reduced to a wet and reckless.  Applicant was placed on two years 
probation, was ordered to refrain from consuming alcohol for six months, and ordered to 
attend three months of alcohol/drug counseling.  Applicant continued to consume 
alcohol. 
     In August 2014, Applicant got into an altercation with his girlfriend at home.  
He left his residence, went to a bar, and started drinking.  Applicant states that at the 
bar, he consumed six beers and possibly a shot of liqueur over a period of five or six 
hours.  Again, he felt slightly “buzzed” before he drove that evening.  Applicant then 
drove to another get-together with people he did not really know.  There he drank at 
least six more beers and a couple more shots of liqueur.  Applicant was very upset that 
evening, as he had just learned that his grandmother was diagnosed with cancer.  
Applicant explained that by consuming alcohol, it helped him deal with the pain.  
Applicant stated that he remembers having his keys and getting into the car to drive.  
He started the car, drove, and then blacked out.  (Tr. p. 74.)  His next memory was 
when he came to, he learned that he ran off a curb and the car’s airbag was deployed.  
Applicant had also totaled the car.  He was charged with (1) Driving Under the Influence 
of Alcohol, (2) Driving While Having a .08% or Higher BAC, and (3) Hit and Run Driving.  
Applicant was arrested and taken to jail.  He was placed on 3 years probation, was 
ordered to refrain from drinking for three years, and ordered to stay out of bars and 
liquor stores.  This time, he was sentenced to 90 days in jail, but was granted alternative 
sentencing requiring him to wear an ankle monitor for about 26 days.  He was required 
to pay restitution of $1,885, and ordered to complete an 18 month DUI program.  
Applicant was also required to have a Breathalyzer blow machine installed in his vehicle 
to remain until October 2017.  Applicant was on probation at the time the SOR in this 
matter was issued.  The hit and run charge was dismissed.  Applicant stated that, at that 
time, he had no future intent to use alcohol, yet he continued to drink.  (Tr. p. 77.)              
 
 In March 2015, Applicant was charged with Corporal Injury to 
Spouse/Cohabitant/Child’s Parent, a felony.  Applicant explained that he and his 
girlfriend had dinner at home that evening and then took a taxi to a bar for drinks.  While 
at the bar, Applicant consumed a couple of beers.  They both left and then went to 
another bar to drink more.  Applicant drank a few more beers.  Applicant saw that his 
girlfriend was flirting with another guy, and he and his girlfriend left the bar and went 
home.  At home, they started a verbal argument and then a physical altercation ensued.  
At some point, Applicant’s girlfriend fell to the floor, and he fell on top of her.  Applicant 
stated that he held her down to prevent her from hitting him.  When he let her up, she 
called the police and went to the backyard.  Applicant was arrested, and a five-day 
 
 
4 
 
 
temporary restraining order was imposed.  Following the arrest, Applicant tried to 
reconcile with his girlfriend and attended couple counseling with her from May through 
July 2015.  In August 2015, Applicant pled no contest to a misdemeanor domestic 
violence charge.  Applicant stated that it was at this point that he finally realized that the 
environment was not a good one for him and so he ended the relationship.  On 
February 6, 2018, just days before the hearing in the matter, Applicant motioned in court 
for an early termination of probation.  The order was granted.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E.)     
  
 Applicant states that since this last arrest, besides completing all of the court 
requirements, he has voluntarily attended some Alcoholic Anonymous meetings.  (Tr. p. 
116.)  He has also gone to a few counseling sessions.  He claims that he has 
completely abstained from alcohol since August 2015.    
 
 Testimony was obtained from a close friend and past base co-worker, who is 
also a retired police officer. The witness knows Applicant’s girlfriend and has witnessed 
her erratic behavior. He described another incident that occurred sometime after the 
2014 incident, which resulted in another verbal altercation over jealousy, not discussed 
in the SOR.  He further testified that in his opinion, the relationship between the 
Applicant and his girlfriend was not healthy.  He does not believe that Applicant has 
ever had a drinking problem.  He allows the Applicant around his children, and has 
never witnessed alcohol abuse on the part of the Applicant.  Furthermore, he does not 
believe Applicant has a drinking problem because he had a breathalyzer in his vehicle 
for almost three years.  (Tr. pp. 23-64.)      
 
 Letters of recommendation from Applicant’s Facility Security Officer on base, his 
mother, his couples’ counseling instructor, and the girlfriend with whom he had these 
problems, attest to the fact that Applicant is a responsible individual.  From his 
company, he is said to be a valuable asset to the mission; from his mother, he is 
described as becoming more mature and has grown from his mistakes; from his 
girlfriend, he is said to be innocent of any domestic violence charges and that she alone 
was the aggressor and lied to the police because she was intoxicated and on drugs; 
and from his attorney, Applicant is said to have successfully followed every order of the 
court including completion of Batterers Treatment, and continues to be a productive 
member of society.  Each of these individuals is of the general opinion that Applicant is 
trustworthy, honest, and forthcoming.  (Applicant’s Exhibits A, B, C, and D.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an 
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The disqualifying conditions raised by the evidence are: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; and     
  
 (g) failure to follow any court order regarding alcohol education, evaluation, 
treatment, or abstinence. 
 
 Applicant was convicted of Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol in 2010, and 
again in 2014.  He was also convicted of Domestic Violence in 2015, where alcohol was 
a contributing factor.  These incidents raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 22(a), 22(b), 
and 22(c).   
 
AG ¶ 23 provides conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security 
concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations;  
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s three alcohol-related incidents are spread over recent years.   
Admittedly, he has completed all of the court’s sentencing requirements, and he states 
that he no longer consumes alcohol.  He further states that he no longer has a 
relationship with the woman who contributed to his excessive drinking.  These are all 
positive things to assist him in maintaining sobriety.  However, given the long period of 
time that he has abused alcohol, and the fact that he has only recently begun to change 
his life to address the issue, more time in sobriety is necessary to show that he can 
control his life without alcohol and that he will not return to his old ways.  Had his 
attorney not filed the motion for early termination, Applicant would still remain on 
probation for the domestic violence offense.  Furthermore, no real prognosis of 
Applicant’s alcohol problem was ever offered into evidence.  Applicant failed to meet his 
burden to mitigate the alcohol-related concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline G in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s history of alcohol 
consumption shows that it has been a regular and habitual part of his life since a 
teenager.  Alcohol has not only caused him many legal problems, but has caused 
problems with his relationships.  He has completed the court-ordered alcohol classes.  
He states that he has stopped drinking and has been sober since August 2015, about 
two and a half years.  Applicant is commended for this effort and encouraged to 
continue a sober life style, in order to become eligible for access to classified 
information sometime in the future.  However, at this point, he has failed to present 
enough evidence of rehabilitation to overcome his heavy burden to mitigate his alcohol 
abuse. Applicant has a recent history of multiple criminal arrests and convictions that 
 
 
8 
 
 
include two DUI’s and one arrest for Domestic Violence. These offenses give rise to 
concerns about Applicant’s judgment and reliability, both because of the nature of the 
offenses and the quantity of criminal offenses.   
 
 Overall, the record evidence raises doubts about Applicant’s suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
