 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02965 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s financial 
problems were caused by four years of underemployment rather than irresponsible or 
reckless behavior. Now working full time, she is in a position to repay her creditors. 
Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 7, 2016, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to a Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) administrative judge for a determination whether to 
revoke her security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry, 
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended 
(Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information, 
implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. At the hearing, 
convened on January 10, 2018, I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, 
without objection. After the hearing, Applicant timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) 
A through C, without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on January 19, 2018.   
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Implementation of Revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Request for a Continuance 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant requested a continuance for additional time to resolve 
her delinquent accounts because of a change in her employment status. I denied the 
request, but left the record open for 60 days to allow Applicant to submit additional 
documentation regarding her finances.2  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 25, has worked as a security guard for a federal contractor since 2015. 
She completed a security clearance application, her first, in June 2015. The ensuing 
investigation revealed and the SOR alleges that Applicant is indebted to three creditors 
for approximately $14,000. The largest debt, $13,505, is for a vehicle repossession. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a). The two other debts are related to a cell phone account ($466, SOR ¶ 1.b), 
and a medical debt ($100, SOR ¶ 1.c).3  
 
 After completing Job Corps in September 2012, Applicant began working two full 
time jobs as a certified nursing assistant (CNA). She worked at a nursing agency and at 
a nursing home, earning approximately $3,900 per month. In 2014, the nursing agency 
lost the contract on which Applicant worked. Because the agency did not have another 
position available for Applicant, she lost her job. Her income decreased by more than 
50% to $1,860 per month. Unable to replace the income from the contract job, Applicant 
became increasingly concerned about being able to pay her bills and decided to 
voluntarily surrender her car to the creditor in October 2014. She purchased the car new 
in April 2013 for $21,000. The creditor sold it at auction for $800.4 
                                                          
2 Tr. 9-11. 
 
3 GE 1, 4.  
 
4 Tr. 18-20, 33-34, 43-45; GE 1. 
 
3 
 
  In March 2015, Applicant was hired by her current employer, earning $14 per 
hour, and her finances improved. After being granted an interim security clearance, 
Applicant was moved to a secured site and received a pay increase to $16.50 per hour. 
Then earning over $2,600 per month, Applicant was confident she would be able to live 
within her means, and moved into her own apartment in the summer of 2016. However, 
when the SOR was issued in November 2016, Applicant was removed from the secured 
site and placed on unpaid leave from November 2016 to January 2017.5 
 
 After being placed on unpaid leave, Applicant returned to working as a CNA, but 
could only find part time employment. She worked 16 hours per week, earning $12.50 
per hour, or $800 per month. In January 2017, her employer found a one-month, part-
time position at an unsecured site. Applicant worked two days per week earning $15 per 
hour. In January 2017, Applicant earned approximately $1,760. When that assignment 
ended, Applicant continued working the CNA job, picking up extra hours as they 
became available. In May 2017, her employer found another short-term, part-time 
assignment for Applicant, working four days per week at $15 per hour. Between May 
and November 2017, Applicant earned $2,720 per month, working both jobs. After 
scouring her employer’s available openings, Applicant secured a permanent, full-time 
positon at an unsecured site, earning $20 per hour.6  
  
When Applicant returned to full-time employment, she contacted the creditor 
about the deficiency balance from the vehicle repossession. She was informed that the 
debt had been sold to another creditor. Applicant called that creditor and set up a 
payment plan in January 2018 for $100 per month. She provided evidence of the first 
payment, but could not secure a letter from the creditor memorializing the payment 
agreement. The delinquent cellphone account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b occurred when 
Applicant switched from one carrier to another under a promotion where the new carrier 
promised to pay the remaining contract fees to the old carrier. Applicant contacted the 
creditor in 2014 and settled the account, but she no longer has documentation of her 
payment. Applicant cannot identify the source of the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
At the time the debt was incurred, she had Medicaid, which did not have copayments for 
medical service. The debt remains unresolved.7  
 
Between November 2016, when she was placed on unpaid leave, and January 
2018, when she returned to full-time employment, Applicant managed to pay her rent, 
car payment, and recurring bills on time. Her family provided some financial support to 
help her stay current with her financial obligations. She did not incur any delinquent 
debts. When her lease expired in November 2017, she moved in with her mother to 
reduce her financial obligations. Since the October 2014 voluntary repossession, 
Applicant has purchased three cars, each less expensive than the previous one. In 
October 2017, she purchased a used car for $14,000 with a $308 monthly payment. 
Now that she is working full time, she has the means to resolve the deficiency balance 
                                                          
5 Tr. 25-29, 20-22, 57-58.  
 
6 Tr. 22-26.  
 
7 Tr. 35-41, 45-49; GE 2; AE A-C. 
 
4 
 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and she intends to do so. She currently has $800 in disposable 
income each month.8  
 
According to the credit reports in the record, Applicant’s credit history is two 
years and seven months. She has three trade lines reported on the report, only two are 
active, and both are current. Applicant does not have credit cards. At the hearing, 
Applicant detailed her efforts to live within her means and to avoid the stress caused by 
having financial obligations she cannot afford to pay.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
8 Tr. 26, 19-33, 49-51, 59-63; GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. 22, 24-35, 41-42; GE 2.   
 
5 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Failure to meet one’s financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified 
or sensitive information.10 The record is sufficient to establish the government’s prima 
facie case that Applicant has a history of not meeting financial obligations and that she 
had an inability to do so. However, she has provided sufficient information to mitigate 
the alleged concerns.11  
 
Applicant financial problems were caused by events beyond her control, a 
combination of unemployment and underemployment between 2014 and January 2018. 
Applicant’s income decreased from $3,900 per month in 2012, to $800 at its lowest 
point in November 2016. However, she acted responsibly in light of her circumstances. 
In 2014, when she first experienced more than a 50% decrease in income and realized 
she could no longer afford her car, she surrendered her 18-month-old car to the 
creditor. Although she could not afford to make payments on her delinquent accounts 
between 2014 and 2018, she proactively reduced her expenses so that she would not 
incur additional delinquent debt. She moved home with her mother, eliminating her 
housing expense. She has secured reliable and less expensive transportation. Since 
returning to full-time employment in January 2018, she has initiated contact with her 
largest creditor to establish a payment plan and has made a payment under the terms 
of the agreement. Although the status of the cell phone account and the medical bill are 
unresolved, the amounts are small and an unlikely source of exploitation or 
vulnerability.12  
 
Based on a consideration of the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s ability 
to properly handle and safeguard classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I 
have also considered the whole-person factors detailed in AG ¶ 2(d). The record shows 
that Applicant has a favorable, albeit limited financial history. Applicant has a history of 
paying her creditors and living within her means. Her attitude toward maintaining her 
                                                          
10 AG ¶ 18. 
 
11 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
12  AG ¶¶ 20(b) and (d). 
 
6 
 
personal finances indicates that she is unlikely to engage in fiscally irresponsible 
behavior. In considering this favorable information, I find Applicant’s assurances that 
she will pay her delinquent debt credible. Ultimately, the record shows that Applicant 
has not engaged in any conduct that suggests an inability to properly handle and 
safeguard classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
