 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-02841 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
06/08/2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case alleges security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 15, 2016, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines F and E.1 The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 10, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on December 4, 2017. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on January 
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was considered 
under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
12, 2018, scheduling the hearing for February 13, 2018. The hearing was convened as 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf. He did not present any documents. I held the record 
open until March 6, 2018. Applicant presented a packet of documents, which I marked 
Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A . DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 
21, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, age 46, is married and has a daughter. He obtained his undergraduate 
degree in 1994 and his graduate degree in 2002. He has been employed with his current 
employer since March 2012. Applicant completed his security clearance application on 
December 11, 2014. He has held a security clearance since 1997. (GE 1) 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has significant delinquent debt in the amount of 
$129,000. The debts include student loans, a state tax lien, and four judgments. Applicant 
admitted all the allegations, with the exception of 1.g and 1.h, under financial concerns. 
He admitted both allegations 2.a and 2.b under personal conduct concerns. He provided 
explanations for each allegation. 
 
Applicant acknowledged his financial hardship. He takes responsibility, but 
attributes it to helping various family members and unemployment. Applicant cared for 
his 95-year-old grandmother before she entered a facility and he also cared for his 
mother. He is an only child and the financial costs for their care exacerbated any financial 
problems he already had. He was unemployed from 2011 until 2012. (Tr. 26). In 2014, he 
defaulted on a rental property due to a tenant’s nonpayment. (Tr. 22) He tried to refinance 
his mortgages but was not successful. Eventually they went to foreclosure. 
 
As to SOR 1.a, a mortgage account past due in the amount of $7,286, with a 
balance of $201,565, this was a rental property. Applicant stopped paying the mortgage 
in 2016. He stated that a tenant ruined the property and Applicant spent about $20,000 
to repair the damages. In the end, the bank assumed the property. (Tr. 35) Applicant 
claimed that he does not owe any deficiency. He did not provide a 1099-C as a post-
hearing submission. 
 
As to SOR 1.c., an amount past due in the amount of $13,693 with a balance of 
$31,744, this is a home equity loan on Applicant’s primary residence. He stated that this 
second mortgage was discharged and that he would provide a 1099-C. However, he 
provided a form 1098 – mortgage interest statement for his primary residence from 2016.  
 
As to SOR 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f, these are student loan accounts which total about 
$47,000. Applicant had a deferment according to an older credit report. He stated that he 
has consolidated the student loans. (Tr. 44) When he completed his graduate degree, he 
did not earn the salary that he thought he would. He believes he has made about $8,000 
in payments. However, he provided no post-hearing documentation. He noted that he did 
make a few monthly payments of $250, but he stopped in 2017. There is no other 
information in the record. (Tr. 45) 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant denied SOR 1.g and 1.h in his answer. However, he presented no 
information that the accounts were paid or disputed. 
 
SOR 1.i is a 2015 state tax lien in the amount of $2,122. There is no documentation 
that the lien has been satisfied. Applicant stated that his tax refunds have gone to pay the 
lien, but that he still owes some money (about $900) and that he intends to pay the 
remainder. He did not provide any documentation to support his assertion.  
 
SOR 1.j, 1.k, 1.l, and 1.m are judgments from delinquent Home Owner Association 
fees (HOA). Applicant produced documentation that he paid all accounts and the 
judgments appear as satisfied on his credit report. He also presented post-hearing 
documentation to prove payments. (AE A) 
 
Applicant earns about $130,000 a year. His wife is a nurse who earns about 
$60,000 a year. Their daughter attends private school, which is about $1,400 a month. 
Applicant’s car note is paid. He states that he has no credit card debt, but his wife does. 
He stated that he lives paycheck to paycheck. He did not provide a written budget nor did 
he report any financial counseling. (Tr. 67) 
 
When Applicant completed his 2014 SCA, he answered “No” to Section 26 
concerning judgments or liens in the past seven years. He also answered “No” to Section 
26 concerning bills or debts turned over to collection accounts.  
 
Applicant admitted that he falsified his 2014 SCA, in his answer, but in his 
testimony at the hearing, he was adamant that he was not trying to defraud the 
Government. He stated that he copied and pasted from an old SCA. He stated during his 
summary interview that he was not aware of the judgments and that his student loans 
were consolidated and had been deferred. At the time, it appears that was true. He also 
denied knowing anything about the status of the mortgages. 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
 
4 
 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires, “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14, requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information. Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO  10865, “Any 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds . . . .  
 
 
5 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”), and 
AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
 The security concerns raised in the SOR may be mitigated by any of the following 
potentially applicable factors: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s debts are long-standing and his student loans are from years ago. AG 
¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts remain unresolved. 
 
AG ¶ 20(b) is not established. While Applicant’s unemployment was a condition 
beyond his control, he has not acted responsibly to address the resulting debts.  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not established. Applicant did not receive any financial 
counseling nor are there clear indications that his financial situation is under control. He  
made intermittent payments and claimed that his first and second mortgages have no 
deficiency, he provided no documentation to support the claim. He has not provided 
information that he is paying his student loans. His judgments are satisfied. His current 
ability to pay his delinquent debts is in doubt as he stated that he lives paycheck to 
paycheck. His financial problems are not under control.  
 
 
6 
 
Applicant failed to meet his burden to mitigate the financial concerns set out in the 
SOR. For these reasons, I find SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. against Applicant. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
Based on Applicant’s alleged deliberate falsification of his SCA, the following 
disqualifying condition could apply: 
 
AG ¶ 16 (a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant admitted that he falsified his 2014 SCA, in his answer, but in his remarks 
at the hearing, he was adamant that he was not trying to defraud the Government.  He 
stated that he copied and pasted from an old SCA. He stated during his summary 
interview that he was not aware of the judgments and stated that his student loans were 
consolidated. At the time it appears that was true. He also denied knowing anything about 
the mortgages. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.2 An applicant’s level of education 
                                                          
2 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). 
 
 
7 
 
and business experience are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant 
information on an SCA was deliberate.3  
 
In this instance, it is clear from Applicant’s comments that he was not aware of 
some of his delinquent debts, and was relying on the deferment or consolidation of 
student loans. He should have disclosed the delinquent debts he had knowledge of on 
his SCA. However, I find insubstantial evidence of an intent by Applicant to intentionally 
omit, conceal, or falsify facts from and on his SCA. Therefore, AG ¶ 16(a) is not 
established. 
 
 Applicant made prompt or good-faith efforts to correct his falsification or 
concealment. He provided information that indicates he copied from an old SCA in 
completing his 2014 SCA. Applicant was credible and has shown that similar lapses in 
judgment are unlikely to recur. He provided sufficient information in this record to 
demonstrate that he has met his burden of proof for his personal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether the granting or continuing 
of national security eligibility is clearly consistent with the interests of national security 
must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
applicable guidelines, each of which is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person. 
An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG 
¶ 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis, and I have considered the factors in AG ¶ 2(d). After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in 
the context of the whole person, including his years of holding a security clearance, I 
conclude that Applicant did not deliberately falsify his SCA, but he has not mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his financial indebtedness. Accordingly, Applicant has not 
carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.i: Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.j – 1.m:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct): FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b: For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
