 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-03639 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to 
mitigate concerns related to his history of illegal drug use and criminal conduct. He also 
intentionally falsified his 2006 security clearance application. Applicant’s continued 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 2, 2017, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the drug involvement and substance misuse, personal conduct, 
and criminal conduct guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance and 
recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination 
whether to deny his security clearance.  
 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on April 11, 2017. A complete copy of the file of 
relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. He received the 
FORM on April 18, 2017, He did not respond. The documents appended to the FORM 
are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, without objection.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued the Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded the AG implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
applied them in this case. 
 
Findings of Fact 
  
 Applicant, 36, has worked for his employer, a federal contractor, since 
September 2001. He started as an apprentice and has been promoted to an area 
manager position. Applicant applied for a security clearance in March 2006, disclosing 
monthly marijuana use from October 1998 to September 2001. He was granted access 
to classified information in June 2006.3 
 
 In the years following his 2006 security clearance application, Applicant married, 
fathered two children, and became a homeowner. He completed his most recent 
security clearance application in April 2016 and disclosed two alcohol-related criminal 
incidents. In February 2016, after consuming alcohol, Applicant was arrested and 
ultimately convicted of leaving the scene of an accident. He was arrested again in 
March 2016 for driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI). However, the DUI charge 
was dismissed and Applicant was convicted of the lesser charge of failure to submit to 
alcohol testing. He self-reported both incidents to his facility security officer.4 
 
 Applicant also reported that he used marijuana a few times per month from 
December 1997 until 2007.5 After 2007, Applicant reported that he continued to use the 
drug occasionally until August 2014. He explains that his marijuana use was purely 
recreational and asserts that he has not used the drug since 2014, citing his children, 
now ages 7 and 10, as the reason for his discontinued use. While he acknowledges that 
the 2006 security clearance application may have inaccurate information regarding his 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
3 GE 3.  
 
4 GE 1-3, 5-6. 
 
5 On the April 2016 security clearance application, Applicant reported that he used marijuana, 
“recreational[ly] a few times per month until 1007, then rarely used at all.”  In his August 2016 background 
interview, Applicant acknowledged the “1007” date was a typo and should have read 2007. GE 4. 
 
3 
 
drug use, the inaccuracy was not done deliberately, but was his best recollection when 
he completed the application. He denies consuming marijuana to the point of impaired 
judgment or reporting to work under the influence of drug. Applicant states that he does 
not intend to use marijuana in the future.6  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
6 GE 1, 3-4. 
 
4 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis  
 
 The record contains evidence to support the Government’s prima facie case that 
Applicant engaged in disqualifying conduct under the drug involvement, criminal 
conduct, and personal conduct guidelines. He did not provide sufficient evidence to 
mitigate any of the alleged concerns.  
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 Applicant admits using marijuana from 1997 to 2014. The illegal use of controlled 
substances can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, 
because such behavior may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because 
it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations.7 Applicant’s 17-year history of drug use is disqualifying on its own and is 
exacerbated by his continued use of marijuana after being granted access to classified 
information in 2006.8  
 
 Even though Applicant’s last reported use of marijuana occurred two years ago, 
the conduct is not mitigated by the passage of time. Applicant’s use of illegal drugs did 
not occur under unusual circumstances, each use occurred in a social setting. The 
record does not contain any evidence to indicate that Applicant’s use of illegal drugs 
was caused by substance dependence or abuse issues, emotional or physical 
problems, or any form of duress. It was recreational and intentional. Applicant has 
expressed his intent not to use drugs in the future. However, he has not presented 
anything to guarantee this statement, such as a signed statement of intent with 
revocation for any future violations. Given his pattern of disregard of federal law and his 
responsibilities as a clearance holder, Applicant’s promises to abstain from future 
marijuana use carry little weight. Applicant’s history of illegal drug use continues to 
reflect negatively on his ongoing security worthiness. 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
 Criminal conduct creates doubts about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. It also calls in to questions a person’s ability or willingness to comply 
with law, rules, and regulations.9 Applicant was convicted of two alcohol-related crimes 
in 2016. While the 2016 incidents standing alone would be unlikely to affect a national 
security eligibility decision, when considered in combination with his other uncharged 
                                                          
7  See,  AG ¶ 24.  
 
8 AG ¶¶ 25(a) and (f). 
 
9 AG ¶ 30.  
 
5 
 
criminal conduct, almost 20 years of illegal drug use, Applicant has demonstrated a 
pattern of poor judgment that casts doubt on his ability to maintain access to classified 
information.10 The conduct is not mitigated for the reasons given in the drug involvement 
and substance misuse section, above. Given his long history of criminal conduct, 
Applicant has not presented sufficient evidence of successful rehabilitation to assuage 
any concerns that he may engage in criminal conduct, either alcohol or drug related, in 
the future.  
 
Furthermore, Applicant’s eventual self-reporting of his illegal drug use and his 
contemporaneous reporting of his two alcohol-related criminal conduct does not change 
the security significance of the underlying conduct. Here, Applicant engaged in an 
activity he knew to be in direct contravention of federal law and his responsibilities as an 
individual holding a security clearance. His behavior showed a disregard for the law, 
regulations, and the fiduciary relationship he voluntarily entered into with the 
Government when he was granted access to classified information.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant’s history of illegal drug use and criminal conduct are cross-alleged 
under the personal conduct guideline. The alleged misconduct is independently 
disqualifying under those specific guidelines and has been considered under the 
relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions as discussed above.  However, the 
allegation that Applicant falsified his 2006 security clearance application warrants 
scrutiny under the personal conduct guideline.  
 
 On his 2006 security clearance application, Applicant reported that he used 
marijuana from 1997 to 2001. On his April 2016 application, Applicant reported his 
marijuana use as being continuous from 1997 to 2014. He claims that the disclosures 
on his 2006 application were his best recollection at the time. This claim is not credible. 
It is unlikely that Applicant’s memory of his drug use between 2001 and 2006 is more 
accurate a decade later than it was at the time he completed the 2006 application. 
Furthermore, the truthful disclosures on the 2016 application do not immunize the 
earlier falsification from a subsequent security review.  
 
 An applicant is expected to provide full, frank, and candid disclosures to the 
Government at all times. Anything less provides a rational basis for a finding against an 
applicant’s security worthiness. Applicant’s disclosure on his 2006 security clearance 
application was not due to an inaccurate memory, it was an intentional and material 
misstatement of fact on a document used to determine national security eligibility.11 A 
statement is material when the concealed information would have the potential to 
influence a decision or action. Applicant’s omissions in his previous adjudication 
prevented the Government from properly vetting his overall security worthiness. It is 
unlikely that Applicant would have been granted access to classified information, if he 
admitted contemporaneous drug use.  
                                                          
10 AG ¶ 31(a). 
 
11 AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
6 
 
Whole-person Concept 
 
Based on the record, I have significant reservations about Applicant’s current 
security worthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the whole-
person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). The purpose of the security clearance adjudication is to 
make “an examination of a sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative 
determination that the person is an acceptable security risk.”12 During the current 
adjudication, Applicant revealed conduct that supports a negative whole-person 
assessment of his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. His behavior also casts 
doubt on his ability to follow rules and regulations and demonstrates a disregard for his 
fiduciary relationship with the government. Accordingly, his continued access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.d:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Criminal Conduct:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
  
 Subparagraphs 3.a:      Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Eligibility for continued access 
to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
12 AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
