 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 16-01419  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John DelCampo, Esq., Personal Representative 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke her eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s violation of her former 
employer’s time and attendance policy is mitigated by the passage of time. However, 
the security concerns raised by her intentional falsification of statements about the 
incident on her security clearance application and in multiple background interviews 
continues to cast doubt on Applicant’s continued trustworthiness and reliability.  
Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 15, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the personal conduct guideline.1 DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information, implemented on September 1, 2006.   
 
 
2 
 
continue Applicant’s security clearance and recommended that the case be submitted to 
an administrative judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s 
security clearance.  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a decision on the 
administrative record. However, Department Counsel exercised its right under Directive 
¶ E3.1.7 to have a hearing in this case and provided discovery to Applicant in January 
2017.2 The case was scheduled for January 17, 2018 and Applicant waived the 15-day 
notice requirement.3 At the hearing, Applicant confirmed her notice waiver on the record 
and indicated she was ready to proceed.4 I admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 and 
2, and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C, without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on January 24, 2018. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Implementation of Revised Adjudicative Guidelines 
 
 While the case was pending decision, the Direct of National Security (DNI) 
issued Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) applicable to all covered individuals who require initial or 
continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold a sensitive 
position. The 2017 AG superseded those implemented in September 2006, and they 
are effective for any adjudication made on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have 
decided this case under the 2017 AG. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 62, has worked for her current employer since June 2014. She has 
worked for federal contracting companies since 1986 and has had access to classified 
information and access to sensitive compartmented information since. She served in the 
U.S. Navy Reserves as an intelligence officer from 1986 to her retirement in 2015 as an 
O-6. On her most recent security clearance application, submitted in July 2014, 
Applicant did not disclose any derogatory information. The investigation revealed that 
Applicant was terminated from her previous position for violating her employer’s time 
reporting policy.5  
 
 Applicant held her previous position from 1995 to 2014, working for two different 
federal contracting companies. She possessed a vast amount of institutional knowledge 
and was well regarded by her customer. The federal contractor that employed Applicant 
from 2006 to 2014 allowed employees to accumulate paid time off (PTO) without 
                                                          
2 Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and II. 
 
3 HE III.  
 
4  Tr. 6 -7. 
 
5 GE 1.  
 
3 
 
distinction between sick and vacation leave. In February 2014, Applicant planned a 
vacation and prepaid some of the travel and lodging costs for the trip. However, less 
than two weeks before the trip, Applicant became ill and could not report to work. She 
did not have enough PTO accrued to accommodate the leave she needed for recovery 
from her illness and her upcoming vacation. The company did not have policies 
authorizing unpaid leave or advanced leave. Because she had a new supervisor, 
Applicant did not feel comfortable discussing the problem with him. Instead, Applicant 
decided to enter the 64 hours she was out sick as hours worked with the intention of 
making up the hours in the future. However, her supervisor, who worked in another 
location, learned from the client that Applicant had been out of the office for part of the 
pay period.6  
 
 When confronted by her supervisor about her attendance and her time card 
entry, Applicant admitted that she provided false information on the time card. Pending 
approval from the corporate office, Applicant’s supervisor intended to settle the matter 
with a formal reprimand. However, the corporate office ordered Applicant’s immediate 
termination for cause. Applicant was unemployed for four months before securing her 
current job in June 2014. Applicant completed a security clearance application in 
connection with a periodic reinvestigation. In response to Section 13A: Employment 
Activities, Applicant listed her previous employer, but reported that she left the job after 
being laid off. She answered ‘no’ to the follow-up question about having been 
terminated or disciplined by the employer.7  
 
 In May 2015, Applicant participated in a routine interview with a background 
investigator. According the interview summary, the information Applicant provided in the  
interview was consistent with her disclosures in the security questionnaire. Three 
months later, in August 2015, the investigator conducted a second interview with 
Applicant. The investigator asked Applicant directly if she had ever been fired from a 
previous job. Applicant said that she had not. The investigator told Applicant that 
information from her previous employer indicated that she was terminated for violating 
the company’s time reporting and attendance policy. Applicant again denied being 
terminated and explained that the employer eliminated her position to reduce redundant 
positions. The investigator then told Applicant about a memorandum she and her  
former supervisor signed, detailing the policy violation. Applicant denied signing any 
such memorandum and indicated she left the job under favorable circumstances.8  
 
 After the interview, Applicant scoured her personal files for the memorandum 
referenced by the investigator. After she found it, Applicant contacted the investigator 
for a third interview to discuss her statements in the earlier interviews. In the third 
interview, Applicant admitted that her previous employer terminated her for violating the 
                                                          
6 Tr. 29-31, 41-43; GE 1. 
 
7 Tr. 31-32; GE 1.  
 
8 Tr. 33-34, 43 – 48; GE 2.   
 
 
4 
 
company’s time and attendance policy. Applicant admitted she lied in the earlier 
interviews because she was afraid of losing her job.9  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s termination from a position in February 2014, 
for violating her employer’s time and attendance policy (SOR ¶ 1.a); that she 
intentionally falsified her July 2014 security clearance application by characterizing the 
termination of that employment as a lay off (SOR ¶ 1.b); and that she intentionally 
provided false information during two background interviews (SOR ¶ 1.c). Applicant 
admitted that she lied on her security clearance application because she was concerned 
that given her age, her career would be over if she could not maintain access to 
classified information. Applicant was also concerned that she would soon be the only 
income earner in her household because of her husband’s uncertain employment 
situation. She admitted that she was not truthful during the first two interviews with the 
investigator because she was making an effort to stick with her original story. She 
decided to tell the truth after she uncovered the memorandum she signed detailing her 
misconduct.10  
 
 Applicant claims that her behavior was totally out of character and not 
representative of the 27 years she has held access to classified information. She stated 
that she would not act similarly in the future. At the hearing, Applicant presented one 
witness and three character reference letters. The witness and the character references 
described Applicant has being honest and trustworthy. The hearing witness, a current 
coworker, admitted that she did not know the issues alleged in the SOR. Applicant 
admits that she did not disclose the incident to the witness, because the witness did not 
know her at the time of the incident. Applicant claims that that three character 
references, all of whom worked with Applicant at the time of the incident, were aware of 
Applicant’s actions. However, none of the references mentions the policy violation in 
their discussion of Applicant’s character.11  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
                                                          
9 Tr. 34. 
 
10 Tr. 32-33, 36, 43, 48. 
 
11 Tr. 21-26, 36, 54-56; AE A-C.  
 
5 
 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden of 
persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
` 
Analysis 
 
 Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Of 
special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide truthful answers during national 
security investigative or adjudicative process.12  
 
Applicant admits disqualifying conduct under the personal conduct guideline. She 
admits deliberately making false statements on her July 2014 security clearance 
application and in two background interviews in May and August 2015, respectively. 
When the multiple falsifications are considered together with Applicant’s intentional 
violation of her previous employer’s time and attendance policy, an incident that is 
neither disqualifying under any other guideline nor enough to warrant  disqualification on 
its own, the record supports a negative whole-person assessment of Applicant’s 
judgment, and trustworthiness.13  
 
The underlying conduct, the policy violation itself is an isolated incident and is 
mitigated by the passage of time.14 However, Applicant’s falsification of her July 2014 
security clearance application and her repeated false statements to an investigator, 
despite being confronted with evidence of her misconduct cannot be considered minor. 
Despite being given multiple opportunities to correct her false statement, Applicant only 
took steps to do so after she realized the investigator had direct evidence of her lies. An 
                                                          
12 AG ¶ 15. 
 
13 AG ¶ 16 (a), (b), and (d). 
 
14  AG ¶17(c). 
 
 
6 
 
applicant is expected to provide full, frank, and candid answers throughout the 
investigative process. Anything less provides a rational basis for a finding against an 
applicant’s security worthiness. Here, Applicant has repeatedly provided false 
information to the government, establishing a pattern of misconduct that cannot be 
ignored. Applicant failed to present sufficient information to mitigate reliability and 
trustworthiness concerns raised by her multiple false statements throughout this 
adjudication.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I have significant reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, 
I have also considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(d). The purpose of the 
security clearance adjudication is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a 
person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable 
security risk.”15 Although Applicant has a long tenure as a clearance holder, her actions 
during the current adjudication raises doubts about her ongoing security worthiness. 
Given her behavior, the Government cannot trust Applicant to self-report derogatory 
information that may adversely affect her self-interests. This concern presents a security 
risk that must be resolved in favor of the Government. Clearance is denied.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraph 1.a-1.b:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
                                                          
15 AG ¶ 2(d). 
 
