                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 16-03602
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding her use of drugs. Eligibility for
access to classified information is granted. 
History of Case
On April 21, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the affirmative determination of eligibility for a security
clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a
security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by DOD on September
1, 2006.  
The Security Executive Agent, by Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative
Guidelines (SEAD 4), dated December 10, 2016, superceded and replaced the
September 2006 adjudicative guidelines (AGs). They apply to all covered individuals
who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility
to hold a sensitive position. Procedures for administrative due process for contractor
personnel continue to be governed by DOD Directive 5220.6, subject to the updated
substantive changes in the AGs, effective June 8, 2017. Application of the AGs that
were in effect for the issuance of the SOR would not affect my decision in this case.
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 15, 2017, and requested a hearing. The
case was assigned to me on February 8, 2018, and was scheduled for hearing on April
18, 2018. At hearing, the Government's case consisted of three exhibits (GEs 1-3).
Applicant relied on one witness (herself) and 11 exhibits. The transcript (Tr.) was
received on May 1, 2018.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline H, Applicant allegedly (a) used marijuana products from
approximately September 2015 to a least July 2016 and (b) continued to use and
purchase marijuana or marijuana products, as set forth in paragraph 1.a, after being
granted a security clearance in June 2015. 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the allegations pertaining
to her use of illegal drugs with explanations. She claimed that she misused marijuana
after cancer treatment, chemotherapy, radiation, and nearly a year-long use of a study
drug she believed caused persistent deep joint pains. She claimed she believed that
using medicinal marijuana would be a good way to quickly ease her aches and pains
without taking time off for personal therapy. 
Applicant further claimed that after she learned that use of marijuana for
medicinal purposes was against policy, she notified a company security person in
December 2015 and January 2016; albeit, she was delayed in finding the right security
person for several months. And, she claimed she is dedicated to her job and has no
interest in abusing drugs in the future.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 50-year-old mechanical engineer for a defense contractor who
seeks to retain a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted
by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant married in December 1998 and has two children from this marriage.
(GE 1) She earned two engineering degrees from a respected university: one in May
1989 in mechanical engineering and another in May 1990 in electrical engineering. (GE
1) And she earned a master’s degree in engineering in May 1998 from another
respected university. (GE 1) Applicant reported no military service. Since November
2000, she has worked for her current employer and held a security clearance since
2003. (GEs 1-2 and AE K)
2
Applicant’s medical history
Medical records document that Applicant was treated for Stage III breast cancer
following her diagnosis in October 2013. (AEs E and J) She underwent surgery in
November 2013 and received chemotherapy between November 2013 and May 2014.
(AE J) After completing radiation treatment in July 2014, she began anti-hormone
treatment at the end of July and went on full-time medical leave. (AE J) After returning 
to a  part-time work schedule in September 2014, she enrolled in a drug study trial (a
blinded trial designed to ascertain the safety and effectiveness of a chemotherapy pill),
which she completed in October 2015. (AEs E and J)
According to Applicant’s certified oncology nurse (OCN), treatment for Stage III
cancer is physically grueling and carries a higher risk of recurrence than Stage I or
Stage II  cancers. (AE E) Applicant was on medical disability between October 2013
and September 2014 and returned to work in September 2014 on a restricted basis (no
more than 30 hours a week) (AEs E and J) Medical issues associated with her cancer
study trial affected her ability to work the long hours she was accustomed to doing.
When work restrictions were lifted in October 2014, she returned to her regular work
schedule. The extra work hours soon increased her pain symptoms, enough to inhibit
her ability to keep up with her regular therapy appointments. (AE E) 
The oncology nurse’s notes confirmed Applicant’s September 2015 request to
discuss the use of medicinal marijuana with her treating physician. (AE E) Applicant’s
treating nurse credited Applicant with taking her health responsibilities, her family (to
include the death of her mother), and her work very seriously. (AE E) Addressing her
medical issues has required considerable leave over the five years spanning April 2012
and February 2017. (AE G) 
     
Applicant’s drug history
In 1992 (at the age of 25), Applicant tried marijuana three times on a summer trip
abroad. (GE 2) She did not use the substance again until September 2015 (GE 2)
Between September 2015 and July 2016, she used marijuana for medical purposes
(after trying alternatives without success) in accordance with the prescription furnished
her by her treating physician in September 2015. (GE 2 and AE H; Tr. 37-38) She
continued to use medical marijuana while holding a security clearance in the belief it
was not against either company or DOD.
In September 2015, Applicant read how marijuana relieves pain and obtained a
medical marijuana prescription under her state’s law that permits the dispensing of
marijuana for certified medical purposes. (AE E; Tr. 38-39) With the prescription, she
went to a marijuana dispensary and purchased $25 worth of marijuana. (GE 2) Over the
course of two weekends, she ate the marijuana product, but never smoked it. It helped
her with her pain, but “knocked her out worse than any flu medication she ever took.”
(GE 2) After this experience, “she never ate the marijuana products again.” (GE 2)
When medical marijuana did not work for her, she turned to over-the-counter
medications for pain relief. (GE 2) 
3
In December 2015, Applicant received a refresher security briefing which
included detailed explanations of both her employer’s and DOD’s policies in place
banning the use of marijuana and other illegal drugs, even when prescribed for
medicinal purposes. (AE J) It was during this briefing that she became aware of
company and DoD policy against the use of medicinal marijuana products. (GEs 2-3; Tr.
39) Armed with this policy information, she self reported her past marijuana use to her
company security personnel office in January 2016 and sought to obtain more guidance
on the use of medical marijuana. (GEs 2-3 and AE J; Tr. 39-40) 
Between 1992 and September 2015, and since July 2016, Applicant has not
used marijuana altogether. (AE J) Except for her earlier use of marijuana for recreation
purposes in 1992 and her past use of medicinal marijuana in 2015-2016, Applicant has
never used marijuana and has never experimented with any other illegal drugs or
misused prescription medications. (GEs 2; Tr. 40-41) She has never asked for or
received drug counseling as a result of her misuse of prescribed marijuana products.
(GE 2) And she assured she has no intention of ever using medicinal marijuana, or any
other illegal drug, in the future.  (GE 2; Tr. 41)
Endorsements and awards
Applicant is well-regarded by her supervisors and colleagues who have
interacted with her on a regular basis for many years and are aware of the serious
health problems and medical treatment she has been receiving since 2014. (AEs D and
I) They credit her with respect and a high level of trust for her ability to understand the
issues, develop plans to resolve the issues, get program and customer concurrence
with the plan, finding the root cause of the problem and implementing effective
corrective actions. (AE D)
 Applicant has received excellent performance evaluations with merit increases
over the course of her employment. (AEs B and I) Between December 2003 and
November 2017, she has received numerous monetary awards in recognition of her
team and individual accomplishments and contributions. (AE A) Her awards include
employee of the month leadership recognition and certificates of appreciation. (AE F) Of
special note, Applicant was on her space executive leadership team, she was
recognized as her team’s space awards night recipient for 2018. (AE C) Her award
recognized her excellent day and day performance and willingness to reach higher and
farther in a way that sets her company apart in the defense industry. (AE C)
          Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering security clearance cases. These guidelines take into account
factors that could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as
well as considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to protect classified information.  The AGs include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered
before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or
4
denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance
on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at
a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person
in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c)
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. 
The adjudicative process is designed to examine a sufficient period of an
applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about whether the applicant is
an acceptable security risk. The following AG ¶ 2(a) factors are pertinent: (1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy factors are pertinent herein:
Drug Involvement
The Concern: Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription
drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with
laws, rules, and regulations  AG ¶ 24.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
5
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant experimented with marijuana in 1992 and used it more frequently
between September 2015 and July 2016 for medicinal purposes to address her recurrent
pain associated with her diagnosed Stage lll  cancer. She used prescribed marijuana on
a frequent basis during this period in compliance with her state’s law authorizing
marijuana use for prescribed medicinal purposes.  
On the strength of the evidence presented, several disqualifying conditions of the
Adjudicative Guidelines for drug abuse are applicable: DC ¶ 25(a), “any substance
misuse,”  DC ¶ 25(c), “illegal possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” and DC ¶ 25(f),
“any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or holding a sensitive
position.” Judgment concerns exist over Applicant’s past drug use. She has some
recurrent history of marijuana use on a limited scale to self-medicate her cancer-related
pain with prescribed marijuana and less than two years of demonstrated abstinence.
Applicant claims she complied with state law in using prescribed marijuana for
medicinal purposes. Once she learned from her employer’s refresher security briefings
that marijuana use was against both company and DOD policy, she ceased using
marijuana and found substitute medications to deal with her pain issues. But her use of
marijuana for medicinal purposes not only violated company and DOD policies
mandating drug-free federal work conditions, but federal law as well. Whether Applicant
was ever made aware of federal law’s preemptive ban of marijuana use in states that
authorize its limited use for medicinal purposes is unclear.
When the Federal Controlled Substances Act (CSA) has been challenged on
federalism grounds, the courts have consistently extended federal preemption authority
over competing state laws that legalize marijuana use. In Oakland Cannabis Buyers, 532
U.S. 483 (2001), the Supreme Court did not attempt to invalidate the enabling legislation
adopted by the particular state in issue. This legislation was designed to implement the
6
key enabling provisions of the state’s Proposition 215, under ¶¶ 11362.5 et seq.
Proposition 215 (known as the Compassionate Use Act) was passed by this state’s
voters in 1996 to validate the right of residents of the state to possess and use marijuana
for medical purposes, when they have a recommendation from a licensed physician.
Proposition 215 gives the patient’s primary care giver the right to cultivate and possess
marijuana for the patient. But the Oakland Cannabis Buyers Court did affirm continued
federal jurisdiction over drug violators covered by the federal law without regard to the
state’s marijuana exception.
More recently, the Supreme Court seized  the opportunity to refine and clarify the
reach of its holding in Oakland Cannabis Buyers, supra.  In Raich v. Gonzales, 545 U.S.
1, 8-14 (2005), the Court addressed the claims of two state residents who suffered from
a variety of serious medical conditions and sought to avail themselves of medical
marijuana pursuant to the terms of the state’s Compassionate Use Act. Notwithstanding
that county investigating officials had found that one respondent’s medical use of
marijuana was entirely lawful, federal agents seized and destroyed all six of her cannabis
plants. In Raich v. Gonzales, supra, the Supreme Court held that the regulation of
marijuana under the CSA was fully within Congress’ commerce power (U.S. Const., art.
I, ¶ 8), because marijuana production intended for home production could have a
substantial effect on supply and demand in the national market. The Raich Court
reasoned that federal failure to regulate the intrastate manufacturing and possession of
marijuana would leave a considerable gap in the CSA.  In turn, the Court vacated the
Ninth Circuit’ s judgment. 
So, even though Applicant complied with her state’s permit to use marijuana for
medicinal purposes, her state-approved medicinal permit would not foreclose the Federal
Government from prosecuting illegal possession charges under the CSA. Applicant
appears to understand the reach of the CSA in its preemption of her state’s medical
marijuana exception and how it affects the anti-drug policies placed in force by her
employer and the DOD.
To her credit, Applicant committed to full compliance with her company’s anti-drug
policy and ceased using marijuana altogether in July 2016, once she fully understood the
policy preempted her state’s medicinal marijuana exception. She found other
medications to treat her pain issues and has not returned to marijuana use in almost two
years.  Based on her limited use of marijuana in compliance with state law without any
knowledge that her use of marijuana for medicinal purposes violated both federal law
and her employer’s anti-drug policy, she may claim the full benefit of several mitigating
conditions of the drug involvement guideline: MCs ¶¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so
long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment,” and 26(c), “abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged
illness during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended.”
Applicant is credited with reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment by her
supervisors and colleagues who have known her and worked closely with her for a
number of years. Her contributions to her employer and DOD are well-documented
7
through her impressive performance evaluations, awards, and letters of achievement.
She has replaced her use of medical marijuana to treat her pain issues with other
medications and is committed to complying with her employer’s anti-drug policies that
are at odds with her own state’s medicinal marijuana exception. Safe predictable
judgments, accordingly, can be made about her ability to avoid recurrent drug
involvement. 
Whole-person assessment
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has established independent
probative evidence of her use of marijuana under exceptional circumstances to address
her cancer-related pain issues. She has also established with strong probative evidence
her understanding of company and DOD anti-drug policy and has made concerted efforts
to find safe and effective substitutes to address her pain problems. Worth underscoring,
too, are Applicant’s important contributions to her employer and DOD. Her impressive
performance evaluations, awards, and letters of achievement are well-documented and
entitled to considerable weight in assessing her overall reliability, trustworthiness, and
ability to abstain from self-medicating with drugs proscribed by federal law and the
policies of her employer and DOD.
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
limited drug use for medicinal purposes in compliance with her state’s medicinal
marijuana exception without knowledge that her marijuana use violated federal law and
the anti-drug policies of her employer and DOD, Applicant mitigates security concerns
related to her drug use. Favorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations
covered by subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b of Guideline H.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE H: (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):         FOR APPLICANT
   
Sub-paras. 1.a-1.b:           FOR  APPLICANT
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
Clearance is granted.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
8
                                        
  
9
