 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 16-01839 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol 
consumption, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 9, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline G, alcohol consumption, and Guideline E, personal 
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 1, 2018, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 27, 2017. The Defense 
 
2 
 
 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 29, 2018. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled on April 16, 2018. The Government offered exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5. Applicant testified and did not offer any documents. There were no 
objections to the Government’s exhibits, and they were admitted into evidence. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript on April 24, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a though 1.c, and 2.a through 
2.c, with explanations. He denied SOR ¶ 1.d. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 27 years old. He graduated from high school in 2008 and college in 
2012, earning a bachelor’s degree. He is currently enrolled in a master’s degree 
program. He is not married and has no children. He began working for his employer, a 
federal contractor, in 2012.1  
 
 DOD CAF requested and Applicant agreed to participate in an independent 
psychological evaluation paid for by the Government. An evaluation was conducted in 
November 2017 by a licensed psychologist. Applicant became aware of the results of 
the evaluation when he received the SOR. During the evaluation, Applicant disclosed 
that he began consuming alcohol at home with his parent’s permission when he was 
between 15 and 16 years old. He would consume a beer or glass of wine at family 
dinners. Later in high school, he would drink alcohol from his parent’s liquor cabinet 
about once a week, as well as beer at parties. He consumed alcohol every other 
weekend while in high school.2  
 
 Applicant continued to consume alcohol in college. He would drink every 
weekend and consume six to eight beers each time he drank. He would occasionally 
drink during the week as well. His heaviest drinking occurred in his sophomore and 
junior years of college. Since graduating from college, he drinks with his friends on 
weekends and occasionally has a couple of drinks at happy hour during the week. He 
drinks to intoxication once every couple of months and occasionally drinks six to eight 
beers during the day on weekends if he is attending a party or outdoor event. He does 
not drink and drive, but rather takes an Uber if he plans to drink while he is out. He 
experienced a black out one time since graduating from college. While at college, he 
blacked out about once a month.3  
 
 Applicant testified that alcohol has never interfered with his work. He told the 
psychologist that several times he needed to work from home because he was too 
hungover to go into the office and did not want his client to see him. Applicant explained 
                                                          
1 Tr. 16-18. 
 
2 Tr. 40-44; GE 5. 
 
3 GE 1, 2, 3, 5. 
 
3 
 
 
that these issues occurred in 2013, after he had moved to a new city. He explained he 
had the flexibility to work from home.4  
 
 Applicant experienced several alcohol-related incidents while in college. In 2008, 
he was arrested for speeding (going 103 miles in a 70 mph zone), operating a motor 
vehicle without a license, and possession of alcohol by a minor. Applicant explained that 
he was driving, and there were others in the car with him that were also underage. They 
were not drinking when they were stopped by police, but there was alcohol in the 
vehicle. His license had automatically expired when he turned 18. He was ordered to 
attend an alcohol awareness class and the charge of minor in possession was dropped. 
He paid a fine for speeding and renewed his license.5  
 
 In October 2010, during a Halloween party Applicant consumed an alcoholic 
punch. He drank too much and blacked out. The campus security was called, and he 
was place in the college holding facility. Applicant attempted to escape by running 
away. He was tackled and arrested by the city police. He spent 48 hours in jail and was 
released on bail. His blood alcohol content was .18%. He hired an attorney who 
recommended he attend an alcohol treatment center before his court date, which he 
did. He was placed in a pretrial diversion program. He was subsequently placed on 
probation, required to do community service, and submit to alcohol testing. Applicant 
told the psychologist that after the resisting arrest charge, he was required to attend 90 
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings in 90 days. He told the psychologist that he 
believed that he attended every day for one week and decided it was not for him, due to 
the religious undertones of the class, and stopped attending.6  
 
On Applicant’s August 2012 security clearance application under section 24, 
which inquired if he had ever been ordered, advised, or asked to seek counseling or 
treatment as a result of his alcohol use, Applicant responded “yes.” He stated in his 
SCA:  
 
I decided to participate in the Intensive Out-Patient program in hopes that I 
would learn to control myself around alcohol. I learned more than I had 
ever imagined about substance abuse, addiction, myself, and more. As 
part of the program, I attended 90 Alcoholics Anonymous meetings in 90 
days, which proved to be another eye opening experience.7 
 
His statement in his SCA is contrary to what he told the psychologist in November 2017. 
When asked by the psychologist about this discrepancy, Applicant told her that he lied 
on his background information form because he thought the investigators would want to 
                                                          
4 Tr. 53-54; GE 5. 
 
5 Tr. 30-33; GE 1, 2, 3, 5. 
 
6 Tr. 33-37; GE 5. 
 
7 GE 1. 
 
4 
 
 
hear that he completed the program, rather than stopping after one week. He told the 
psychologist that he had completed the probation and its terms.8  
 
Applicant was interview by a government investigator in July 2015. During the 
interview he stated that he attended AA for four months. The first month he went five 
times a week; the second month he attended three times a week; and the third month, 
he attended twice a week. He told the investigator he had attended 60 meetings over 
four months. He testified that after he attended AA daily for the first week, his 
attendance tapered off to once a week, but he stood by his statement that he attended 
60 meetings in four months.9 
 
As part of a follow up interview with the government investigator in August 25, 
2015, Applicant confirmed he completed 90 days of AA meetings over four months.10  
 
Applicant testified that counselors wanted him to participate in 90 AA meetings in 
90 days after he was charged with resisting arrest in October 2010 to help with the 
pretrial diversion. He was disillusioned with the whole process. He did not attend every 
day after a week, but said he attended periodically. He stopped attending when he felt 
the program pushed a religious aspect. He did not identify with the people attending or 
with his sponsor. He noted the AA meetings were not court-ordered. He did not 
understand the process. He stated he disclosed information that was based on truth, but 
he misrepresented it. He admitted that when he thought his job depended on him 
obtaining a clearance, he lied because he wanted to look better. He said he was 
younger at the time, but old enough to know the truth. He said he is now more 
responsible and level headed and understands the seriousness of the process.11  
 
Applicant testified that in May 2011, he was arrested for public intoxication. He 
was still on probation from the October 2010 resisting arrest incident. He and friends 
had gotten “liquored up” and went downtown to try and sneak into a bar. His friends had 
fake identification. Applicant was underage and tried to bribe the bouncer to gain 
entrance into the bar. His friends went into the bar and left Applicant outside on his own. 
He called a friend and asked for a car ride. Before his friend arrived, he was stopped by 
police and arrested for public intoxication. The charge was dropped when the police 
officers did not appear for court. He never reported the incident to his probation officer. 
He explained that his attorney told him if it does not come up, then do not say 
anything.12  
 
                                                          
8 Tr. 26-27; GE 2. 
 
9 Tr. 26-28. 
 
10 Tr. 62-63; GE 3. 
 
11 Tr. 20-26. 
 
12 Tr. 37-40; GE 5. 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant described to the psychologist an incident that is not alleged in the SOR, 
where he attempted to drink 21 beers on his 21st birthday. He testified that he had 24 
beers and was hospitalized after this incident. His blood alcohol content was either .399 
or .4%. He was subsequently asked to leave the dorm where he was drinking, and was 
required to live off campus because of this incident.13  
 
Applicant disclosed to the psychologist that he smoked marijuana daily during his 
sophomore and junior years of college. He told her he smoked marijuana on the 
weekends during his freshman and senior years of college, but has not smoked 
marijuana in five years. The psychologist questioned him about his failure to disclose 
this information during on his background check. He told her that he believed his 
marijuana use automatically disqualified him from receiving a security clearance. 
Applicant testified that he used marijuana about once a week starting late in his 
freshman year of college until he was arrested in October 2010. He purchased it from 
drug dealers on campus.14 
 
Applicant testified that when he completed the SCA in 2012, he did not 
understand how the clearance process worked. He thought by admitting his marijuana 
use he would not get a security clearance. He stated he thought he could pretend it 
never happened. When Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator in July 
2015, he was asked to confirm his SCA response that he had not used illegal drugs. He 
confirmed to the investigator that he had not used illegal drugs in the past. While 
testifying Applicant denied that he failed to disclose his drug use during his July 2015 
interview. He stated: “I do not recall denying any illegal use of drugs. I assume if they 
wrote that down, then that must have been their interpretation, but I don’t remember 
specifically talking to them about the use.”15 Applicant was then asked: “So you’re 
saying you disclosed it, you disclosed in 2015 during your interviews that you used 
drugs.” He answered: “yes.”16 When questioned during cross-examination, Applicant 
stated when the investigator interviewed him in July 2015, he was confirming that he 
responded “no” on the drug use questions on his 2012 SCA. He explained: “I think there 
is a difference between having denied illegal use of drugs in that interview and 
confirming that I had said that I had not on the actual form, because we definitely 
discussed it immediately afterwards.”17 
 
Applicant completed government interrogatories in April 2016. He disclosed his 
past marijuana use and reiterated that the reason he failed to disclose the information 
                                                          
13 Tr. 55; GE 5. I will not consider any unalleged derogatory information for the disqualifying purposes. I 
may consider this information when analyzing Applicant’s credibility, in the application of mitigating 
conditions, and in the whole-person analysis.  
 
14 Tr. 45-46; GE 5. 
 
15 Tr. 29. 
  
16 Tr. 18-20, 28-29, 64; GE 4. 
 
17 Tr. 64-65. 
 
6 
 
 
was because he believed he would not be granted a security clearance. The 
interrogatory questions specifically asked him why he failed to disclose his marijuana 
use during his November 2012 and his July 2015 subject interview. He stated as to 
both: “I stuck to what I put in the original clearance application.”18 That answer 
contradicts his testimony when he said he disclosed his use in his July 2015 interview.  
 
In the same interrogatories, Applicant disclosed that he used marijuana from 
November 2008 to November 2010 and his frequency of use was twice a week. He 
disclosed that he decided to stop using marijuana during his sophomore year of college 
after he was arrested (for an alcohol offense) and was placed on probation. He did not 
intend to use illegal drugs in the future. He testified that he stopped using marijuana 
after his October 2010 arrest. Applicant’s interrogatories’ disclosures regarding the 
frequency of his marijuana use and when he ceased using it are inconsistent with his 
statements to the psychologist.19  
 
The psychologist diagnosed Applicant with Alcohol Use Disorder, Moderate. She 
noted: 
 
It is the evaluator’s opinion that [Applicant’s] judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness is impaired, as evidenced by his tendency to be evasive 
and dishonest about his alcohol use history and his mental health history. 
Although some of the information he provided was consistent with his 
medical record and with information contained in his background 
information, he appeared to selectively fail to disclose details of certain 
events and often failed to disclose pertinent information in general until he 
was confronted with information the evaluator read in his background 
information. [Applicant] continues to consume alcohol on a regular basis, 
including the night before this evaluation, despite his consumption clearly 
causing difficulties for him in the past.20  
 
The psychologist recommended Applicant begin treatment with an individual 
therapist regarding his anxiety and transient depressive symptoms and seek counseling 
regarding his problematic alcohol use. She found that “[Applicant] currently displays 
behaviors that suggest his judgement, reliability, and trustworthiness are impaired.”21 
 
Applicant disputed the diagnosis, believing it is based on his conduct prior to 
2012. He denied that he was evasive or dishonest about his alcohol use history 
because he talked about each alcohol incident.22 
                                                          
18 Tr. 28-29; GE 4. 
 
19 GE 4, 5. 
 
20 GE 5. 
 
21 GE 5.  
 
22 Tr. 56-58. 
 
7 
 
 
In Applicant’s 2012 SCA he disclosed that in 2010 he was told by the college’s 
judicial affairs to attend an alcohol education class and to seek counseling with regard 
to his alcohol use. He participated in a one-day class. He was also advised by family 
and friends to attend treatment as a result of his alcohol use. His disclosure that he 
attended 90 AA meetings in 90 days was in response to his family and friends advising 
him to seek treatment.23  
 
Applicant was initially interviewed by a government investigator in November 
2012. He disclosed to the investigator that he participated in grief counseling which 
transitioned into alcohol counseling after his October 2010 arrest. It was individual 
counseling and the counselor provided him advice on how to control his drinking. 
Applicant stopped the counseling when his criminal charges were dropped. After he was 
arrested for public intoxication in May 2011, his lawyer and friends recommended he 
seek counseling. He told the investigator that he was diagnosed as alcohol dependent. 
He attended individual counseling, some group sessions, and AA meetings. He said he 
complied with all the requirements while attending therapy.24 
 
Applicant testified he did not remember telling the government investigator that 
he had been diagnosed as alcohol dependent. He admitted it was possible that he told 
the investigator, but could not remember.25 
 
Applicant testified he continues to drink alcohol socially. After college he moved 
to a new city and went to a happy hour once or twice a week. After making new friends, 
his drinking tapered off. In 2013, he had a more stable group of friends and continued to 
drink socially. It takes 6-7 drinks for him to become intoxicated. Every two to three 
months he consumed more than a couple of drinks, which he said is an aberration. He 
moved back to his home city in September 2015. He stated he does not believe he has 
an alcohol problem. When asked when he last consumed alcohol he stated he had two 
drinks the night before his hearing.26  
 
Applicant has been promoted twice in last five years. He is in a stable 
relationship with his girlfriend of 18 month.27  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
23 GE 2. 
 
24 Tr. 60-61; GE 2.  
 
25 Tr. 58-59. 
 
26 Tr. 46-51. 
 
27 Tr. 70. 
 
8 
 
 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
 
9 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. The following will 
normally result in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, 
security clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national 
security eligibility:  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and  
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a nation 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative. 
 
There is sufficient evidence to conclude Applicant deliberately failed to disclose 
on his August 2012 SCA that he used marijuana from November 2008 to November 
2010. The evidence also proves that Applicant lied on the same SCA when he reported 
that he attended 90 AA meetings in 90 days, when in fact he participated in AA for 
about a week before sporadically attending. He admitted in his interrogatories and to the 
psychologist that he lied because he thought the investigators would want to hear he 
completed the program. Applicant falsified facts during his background interviews with 
government investigators in July 2015, when he said he had completed 60 AA meetings 
over four months, when in fact he only attended AA for sporadically. He also denied to 
government investigators that he had illegally used drugs, when in fact he had used 
marijuana. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant prove mitigation. Two mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying security concerns based on 
the facts: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
 
10 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
There is insufficient evidence that Applicant made prompt, good-faith efforts to 
correct the omissions or falsifications he made when completing his SCA or the 
statements he made to investigators before he was confronted with the facts. He 
repeatedly had opportunities to do so and did not until he was presented with 
interrogatories in April 2016 when he finally admitted his drug use. As he stated in the 
interrogatories, he “stuck to what I put in the clearance application.” There is insufficient 
evidence to conclude Applicant made a prompt good-faith effort to correct the 
omissions, concealment, and falsifications before being confronted with the facts. AG ¶ 
17(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant’s omissions and falsifications are not minor. Applicant had several 
opportunities to disclose his past transgressions and chose not to do so. I did not find 
his explanation that he misunderstand the process to be persuasive, as he also 
admitted he knew he was being untruthful. His omissions and falsifications are serious 
and cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(c) does 
not apply. 
 
Guideline G: Alcohol Consumption 
 
 AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern for alcohol consumption: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
 AG ¶ 22 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following to be potentially applicable:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of the frequency of the individual’s 
alcohol use or whether the individual has been diagnosed with alcohol use 
disorder;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed with alcohol 
use disorder; and 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical or mental health professional 
(e.g. physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist or licensed clinical social 
worker) of alcohol use disorder.  
 
11 
 
 
 Applicant was arrested in 2008 for possession of alcohol by a minor; in October 
2010 he was arrested for resisting arrest after consuming alcohol; and in May 2011 he 
was arrested for public intoxication. He was diagnosed in November 2017 by a licensed 
psychologist with Alcohol Use Disorder, Moderate. The evidence supports the 
application of the all of the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from alcohol consumption. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 23: 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or judgment; 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her pattern of maladaptive alcohol 
use, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations;  
 
(c) the individual is participating in counseling or a treatment program, has 
no previous history of treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory 
progress in a treatment program; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed a treatment program along 
with any required aftercare, and has demonstrated a clear and established 
pattern of modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with 
treatment recommendations.  
 
None of the above mitigating conditions apply. Applicant participated in some 
alcohol counseling in college, but the extent of that participation is questionable based 
on his inconsistent and dishonest statements about his attendance in AA, and his 
discontinuation of counseling when the criminal charges were dropped. The alcohol-
related criminal incidents alleged happened when he was in college, and there have 
been no additional alcohol-related criminal conduct since then. Applicant does not 
believe he has a problem with alcohol. However, he has been diagnosed with Alcohol 
Use Disorder, Moderate, which diagnosis he denies. I am not confident that Applicant 
has been honest and forthcoming about his current use of alcohol based on his history 
of minimizing and being evasive about it, and other derogatory information about his 
past. He did not provide any independent evidence about actions he has taken to 
address his problem or sufficient corroborating evidence of modified consumption. No 
evidence was presented that he is participating in counseling or treatment, or that he 
successfully completed a treatment program. Although there may be some mitigating 
evidence, it is not sufficient to overcome the concerns that have been raised by his 
alcohol consumption.  
 
12 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines G and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old college graduate. He had alcohol-related incidents 
while in college and subsequently participated in counseling. More recently, an 
independent psychologist diagnosed him with Alcohol Use Disorder, Moderate. He 
falsified information on his 2012 SCA when he said he had participated in 90 AA 
meetings in 90 days. He continues to consume alcohol. He was deliberately untruthful 
about his past drug use. Applicant’s history of alcohol abuse, deliberate omission and 
falsification of information to the Government raises questions about his judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the personal conduct and alcohol consumption guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
   
 
13 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.c:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
