 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 16-00369 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 27, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on June 8, 2017. 
    
 On June 14, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on March 1, 2017. 
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on September 25, 2017, and 
transferred to me on April 4, 2018. On April 12, 2018, a Notice of Hearing was issued 
scheduling the hearing for May 2, 2018. The hearing was held as scheduled. During the 
hearing, the Government offered four exhibits which were admitted as Government 
Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 4.  Applicant testified and offered no exhibits. The record was held 
open until May 16, 2018, to allow the Applicant to submit additional documents. 
Applicant timely submitted a 19-page document, which was admitted as Applicant 
Exhibit (AE) A. The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 9, 2018. Based upon a review 
 
2 
 
 
of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted.  
      
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is an employee of a Department of Defense contractor seeking to 
maintain a security clearance. He has worked for his current employer since 2015. He 
has worked for various DOD contractors since 2004. He has had no periods of 
unemployment. He is a high school graduate. He has two daughters, ages ten and five, 
from two different relationships. He is engaged and his fiancée has two sons. He has 
held a security clearance for 15 years without incident. (Tr. 18- 24; Gov 1)   
 
On October 22, 2015, Applicant submitted a security clearance application as 
part of a periodic reinvestigation. (Gov 1) A subsequent security clearance background 
investigation resulted in the following SOR allegations: a $13,574 delinquent home 
equity line of credit that was placed for collection in June 2014.  (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 4 at 5, 
8); a $258 delinquent cell phone account that was placed for collection in November 
2014 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 4 at 6); a $538 delinquent cell phone account that was placed for 
collection in August 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 3 at 2; Gov 4 at 7); a $497 delinquent 
account placed for collection in October 2015 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 4 at 7; Gov 3 at 2); a 
$230 medical account placed for collection in January 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 4 at 7; 
Gov 3 at 2); a $669 electric bill that was placed for collection in October 2015 (SOR ¶ 
1.f: Gov 4 at 7; Gov 3 at 2); a $155 debt owed to a gym that was placed for collection in 
April 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 4 at 9); and a $1,655 jewelry store account that was placed 
for collection in June 2012. (SOR ¶ 1.h: Gov 4 at 6; Gov 3 at 4)  
 
In June 2012, Applicant purchased a home for $129,000. In 2014, two child 
support proceedings were filed against Applicant. He could not afford to pay child 
support and his mortgage. He consulted an attorney who advised him to make paying 
child support a priority because he could go to jail for failing to pay child support. The 
attorney advised Applicant that he should attempt to sell his house. Applicant attempted 
to sell his house. He was not successful and the house went to foreclosure. He pays a 
total of $950 a month for his two daughters. In March 2014, Applicant moved back in 
with his parents in order to save money. He paid them $350 a month for rent.  He 
moved in with his fiancé about six months ago. (Tr. 16 – 22; Gov 2; Gov 1, section 26)  
 
When he received the SOR in 2016, Applicant contacted a credit counseling  
agency to assist him with paying delinquent debts. He paid off several of the debts and 
intends to resolve the remaining debts. His financial situation has improved. The current 
status of the SOR debts are:  
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: $13,574 home equity account placed for collection:  Applicant 
testified that he was not sure what this account was for. He possibly thought it was a 
mortgage. He was never notified about owing anything on his mortgage. The credit 
report entry did not provide a phone number or address so Applicant claims that he was 
unable to look into it. He will pay it, if it is determined to be a valid debt. The October 30, 
 
3 
 
 
2015 credit report entry indicates that this is a home equity line of credit. An entry for 
creditor A on page eight indicates the nature of the debt. On page five of the October 
2015 credit report, it shows that creditor B took over the account from creditor A as a 
collection agent. (Gov 4 at 5, 8) The credit report, dated November 14, 2016, lists the 
debt with the original creditor A. The entry also indicates the debt was paid and closed. 
(Gov 3 at 4) It is also listed as paid and closed in the credit entries Applicant provided 
from his credit counselor. (AE A at 10) The account is resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: $258 cell phone account placed for collection: Applicant claims he 
paid this debt in 2017.  The account is no longer listed on the November 2016 credit 
report. The debt is resolved. (Tr. 27; Gov 3)     
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: $538 cell phone account placed for collection: Applicant admits he 
has not paid this debt. He intends to pay it off in the near future. (Response to SOR, Tr. 
1.c; AE A at 5, 15)  
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: $497 credit card account placed for collection:  Applicant claims that 
he paid this debt in June 2016. A credit report entry on the November 2016 credit report 
lists the debt as paid. Applicant’s post-hearing submissions also indicate the debt is 
paid. The debt is resolved. (Tr. 1.d; Gov 3 at 2; AE A at 16) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: $230 medical account placed for collection: Applicant claims the 
account was paid in June 2016. The November 2016 credit report indicates a medical 
collection account with the identical account number was paid on June 7, 2016. The 
debt is paid.  (Tr.29; Gov 3 at 2; AE A at 1) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f: $669 electric utility account placed for collection: Applicant admits that 
this debt is unresolved. He intends to resolve this account in the near future. (Tr. 29-30)    
 
SOR ¶ 1.g:  $155 gym membership account placed for collection: Applicant 
claims this debt is paid. It was not listed on the November 2016 credit report. The debt 
is resolved. (Tr. 30; Gov 3 )  
 
SOR ¶ 1.h:  $1,655 delinquent jewelry store account placed for collection:  
Applicant claims this debt was paid off through garnishment several years ago when he 
worked for another contractor.  The recent entry he provided after the hearing listed the 
debt as charged off with a zero balance. He did not provide documentation of resolution 
of the debt through garnishment. (Tr. 30-31; AE A at 17) 
 
Applicant provided a copy of his household budget in his post-hearing 
submissions. Applicant’s net monthly salary is $3,678. His net monthly expenses are  
$3,326. After expenses, there is a remainder of $352. (AE A at 2)  He is current on his  
federal and state income taxes. (Tr. 37) Applicant testified that there was approximately 
$30,000 to $40,000 in equity on his house before it went to foreclosure. Applicant’s 
post-hearing submission indicates that he does not owe anything to the bank that 
financed his mortgage. (Tr. 21; AE A at 11)  
 
4 
 
 
 
 Applicant states that over the past few years he had to make some difficult 
financial decisions. He made paying his child support obligations a priority because he 
wants to be a father to his children. He continues to work to relieve his debts with his 
credit counseling company when he is able to do so. He asks for forgiveness for 
showing a lack of responsibility by allowing some debts to become delinquent. He is 
doing everything he can to resolve the delinquencies while raising his two daughters 
with no help from other sources. (Response to SOR)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access for national 
security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
 
5 
 
 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
GUIDELINE F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security concerns. 
The disqualifying conditions that are relevant to Applicant’s case include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
  (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant encountered financial problems in 2014, while involved in child support 
and custody proceedings. He could not afford to pay both his child support and his 
mortgage. He chose to pay his child support payment.  He attempted to sell his house, 
but was unable to do so before it went to foreclosure. Several other accounts became 
delinquent during this time period. The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts with a total 
approximate balance of $17,576. AG ¶¶ 19(a), and 19(c) apply to Applicant’s case.  
   
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
 
6 
 
 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
AG ¶ 20 includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) applies. Applicant purchased a house in 2012. He eventually could 
not afford to pay both the mortgage payment and his child support obligations. He 
chose to support his children. The home was foreclosed in 2014. Applicant began 
addressing his delinquent debts. The evidence shows that he has paid five of the eight 
debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant’s financial situation has improved. He demonstrated 
his reliability and trustworthiness through his efforts to resolve his delinquent accounts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) applies because Applicant’s financial situation was adversely affected 
by his child support obligations. He was unable to pay his mortgage and pay his child 
support obligations. He opted to pay his child support obligations. He unsuccessfully  
attempted to sell his house before it was foreclosed. After the foreclosure, Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
moved in with his parents to save money. He began to pay his delinquent accounts in 
2016. He acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) applies. Applicant has been using an online credit counseling 
company to help him pay his delinquent debts.  Only two delinquent debts remain.  His 
financial problems are being resolved and his financial situation is under control.  
 
 AG & 20(d) applies towards the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, and 
1.g.  Applicant provided proof or there was sufficient proof in the credit reports that 
these debts were resolved.  The largest debt, SOR ¶ 1.a, a $13,754 home equity line of 
credit appears to have been resolved during his foreclosure proceedings. Applicant 
indicated that there was about $40,000 in equity in the home.  This is likely since the 
home equity line of credit is resolved and, although not alleged in the SOR, the 
mortgage on the home that went to foreclosure is also resolved. Applicant demonstrated 
a good-faith effort to resolve his debts. The jewelry store debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is 
likely resolved. Applicant testified that it was resolved through garnishment when he 
worked for a previous employer. He did not provide documentation verifying this 
assertion.  Applicant intends to pay the two remaining debts. The total amount of 
delinquent debt has decreased from $17,576 to $1,207. If it is discovered that he owes 
the jewelry store debt, the total amount of the delinquent debt is $2,862.  Applicant is 
resolving his debt slowly, but more importantly, he is making sure that his children are 
supported. He does not live above his means. It takes time to recover from a financial 
setback. Applicant has worked to improve his financial situation. I am confident he will 
continue to work on repaying his delinquent debts.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 
8 
 
 
       I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s successful 
career with federal contractors since 2004. I considered he is a responsible father who 
insures that he provides for his children. I considered that he is recently engaged. 
 
 After Applicant’s home went to foreclosure, he cut expenses by moving in with 
his parents.  Six months ago, he moved in with his fiancée. They currently share 
expenses.  While Applicant still has several debts to resolve, I am confident that he will 
continue to resolve them through his online credit counseling company. Security 
concerns under financial considerations are mitigated.    
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.h:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
