 1 
     
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 16-01596 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). Applicant has mitigated the 
security concerns raised by his failure to disclose derogatory information during his 
background investigation, but has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his 
delinquent debts. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on September 25, 
2015. On July 30, 2016, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The DOD acted 
under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 2 
Applicant answered the SOR August 16, 2016, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
on September 7, 2016. On September 8, 2016, a complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), which included Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4, was sent to 
Applicant, who was given an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on September 
12, 2016, and his Response was received by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) within the allotted 30 days. The case was assigned to me on July 3, 2017.  
 
On January 24, 2018, I reopened the record until February 7, 2018, to permit 
Applicant and Department Counsel to submit any additional documentary evidence. I 
received an automated email response from Applicant that stated he was on medical 
leave. After several communications with Department Counsel and Applicant1, I reopened 
the record until June 1, 2018. Applicant made a brief statement by email, which I have 
admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A. Neither party submitted any additional 
documentary evidence.  
 
The SOR was issued under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The DOD 
implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision was pending. This 
decision will be decided based on the amended AG.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges two charged-off credit-card accounts totaling 
$17,142. Applicant admits these debts. Under Guideline E, the SOR alleges that 
Applicant materially falsified his e-QIP by failing to disclose these two delinquent 
accounts. Applicant denies this allegation. Applicant’s admissions are incorporated in my 
findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 62-year-old facility specialist employed by a defense contractor since 
March 2005. He and his wife married in 2002, and they have two adult sons. In 2016, 
Applicant and his wife obtained custody of their then one-year-old granddaughter. 
Applicant has held a security clearance since November 2005. (GX 4; Response.) 
 
Applicant and his wife hired an attorney in June 2012 to help them resolve their 
debts. At that time, the attorney told Applicant that the debts should be resolved in 
approximately three years, however, they were not. In May 2015, Applicant’s wife, due to 
health issues, changed jobs, taking a $10,000 a year pay cut. At that point, Applicant 
discontinued the services of the attorney. Applicant’s wife regularly handled the finances 
for their household, and she did not disclose the ongoing financial issues that they were 
having. In March 2016, Applicant and his wife gained custody of their granddaughter, 
which added to their regular financial obligations. 
 
Applicant attributes the credit-card debts to his wife’s overspending. While he 
asserts that he continues to try to resolve his debts, he did not provide any evidence in 
                                            
1 I have appended the email correspondence to the record as Administrative Exhibit 1. 
 3 
support of this statement. The $13,610 charged-off credit-card account (SOR ¶ 1.a) and 
the $3,532 charged-off credit-card account (SOR ¶ 1.b) remain unresolved. 
 
Applicant asserted in a notarized statement that he did not realize the extent of the 
debt when completing his 2015 e-QIP, and asserted that he did not intentionally falsify 
his response to the financial question as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. Applicant’s wife stated, 
also in a notarized statemment, that she did not disclose the extent of their debts to 
Applicant prior to his completion of his e-QIP. Applicant was asked about his delinquent 
accounts during his personal subject interview with a DOD investigator. Following the 
interview, Applicant confronted his wife about the financial issues raised by the 
investigator. Applicant’s wife then disclosed the nature and extent of their delinquent 
accounts. 
 
Applicant has held a security clearance for over 12 years and has had no other 
issues that raised a security concern. Applicant and his wife are considering seeking 
financial counseling, and he will continue to work on resolving his debts. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
 4 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
  
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness 
to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information…. 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
The record evidence establishes two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial 
obligations”).  
 
 5 
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
The conditions that gave rise to Applicant’s financial problems were largely beyond 
his control. Applicant’s wife overspent on their credit cards, and the accounts became 
delinquent. Applicant initially acted responsibly by initiating a good-faith effort to repay his 
creditors by hiring an attorney in 2012 to assist with resolving the delinquent debts. 
Applicant believed that the debt-resolution process would take approximately three years. 
In 2015, Applicant’s wife suffered from a health condition that required her to change jobs 
and take a significant pay cut. As a result of the reduced household income, Applicant 
discontinued working with the attorney and his accounts remained delinquent. Applicant’s 
wife handled the finances in their household, and Applicant was unaware of the amount 
of debt. Additionally, in 2016, Applicant and his wife added their granddaughter to their 
household, and began incurring greater expenses. While Applicant asserts that he will 
resolve his delinquent accounts, he failed to provide any evidence that the SOR debts 
are being paid or otherwise resolved. Applicant’s financial difficulties are recent and 
ongoing. Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes . . . 
 
The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
 6 
AG ¶ 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility 
or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government has 
the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. An 
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
Applicant denies that he intentionally falsified his 2015 e-QIP, claiming he was 
unaware of the nature and extent of his financial status. Applicant’s wife handled the 
family finances, and did not disclose the debts to Applicant. Applicant learned of the debts 
during his personal subject interview with a DOD investigator. Given the record evidence 
as a whole, I find that Applicant did not intentionally falsify his e-QIP and the Guideline E 
security concerns are mitigated.  
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but I 
have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance with his current employer since 2005. He 
did not intentionally falsify his e-QIP. Applicant initiated an effort to repay his overdue 
creditors, however, he was unable to demonstrate a sufficient track record of repayment 
to mitigate the ongoing security concerns raised by his indebtedness. 
 7 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant 
has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct)  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:      For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
