 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 17-02444 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On July 26, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive 
Position (AG), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
  
  Applicant answered the SOR on August 4, 2017, and requested his case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). On 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
August 30, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was 
mailed to Applicant and received by him on September 18, 2017. The FORM notified 
Applicant that he had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not submit 
a response to the FORM or object to the Government’s evidence. Items 1 through 7 are 
admitted into evidence without objection. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned this case to me on January 17, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant admitted 19 of the 20 alleged SOR debts. He denied the automobile loan 
in SOR ¶ 1.d for $5,006 because he could not find it on two credit reports he obtained. 
However, during his interview on April 28, 2017, with a government investigator, he 
acknowledged the loan. The debt also appears on both record credit bureau reports 
(CBR). (Items 3, 6, 7)   
 
 Applicant is 36 years old and unmarried. He earned an associate’s degree in 2012. 
He began working for a defense contractor in 2016. Prior to this position, he was self-
employed and worked for various private businesses. (Item 4) 
 
 On May 26, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). In 
it he disclosed an automobile repossession and a delinquent credit card account. During 
the April 2017 interview, Applicant discussed additional delinquent debts and stated he 
was unfamiliar with other debts mentioned by the investigator. He attributed his financial 
problems to having insufficient money to pay his debts because of periods of 
underemployment and paying traffic tickets and fines. He said the financial problems 
started around 2009. (Item 5) 
  
 Based on Applicant’s admissions and CBRs from August 2016 and July 2017, the 
SOR alleged 20 debts that became delinquent between 2009 and 2017, and totaled over 
$45,386. They included student loans, credit cards, medical debts, an automobile 
repossession, and utility bills. (Item 6, Item 7)  
 
 In his Answer, Applicant submitted proof that he paid the two delinquent student 
loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.q. (Item 3) He also stated that on August 2, 2017, he 
enrolled eight SOR debts, totaling $33,163, in a debt relief program (DRP) and 
established a payment plan for them. According to that plan, Applicant agreed to make 
monthly payments of $533 for 45 months, beginning on August 9, 2017.1 Although he 
asserted that he had payment plans with the other ten SOR creditors and anticipated 
having many of them resolved by October 2017, he did not submit documentation 
confirming those assertions. He did not provide a budget or other information related to 
                                                 
1 Applicant did not submit proof that he made any payments on this plan. 
 
 
3 
 
 
his financial obligations from which to determine his current financial reliability, 
compliance with payment agreements, or ability to maintain payments on the debts. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.2 
 
Based on his admissions and CBRs, Applicant has a history of being unable or 
unwilling to meet financial obligations, which began in 2009 and continued into 2017. The 
evidence raises security concerns under the above disqualifying conditions, and shifts the 
burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s financial problems. The following four are potentially applicable: 
 
                                                 
2 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts arose between 2009 and 2017; 18 of the 20 debts 
remain unresolved. AG ¶ 20 (a) does not apply. Applicant attributed his financial problems 
to earning insufficient money and having to pay traffic tickets.  While earning insufficient 
money may have been a circumstance beyond his control, incurring debts he could not 
afford to repay and receiving traffic tickets were circumstances within his control. He did 
not provide evidence that he has attempted to responsibly manage his financial 
obligations; thus, AG ¶ 20(b) provides minimal mitigation. There is evidence that he 
recently enrolled in a DRP, which may have included financial counseling, but there is 
insufficient evidence to conclude that the 18 delinquent debts are being resolved and are 
under control. AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. He provided evidence that the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.p and 1.q. are paid. This established mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) for those 
debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
  Applicant is a mature individual who began working for a defense contractor in 
2016. In his May 2016 SCA, he disclosed two delinquent debts. During an April 2017 
interview, he learned of other delinquent debts. In the July 2017 SOR, the Government 
placed him on notice that his debts raised security concerns. After reviewing his Answer 
to the SOR, the Government notified him in the FORM that the evidence he submitted in 
his Answer was considered by Department Counsel to be insufficient to mitigate the 
financial allegations. Despite that notice, he did not provide additional evidence to confirm 
that he was resolving debts as he stated in his Answer. At this time, he has failed to 
present sufficient evidence of mitigation, including a track record of responsibly managing 
debts and financial obligations. He failed to meet his burden to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:          AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.o:      Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.p and 1.q:       For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.r through 1.t:       Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                                 
   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
