 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01502 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
June 15, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 1, 2017, in accordance with Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 
5220.6, as amended (Directive), the DoD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guidelines F and E.1 The SOR 
further informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant replied to the SOR on July 7, 2017, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. (RSOR.) The case was assigned to me on September 11, 2017. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
October 3, 2017, setting the hearing for November 8, 2017. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled on that date.  
                                                          
1 I considered the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006, as well as the new 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. My decision would be the same if the case was 
considered under the previous Adjudicative Guidelines, effective September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
At the hearing, the Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were 
admitted without objection.  Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented no 
documentary evidence. The record was left open until November 22, 2017, for receipt of 
additional documentation. While additional documents were not received initially in a 
timely manner, after inquiry from Department Counsel, Applicant did submit some 
documents which he contended he had previously sent. These have been identified and 
entered into evidence collectively as Exhibit A.  DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (TR) on November 16, 2017. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
make the following findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is 32 years old. He is married for the second time, and he has two 
stepchildren. He received a Master’s degree in Business in 2017 and a Bachelor’s 
degree in 2016. Applicant served on active duty with the United States Marine Corps 
from 2004 to 2012, when he received an Honorable Discharge. He is currently 
employed as a Systems Analyst by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security 
clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector. (Tr at 5-6, 19-22, 
28.)  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations  
 
 The SOR lists 14 allegations (1.a. through 1.n.) regarding financial difficulties, 
specifically overdue debts totaling approximately $23,000, under Adjudicative Guideline 
F. Applicant admitted all of the allegations in his RSOR. At the hearing, Applicant 
testified that the debt listed on the SOR as 1.m., in the amount of $430, has been paid. 
(Tr at 23.) Applicant submitted no documentation at the hearing or after the hearing to 
establish that this debt or any of the other SOR debts has been resolved or reduced.  
 
Applicant testified that a major reason for his financial problems was that his first 
wife abandoned their marriage and left him with all of the bills, which he was able to pay 
during their marriage with both of their incomes, but he could not pay the debts by 
himself. Applicant also stated that with the exception of SOR debt 1.m., he has not 
resolved or reduced any of his other delinquent debts. His current plan is to contact the 
creditors and negotiate settlements with them. At this time he has $5,000 saved, and he 
wants to start resolving debt within the next year. He has not received any kind of 
financial counseling to help him with his debt. (Tr at 31-36.)  
   
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The SOR lists four allegations (2.a. through 2.d.) regarding Personal Conduct, 
under Adjudicative Guideline E. Applicant admitted all of the allegations in his RSOR. 
 
 
3 
 
2.a. The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified material facts on an 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) that he executed on 
February 25, 2016. Section 26 asked whether: in the last seven years, Applicant had a 
judgment entered against him; had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency; had 
any account or credit card suspended, charged off or cancelled for failing to pay as 
agreed; had been over 120 days delinquent on any debts; or was currently over 120 
days delinquent on any debt. Applicant answered, “No,” to these questions. It is alleged 
that Applicant deliberately failed to disclose that information concerning his finances and 
overdue debts, as set forth in subparagraph 1.a. through 1.n., above. 
 
During his testimony, Applicant could not provide a reasonable explanation for 
why he did not list any of his delinquent debts. He contended that he never meant to 
mislead the Government about his finances; he simply did so in error. However while 
missing some of the debts could be possible, I do not find that leaving out all of the 
debts is a legitimate or reasonable explanation. (Tr at 23-25, 36-37.)  
 
2.b. The SOR alleges that Applicant also deliberately falsified material facts on 
the e-QIP that he executed on February 25, 2016. Section 22 asked whether: Applicant 
had ever been charged with an offense involving alcohol or drugs. Applicant did not 
disclose on this e-QIP the arrests, which are set in subparagraphs 2.c. and 2.d., below. 
At the hearing, Applicant had no explanation for his failure to include the DUI arrests on 
his e-QIP. (Tr at 25-26, 49-50.)  
 
2.c. The SOR alleges that Applicant was arrested and charged on or about 
January 18, 2015, with Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol (DUI). Applicant testified 
that he was found guilty for this DUI, and he was required to attend an 18 month alcohol 
related course, pay a $2,000 fine and complete 4 days of community service. While 
Applicant has paid the fine and completed the community service, at the time of the 
hearing, he had not completed all of the required class attendance. Finally, he is still on 
10 year probation for this DUI conviction, which is scheduled to end in 2025. (Tr at 26, 
45-47.)   
 
2.d. The SOR alleges that Applicant was arrested and charged on or about 
March 3, 2012, with DUI. Applicant testified that he was ultimately found guilty for this 
DUI and was found to have an alcohol blood level of .01. He was assigned to attend a 
first offender program, and before he could complete the program, he was arrested for 
the second DUI in 2015. (Tr at 42-45.)  
 
Applicant contends that he has not consumed alcohol since June 2017, and he 
attends Alcoholics Anonymous meetings twice a week. (Tr at 47-48.) Applicant 
submitted some Certificates of Commendation he had received during his military 
duties. (Exhibit A.)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage.  
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Applicant was alleged to have substantial delinquent debts. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions (a), (b), and (c) as applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; 
 
 AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20. As reviewed above, evidence was 
introduced to establish that Applicant’s financial problems occurred as a result of his 
divorce from his first wife.  Therefore, I find that mitigating factor AG ¶ 20 (b), is 
potentially applicable in this case. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 However, since Applicant has not established that he has resolved or reduced 
any of the delinquent debts, nor contacted any of the creditors to attempt to resolve his 
debts, I do not find that he has acted responsibly under the circumstances. Nor do I find 
 
6 
 
that any of the other mitigating factors are applicable in this case. Therefore, I find 
against Applicant under Guideline F. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
  The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. Because Applicant failed to include the information about his delinquent debts 
and his two DUIs on his e-QIP, I find that the evidence is sufficient to raise disqualifying 
condition (a) in this case. Also since he was arrested, charged and convicted for DUIs in 
2012 and 2015, and he will be on probation until 2025, I also find that disqualifying 
condition (c) is applicable in this case.    
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual may not 
properly safeguard classified or sensitive information; 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17, but I did not find that any of them are 
applicable in this case. I find against Applicant under Guideline E. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations and Personal 
Conduct security concerns under the whole-person concept.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. - 1.n.:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a. – 2.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
Martin H. Mogul 
Administrative Judge 
