 
1 
  
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 1 )  ISCR Case No. 17-00892 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny his eligibility 
for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s most recent use of 
marijuana was in April 2016. He used and purchased marijuana after completing a 
security clearance application in November 2014. He failed to mitigate the security 
concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement and substance misuse, and Guideline E, 
personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,2 on May 5, 2017, 
the DoD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
                                                          
1 This is Applicant’s name. The name on the Statement of Reasons is not reflected on his birth certificate 
or was ever used by Applicant. (Item 4)  
 
2 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
 
2 
Guideline H, drug involvement and substance misuse, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
On May 17, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the matter decided 
without a hearing. On July 25, 2017, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
Department Counsel (DC) submitted the Government's case in a File of Relevant Material 
(FORM). The FORM contained four attachments (Items). On August 2, 2017, Applicant 
received a copy of the FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to object to the 
Government’s evidence and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
potentially disqualifying conditions. Applicant’s response was due on September 6, 2017. 
No response was received. On December 19, 2017, I was assigned the case.  
 
While this case was pending a decision, the Director of National Intelligence issued 
Security Executive Agent Directive 4, establishing the National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AGs), which he made applicable to all covered individuals who 
require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or eligibility to hold 
a sensitive position. The new AGs supersede the Sept. 1, 2006 AGs and are effective “for 
all covered individuals” on or after June 8, 2017. Accordingly, I have evaluated Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility under the new AGs.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted using marijuana from 2002 to June 
2006 and using and purchasing marijuana from July 2012 to April 2016. He admitted his 
use and purchase after being granted a DoD security clearance on October 25, 2006. 
After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact. 
Applicant is a 34-year-old curriculum developer who has worked for a defense 
contractor since April 2014. He seeks to obtain a security clearance. (Item 3) From June 
2006 through June 2012, he honorably served as a signals intelligence analyst in the U.S. 
Army. (Item 2) He is married and has no children. (Item 2) 
On November 20, 2014, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). In his e-QIP he admitted using marijuana weekly from 
July 2012 through February 2014. He stated, “I was out of the military and decided to try 
it. I don’t believe cannabis should be illegal. I believe it is safer than alcohol, and I’m not 
ashamed to say I used it.” (Item 2) He admitted to purchasing marijuana when he used it. 
He also stated in his e-QIP about his intentions the following: 
For as long as I intend to hold and maintain a security clearance I will not 
use it. However, once cannabis prohibition is repealed and I no longer 
require a security clearance I may decide to try it again. 
                                                          
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (Sept. 1, 2006 AG) effective 
within the DoD on September 1, 2006.  
 
3 Application of the AGs that were in effect as of the issuance of the SOR would not change my decision in 
this case. The new AGs are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha/5220-6 R20170608.pdf. 
  
 
3 
 
When Applicant answered the SOR, he expressed his disagreement with the 
federal prohibition on marijuana: 
 
To whom it may concern, I admit to being a frequent cannabis user, I 
recognize that although many states permit cannabis for medical or 
recreational use, Virginia is not one of those states, and that the federal 
government chooses to maintain cannabis prohibition, despite no evidence 
that cannabis is any more harmful than alcohol or tobacco. I question the 
judgment of a government for disqualifying someone for what they do on 
their free time, while allowing thieves and charlatans to take over 
government who do not have our nation's best interests at heart. It is, of 
course, your perogative (sic) to decide who you allow to access classified 
information, but you lose out on having the skills of a good veteran 
intelligence analyst/instructional designer in doing so . . . With honesty and 
no regrets. 
 
 On May 16, 2016, Applicant completed a personal subject interview. (Item 4) 
During that interview he stated he first used marijuana in 2002. He used it a few times 
between 2002 and 2006.4 (Item 4) He stated from July 2012 until April 2016, the month 
prior to his interview, he used marijuana monthly. (Item 4) However, in his November 
2014 e-QIP he estimated from July 2012 until February 2014 he use marijuana weekly. 
He purchased marijuana monthly from July 2012 through April 2016. He continued to use 
marijuana after completing his e-QIP. 
 
Applicant asserted during his interview he never used marijuana while holding a 
security clearance. In his SOR response he admitted using marijuana after being granted 
a DoD security clearance in October 2006. (Item 1) He said he used marijuana after 
leaving the Army in June 2012. He also said during his interview that said he planned to 
continue using marijuana if his job does not test for it and as long as he does not need a 
security clearance. (Item 4) He also stated he would give up marijuana use if he needed 
a security clearance. He has smoked marijuana with his wife and purchased the 
marijuana from an associate of his wife. (Item 4)  
 
 Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in evaluating 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
                                                          
4 Applicant denies, and there is no evidence to the contrary, that he used marijuana while he was in the 
Army from June 2006 to June 2012. 
 
4 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the adjudication process is an examination of a sufficient period and a careful weight of a 
number of variables of an individual’s life to make an affirmative determination that the 
individual is an acceptable security risk. This is known as the whole-person concept.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse  
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
  
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any “controlled substance” as 
 
5 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above.  
 
In addition to the above matters, I note that the Director of National Intelligence 
(DNI) issued an October 25, 2014 memorandum concerning adherence to federal laws 
prohibiting marijuana use. In doing so, the DNI emphasized three things. First, no state 
can authorize violations of federal law, including violations of the Controlled Substances 
Act, which identifies marijuana as a Schedule I controlled drug. Second, changes to state 
law (and the laws of the District of Columbia) concerning marijuana use do not alter the 
national security adjudicative guidelines. And third, a person’s disregard of federal law 
concerning the use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana remains relevant when making 
eligibility decisions for sensitive national security positions.  
 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Those that are potentially applicable in this case include:  
  
(a) any substance misuse; and  
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position.  
  
In his November 2014 e-QIP, Applicant estimated from July 2012 until February 
2014 he used marijuana weekly. In his May 2016 personal subject interview, he stated 
from July 2012 until April 2016, the month prior the interview, he used marijuana monthly. 
He purchased marijuana monthly from July 2012 through April 2016, for his personal 
consumption. I find AG ¶ 25(a) applies. 
 
Applicant admitted using marijuana after being granted a security clearance in the 
Army and continued to use marijuana after completing his e-QIP. However, he denies 
using marijuana while holding a clearance. He stated he did not use marijuana while in 
the Army, but decided to try it after he was out of the Army in 2012. After leaving the 
Army, he would no longer have a security clearance. Therefore, he could have used it 
after 2006 and still not had a clearance when he used it. The record is unclear if he 
possessed a security clearance when he used marijuana. I find AG ¶ 25(f) does not apply. 
However, the record is clear that he continued to use marijuana after completing his 
November 2014 e-QIP and used it until April 2016, which raises serious concerns about 
his judgment and reliability.  
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Two potentially 
apply in this case:  
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
  
 
6 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to:  
  
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
  
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
  
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any 
future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of 
national security eligibility.  
  
  Applicant’s use of marijuana was frequent during the time frame he used it. He 
claims abstinence since his last use in April 2016, approximately two years ago. An 
applicant’s use of illegal drugs after having completed a security clearance application 
raises questions about his or her judgment, reliability, and willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-03450 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 11, 2015). 
 
 Given the circumstances of Applicant’s use (i.e. using marijuana weekly or 
monthly, at times, from July 2012 through April 2016 and knowing such use was against 
federal law), insufficient time has passed to determine that recurrence is unlikely. 
Applicant’s future intent regarding marijuana is to use it if his job does not test for it and 
he does not need a security clearance.  
 
There is no showing Applicant has disassociated himself from drug-using 
associates or contacts, which would include his wife. There is no showing he has changed 
or avoids the environment where drugs are used. His claimed abstention is insufficient to 
convince me that recurrence is unlikely. The recency of his past use after completing a 
security clearance application and disregard for federal law casts doubt upon his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) do not apply.  
  
It is well-settled that administrative agencies, such as DOHA, have limited 
authority. See, e.g., Thunder Basin Coal Company v. Reich, 510 U.S. 200, 215 (1994). 
DOHA Judges have no authority to entertain challenges to statutes, regulations, or, as in 
this case, the Federal law prohibiting the use of marijuana. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-
01961 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 2007). It is also well-settled that DOHA proceedings are 
intended to adjudicate security eligibility of individual applicants and not as a forum to 
pass judgment on Federal laws or processes. See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 03-06174 at 8 
(App. Bd. Feb. 28, 2005) and ISCR Case No. 14-03734 at 3 and fn. 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 
2016).  
 
Access to national secrets entails a fiduciary duty to the United States. A person 
who enters into such a fiduciary relationship is charged with abiding by legal and 
regulatory guidance regardless of whether he or she believes that guidance to be wise. 
 
7 
See, e.g. ISCR Case No. 16-3460 at 4 (App. Bd. May 24, 2018) Drug involvement and 
substance misuse security concerns persist. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
  
  AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. . . .  
  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable:  
  
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing.  
  SOR ¶ 2.a is a cross-alleges the drug involvement allegations in SOR ¶ 1. The 
security concerns associated with that conduct are largely addressed under Guideline H 
above. The record established the above disqualifying condition, requiring additional 
inquiry about the possible applicability of the applicable mitigating conditions. AG ¶ 17 
provides conditions that could mitigate the personal conduct security concerns. I 
considered the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 including: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
  
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur;  
  
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
  
 
8 
(f) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, has 
ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations.  
  
 None of the above conditions have been shown to apply. The use and purchase 
of marijuana is not minor and only a little over two years has passed since Applicant’s 
last purchase and use. The use and purchase did not occur under unique circumstances. 
To Applicant’s credit he was forthcoming when he completed his e-QIP and during his 
personal interview. However, there is no showing of counseling to change the behavior 
or that the behavior is unlikely to recur. Applicant has not presented evidence to support 
any of the above mitigating conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept  
  
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
  
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s honorable 
military service and that he voluntarily disclosed his marijuana use on his e-QIP and to 
an investigator. However, I also considered that he made a conscious and calculated 
choice to violate federal law by engaging in marijuana use. Marijuana use is prohibited 
before, during, and after completing a security clearance application. Indeed, it is 
prohibited without reference to clearance adjudications, and there is no reason to believe 
that Applicant was unaware of this, any more than he would have been unaware that 
other criminal acts are forbidden at all times.  
 
In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. In so doing, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence 
to supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, 
 
9 
articulate his position, and mitigate the drug involvement and personal conduct security 
concerns. Considerable concern is raised about his willingness to comply with federal law 
by failing to provide such information, and by relying on only a single paragraph of 
explanation in his SOR response. Security concerns remain. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, drug 
involvement and substance misuse, and Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Drug Involvement 
and Substance Misuse:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
