 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02974 
  ) 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Allison Marie, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MURPHY, Braden M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the financial security 
concerns relating to an outstanding state tax lien and other delinquent debts. Applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 21, 2015. 
On September 19, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations.1 Applicant answered the SOR on November 16, 2017, and elected a 
decision on the written record, in lieu of a hearing.  
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Security Executive 
Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, effective within the DOD as of June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
 
On January 5, 2018, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM), including documents identified as Items 1 through 7. Applicant 
received the FORM on January 19, 2018. He was afforded an opportunity to file objections 
and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not respond to 
the FORM. The SOR and the answer (Items 1 and 3) are the pleadings in the case. Item 
2 (Applicant’s signed receipt of the SOR) is a procedural document. Items 3-7 are 
admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned to me on April 27, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c, with brief explanations but no 
documents. His admissions and other comments are incorporated into the findings of fact. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 58 years old. He and his wife have been married since 1996. He has 
one adult stepson. He was previously married from 1984-1996. Applicant served 
honorably in the United States Navy from 1980 to 2001. Since then, he has been 
employed with federal contractors in the information technology field. According to his 
SCA, he was last granted a security clearance in 2002. (Items 4, 5) 
 
 The Statement of Reasons concerns three alleged delinquencies, all of which 
appear on Applicant’s August 2017 credit report, and all of which he admitted. SOR ¶¶ 
1.a ($3,056) and 1.b ($1,895) are past-due credit cards. The “dates of last activity,” or 
“DLA” are listed on Applicant’s credit report as 2013 and 2012, respectively. Applicant 
said in his Answer that debt 1.a was “being addressed.” Debt 1.b is an account opened 
by his wife. Applicant said he was not aware the account had become past due, but he 
said he would pay the debt. (Items 1, 3, 6) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c is an outstanding state tax lien for $18,381. It was filed in January 2011 
against Applicant and his wife. The tax lien concerns tax years 2004-2009. The tax lien 
was filed in State 1. (Items 6, 7) Applicant and his wife lived in State 1 from February 2004 
to December 2009 – the same tax years covered by the tax lien. (Item 1)  
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.c. He asserted in his Answer that three days after he 
moved to State 1, he was in an auto accident. He asserted that his insurance company 
denied him coverage because his insurance had lapsed when he moved (apparently 
because he failed to inform the insurance company of his move, though Applicant did not 
say this). Applicant claimed that State 1 tax authorities “attached an insurance cost to my 
taxes” of about $1,200, with the rest of the $18,000 being fees and penalties. Applicant 
claimed to be contesting the matter, and said once it was settled, he would pay what he 
owes. Applicant provided no documents to support any of his claims. (Item 3) 
 
 Applicant did not list either the credit card debts or the tax lien on his SCA in 
October 2015. When confronted about the debts during his interview in October 2016, he 
stated that he was not aware of the tax lien. He also said had never lived in the county in 
 
3 
 
 
State 1 where the lien was filed. This is true. However, the county where the lien was filed 
is also the county where the capital of State 1 (and thus, the State Comptroller’s office) is 
located. Further, Applicant’s address in State 2 listed on the 2011 tax lien is the same 
address he gave on his SCA as his home in 2011. (Items 4, 7) 
 
 Applicant provided no documents concerning the current status of either SOR ¶¶ 
1.a, 1.b or 1.c, nor did he provide any documents showing any payments towards those 
debts, all of which he admitted. He provided no documents concerning his current 
financial situation, such as his income, assets, and expenses. 
  
Policies 
 
 It is well established that no one has a right to a security clearance.2 As the 
Supreme Court noted in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent standard 
indicates that security determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”3 
  
The adjudicative guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
                                                          
2 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ 
to a security clearance”).  
 
3 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
4 
 
 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.4 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations, and  
 
(g)  . . . failure to pay annual Federal, state or local income tax as required. 
 
Applicant did not document, or prove, any link between his auto accident and the 
tax lien. It is far more likely that Applicant and his wife failed to file or pay State 1 state 
income taxes, as required, when they lived there during tax years 2004-2009 (the same 
years noted in the tax lien). AG ¶ 19(g) is established as to SOR ¶ 1.c. All three debts 
alleged satisfy AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
                                                          
4 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements.  
 
 Applicant did not provide any documents regarding the current status of any of his 
SOR debts, nor did he provide proof of any payments made. He provided no documents 
to verify his claim that the tax debt related to an insurance dispute following an auto 
accident which occurred many years ago. It is reasonable to expect applicants to present 
documentation about the satisfaction of specific debts.5 Applicant did not do so. His 
assertions, standing alone, are insufficient to show that the SOR debts have been, or are 
being, resolved in a responsible way.  
 
 Each of the SOR debts are several years old. However, as they remain unresolved, 
they are also ongoing. They therefore continue to cast doubt on Applicant’s current 
reliability, trustworthiness and good judgment. Applicant also provided no documents 
concerning his current financial situation, such as his assets, income, or expenses, 
evidence which might show his ability to resolve his debts. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant did not establish that any of the debts are due to conditions beyond his 
control. He did not establish that he has acted responsibly to resolve them, or that he has 
undertaken good-faith efforts to do so. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) do not apply. As to the tax 
lien, Applicant did not establish that he has made any arrangements to pay or resolve 
that debt, which is by far the largest and most significant debt alleged (and the oldest). 
AG ¶ 20(g) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 09-07091 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 11, 2010). 
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(a), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis.  
 
 Applicant has had past-due debts, including significant tax debt, for several years. 
He has not shown any reasonable effort in resolving them. He has failed to meet his 
burden of establishing that his financial issues are in the past, or that he is resolving them 
responsibly. The record evidence therefore leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for 
access to classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                   
 
_____________________________ 
Braden M. Murphy 
Administrative Judge 
