 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02463 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 11, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On June 1, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-86).  
(Government Exhibit 1.) On August 30, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. (Item 1.) The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines, effective within the DoD after 
June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 27, 2017, and requested a 
hearing before an Administrative Judge.  DOHA received the request on November 16. 
2017, and the case was assigned to another Administrative Judge.  The notice of 
hearing was issued on December 11, 2017, scheduling the hearing for January 18, 
2018.  The case was transferred to the undersigned Administrative Judge on January 
 
2 
 
17, 2018.  The hearing was convened as scheduled.  At the hearing the Government 
presented five exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 5, which were 
admitted without objection.  Applicant presented three exhibits, referred to as 
Applicant’s Exhibits A through C, which were admitted without objection.  He also 
testified on his own behalf.  The record in this matter remained open until close of 
business on January 29, 2018, to allow the Applicant to submit additional supporting 
documentation.  Applicant submitted seven Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as A 
through G were admitted without objection.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(TR) on January 26, 2018.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and 
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.   
  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 40 years old and married.  He has a high school diploma.  He is 
employed with a defense contractor as a Crane Operator/Rigger/Equipment Operator.   
He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  
 
The SOR identified four delinquent debts totaling approximately $19,769.  
Applicant admits all of the debts, except 1.d., that he asserts is a duplicate of the debt 
set forth in allegation 1.c.  (Tr. pp. 39-42.)  The debt in the SOR is for delinquent 
consumer and medical debt. Credit reports of Applicant dated July 6, 2016; June 20, 
2017; and November 3, 2017, reflect that each of the debts remain outstanding.  
(Applicant’s Exhibits 3, 4, and 5.)  
 
Applicant served in the United States Navy as an inactive reservist from July 
1997 to July 2001.  He began working for his current employer in May 2016. 
 
 Prior to his current employment, Applicant was laid off from his job in September 
2015 and was unemployed until May 2016.  After March 2016, his unemployment 
benefits were exhausted.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  As a result, he fell behind on his bills.  
He tried to sustain his household with unemployment benefits, but it was not enough.  
He had no savings.  In retrospect, Applicant realizes that planning ahead for life 
surprises, like losing a job, would have been a good idea.  He was forced to make 
difficult decisions about whether to continue making payments toward his debt or to try 
to keep his home and food on the table for his family.  For the most part, he believes 
that he did not live beyond his means, and only purchased necessities.  Prior to his job 
lay-off, he had no financial problems.  At that time he was earning $27 per hour.  At his 
current job, he earns $23 per hour.  Due to the current decrease in pay, it has taken him 
 
3 
 
some time to address his delinquent debt.  The following debts listed in the SOR 
became owing:   
 
1.a. A debt to a creditor for a vehicle Applicant purchased prior to his job lay-off was 
repossessed when he could no longer afford to make the payments.  The vehicle was 
sold by the creditor, and the deficiency owed by the Applicant is approximately $8,614.  
The account remains owing.   
 
1.b.  A debt owed to a creditor for a delinquent credit card account was charged off in 
the amount of $4,348, and remains owing.   
 
1.c.  A debt owed to a creditor for a delinquent medical account was placed for 
collections in the amount of approximately $3,585.  The debt remains owing.  Applicant 
explained that he developed kidney stones and had to go to the emergency room for 
treatment when he could not afford medical insurance. 
 
1.d.  This debt is apparently the same debt as that set forth in allegation in 1.c. above.  
Accordingly, 1.d. is found for the Applicant. 
 
 After receiving the SOR in this matter, in September 2017, Applicant contacted 
and hired a debt consolidation company to assist him and his wife in resolving their 
debt.   (Applicant’s Exhibits A and C.)  Applicant testified that the company has not yet 
begun to address any of the debts listed in the SOR, since they are focusing on his 
wife’s debt first.  Applicant testified that together they have about $28,000 in delinquent 
debt.  (Tr. p. 57.)  Applicant is currently making bi-weekly payments of $253 for 42 
months to the debt consolidation company to resolve their debts.  Applicant erroneously 
testified that his payments were $150 bi-weekly for 24 months toward the debt until it is 
resolved.  He later testified that his wife handles the finances, and has a better handle 
on their financial matters.    
 
 Applicant Post-Hearing Exhibit A indicates that upon re-evaluating the debt   
consolidation program, Applicant cancelled the agreement.  He learned that the debt 
consolidation company was taking 25 percent of what he owes in debt from his money 
he pays to them each month to cover their fees.  He decided that he could contact his 
creditors and set up payment arrangements himself, and use that money that they take 
in fees toward his payments.  Applicant testified that in January 2018, he set up 
payment plans with each of the creditors listed in the SOR on his own.  Applicant’s wife 
also prepared a financial budget that she and the Applicant plan to follow in order to 
maintain financial stability and resolve their debts.   
 
 Applicant stated that when he was hired by his current employer, he knew the job 
required a security clearance, but he did not understand the importance of having his 
finances in order.  (Tr. p. 61.)       
 
 A letter from the Applicant’s supervisor from August 2016 through August 2017, 
indicates that he considers the Applicant to be reliable, committed to his job, and 
dependable.  Applicant is described as a team player who would take on any job and do 
 
4 
 
it right, with outstanding character and high integrity and drive.  He is recommended for 
a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)  
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision.  The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept.  The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debt regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant is delinquently indebted in the amount of $28,000.  His actions 
demonstrate both a history of not addressing his debt and an inability to do so. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
  The following mitigating condition under the Financial Considerations is 
potentially applicable under AG ¶ 20. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
  It is recognized that Applicant’s long period of unemployment, a period of 
underemployment, and his failure to plan for a financial emergency contributed to his 
 
6 
 
current financial situation.  Although he hired a debt consolidation company to assist 
him in resolving his debts, he has now cancelled their contract, and has taken on the 
responsibility himself to resolve his debts.  He has recently set up payments plans with 
each of the outstanding creditors listed in the SOR, and plans to follow his payment 
plans until the debts are completely resolved.  Applicant is commended for this recent 
action, but he should have done this long ago.  There needs to be a pattern of 
systematic payments to show a pattern of financial responsibility.  This evidence is 
lacking.  There is insufficient evidence here to show that he has acted responsibly under 
the circumstances.   His inaction casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1..d:  For Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
                                                
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
