 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
         
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ADP Case No. 17-04026 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                 For Government: Robert B. Blazewick, Esquire, Department Counsel 
                                                      For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
The Applicant seeks eligibility to occupy an automated data processing (ADP) 
position designated ADP-I/II/III. On December 28, 2017, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In a response 
dated January 22, 2018, she admitted 11 of 13 allegations and requested a determination 
based on the written record. On February 13, 2018, the Government issued a File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) with five attachments (“Items”). The case was assigned to me 
on May 10, 2018. Based on my review of the record as a whole, I find Applicant mitigated 
financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old single mother of two. She is currently employed as a 
claims processor. She has held multiple jobs over the past few years, but was 
unemployed from September 2016 to May 2017, May 2015 to January 2016, and March 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
2 
2013 to September 2013. Applicant has earned a high school diploma and a bachelor’s 
degree. There is no evidence she has received financial counseling. 
 
At issue in the SOR are 13 allegations, each reflecting a different delinquent debt. 
Those obligations amount to about $12,900. At least nine of those debts, amounting to 
about $10,500, are medical in nature. In her SOR answer, Applicant admitted 
responsibility for all but two of the debts at issue, denying the allegations at 1.l and 1.m. 
She wrote that the debts noted in allegations 1.a-1.c and 1.e-1.f are in “dormant hold” 
and, therefore, cannot be consolidated into one repayment plan. Consequently, she 
would have to make an individual payment arrangement for each of those debts, an action 
to which she cannot commit at this time. (SOR Response) She noted that she has 
consolidated the delinquent debts noted at SOR allegations 1.g-1.i and is currently 
making monthly $50 payments on that plan, and expected to satisfy the debts at 
allegations 1.d and 1.j by April 2018. In addition, with regard to the debt at allegation 1.k, 
Applicant reported that she intended to resolve the outstanding balance before the end 
of 2018. 
 
In response to the FORM, however, Applicant provided documentary evidence of 
full payment on the debt at 1.m ($176). Three $50 monthly payments were noted as paid 
between January 2018 and March 2018 toward the repayment plan encompassing the 
debts noted at 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i. The $632 delinquent debt at 1.d was satisfied with a 
payment of approximately $348. She also settled the $811 delinquent debt at 1.j with a 
payment of $365.  
 
Applicant’s income is highly limited. She is paid an hourly wage of $9.21 an hour. 
Overtime is also limited at her workplace, and she has not been offered the opportunity 
to perform such work. Her regular bills, however, are timely met. She has not increased 
her debt with new delinquent accounts. She attributed most of her delinquent medical 
debts to the delivery of a child and emergency room visits. (FORM, Item 4) She receives 
no healthcare benefits, and she accrues neither medical leave nor vacation leave. Any 
time missed from work is unpaid, including missed time due to inclement weather. It is 
her intent to satisfy all of her debt.  
 
Policies 
 
In this matter, The Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 4, National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), effective June 8, 2017, is controlling. The DOD considers 
ADP positions to be “sensitive positions.” For a person to be eligible for sensitive duties, 
the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness must be such that assigning the 
person to a sensitive position is clearly consistent with the national security interests of 
the United States. AG ¶ 2.c. Applicants for ADP positions are entitled to the procedural 
protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination is made. 
(Under Secretary of Defense’s Memorandum for the Director, Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals, dated November 19, 2004)  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A public trust position decision resolves whether it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant or continue an applicant’s access to sensitive 
information. The Government must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. If it does, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating 
that it is clearly consistent with the national security interest of the United States to grant 
or continue his or her access to sensitive information.  
 
Persons with access to sensitive information enter into a fiduciary relationship with 
the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling 
interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of those who must protect national security as their own. The “clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security” standard requires that “any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in 
favor of the national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). An eligibility for a public trust position decision 
is not a determination of the loyalty of the applicant concerned. It is merely an indication 
that the applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established 
for issuing access to sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the trustworthiness concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect sensitive information.  
 
Here, Applicant admits, and her credit reports reveal, that she has nearly $12,900 
in unaddressed delinquent debt. This is sufficient to invoke financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do so;  
and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance related security concerns posed here:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
The delinquent debts at issue are multiple in number and, based on the scant 
evidence offered, largely unaddressed. Despite Applicant’s limited income, approximately 
$1,040 has been expended toward her overall debt of almost $12,900. The reasons as to 
how this situation was created and why it continues, however, are mostly unknown, 
although she represents that “most” of the medical debt at issue is related to the birth of 
a child and emergency room visits. While it can be assumed that those medical debts 
may have created the underlying debts for those delinquent debts, insufficient facts were 
offered to gauge whether Applicant acted responsibly at the time they were acquired 
through today. Further, there is no evidence she has received financial counseling, and 
there is no suggestion she has formally disputed any of the debts cited. At best, AG ¶ 
20(b) applies in part, and AG ¶ 20(d) fully applies. None of the other available mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. Under AG ¶ 2(a), the need to utilize a “whole-
person” evaluation is set forth. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
 
 
 
 
5 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated 
my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant, 31, is a single mother of two preteen children. Her present workplace 
pays her $9.21 an hour, offers no healthcare or leave benefits, and does not offer 
opportunities for notable overtime. As a threshold issue, it is apparent from the facts that 
Applicant has the genuine desire and intention of addressing the delinquent debts at 
issue.  The majority of her delinquent debt is medical in nature, with most of those debt 
related to childbirth and emergency room visits. Applicant admits her financial resources 
are tight, but she nevertheless is making progress on the debts at issue.  
 
Despite her limited income, Applicant has made a good-faith effort to settle or 
satisfy multiple delinquent debts by payment of nearly $1,050 on the delinquent debt at 
issue. While her pace in addressing or settling these debts may be slow, her methodology 
appears at this point to be appropriately measured and successful. Given her efforts to 
date, and in light of her demonstrated intent to satisfy her financial issues, financial 
considerations trustworthiness concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.m:   For Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. 
Eligibility for a public trust position is granted.  
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
