 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ADP Case No. 17-02651 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the alleged financial and personal conduct 
trustworthiness concerns. National security eligibility for a position of trust is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On August 18, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD for SORs issued after June 8, 2017.  
 
 On August 28, 2017, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and elected to have 
her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was mailed to 
  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant on September 28, 2017, and received by her on November 7, 2017. The FORM 
notified Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of receipt of the FORM. Applicant 
timely submitted a letter and two attachments that I marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A.  
Neither the Government nor Applicant objected to any exhibits. Items 1 through 7 and AE 
A are admitted into evidence. On February 18, 2018, the Department of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) assigned this case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations contained in the SOR. (Item 2.)  
 
 Applicant is 62 years old and divorced twice. She has a grown child. She earned 
an associate’s degree in 1976. She started working for her current employer, a defense 
contractor, in 2005. In May 2016, she submitted an application for a position of public 
trust (e-QIP). (Item 3.) 
  
 Based on Applicant’s admissions and credit bureau reports (CBR) from May 2017, 
June 2016, and October 2005, the SOR alleged a 1997 Chapter 7 bankruptcy and 23 
delinquent debts. They include credit card bills, medical debts, miscellaneous debts, and 
student loans, which became delinquent between 2010 and 2016 and totaled $13,438. 
(Items 4, 5, 6)  
 
 Applicant admitted that she needed assistance with managing money. She 
recently contacted her employer’s Employee Assistance Program (EAP). (Answer) She 
stated that she intend to pay her debts before she retired in four years. She was ashamed 
of her “poor money management.” (AE A.)   
 
 Applicant provided proof that she paid two alleged debts. In November 2017, she 
paid the $129 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g and the $132 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.u. (AE A) 
She stated that she made a payment arrangement for another debt, but it is unclear which 
allegation she is referring to. She did not submit proof that she started making payments 
on that debt. She did not provide credible documentation that she paid, resolved, or 
disputed the other 21 debts.  
  
 In response to question Section 26: Financial Record of her May 2016 E-QIP, 
Applicant did not disclose any delinquent debts or charged-off accounts. (Item 3) In her 
Answer, she explained that the e-QIP was intimidating and that she did not have all of the 
requested information when she completed it. (Item 2) In her Response to the FORM, 
she acknowledged that she “exercised poor judgment” when she answered the financial 
questions and admitted she should have answered affirmatively to the financial question. 
(AE A) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a position of 
trust. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
  The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. According to Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant 
is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.” 
 
 A person applying for a position of trust seeks to enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship transcends 
normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government reposes a 
high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national security 
eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant 
may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The trustworthiness concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
are set out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
 
4 
 
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns. Three may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Beginning in 2010, Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that she has been 
unable or unwilling to fully resolve. Previously, she filed and had debts discharged in 
bankruptcy in 1997. The evidence raises the above trustworthiness concerns, thereby 
shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could potentially mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial problems: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 
5 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Twenty-one of the alleged delinquent debts are ongoing, unresolved, and continue 
to cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability. AG ¶ 20 (a) does not apply. There is no evidence 
to establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) because Applicant acknowledged that poor 
management of money caused her financial problems. Although she submitted evidence 
that she inquired about participating in credit or financial counseling, there is no evidence 
that she completed it. There are no clear indications that her 21 SOR-alleged debts are 
under control. The evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
paid and resolved two debts, which demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.u. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to those debts. Applicant did not 
provide evidence to substantiate a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of any 
debts. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the trustworthiness concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant acknowledged that she knowingly failed to disclose delinquent debts in 
her 2016 e-QIP. The evidence establishes the above disqualifying condition.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides a condition that could potentially mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns raised under this guideline:  
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
There is insufficient evidence to establish mitigation under the above condition. 
The failure to disclose requested information is not a minor offense and casts doubt on 
Applicant’s reliability and judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a 62-year-old woman who has worked for a defense contractor since 
2005. In August 2017, the Government issued a SOR to her alleging a history of 
delinquent debts and the non-disclosure of them. In September 2017, the Government’s 
FORM specifically informed her that she failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate 
the allegations in the SOR, and gave her 30 days to submit additional information. She 
provided minimal evidence, addressing the allegations. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, eligibility, and 
suitability for a position of trust. She failed to meet her burden to mitigate the 
trustworthiness concerns raised under the guidelines for financial considerations and 
personal conduct. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:                AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
     Subparagraphs: 1.a through 1.f:               Against Applicant 
                    
                    Subparagraph 1.g:                           For Applicant 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.h through 1.t:      Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.u:        For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.v-1.x       Against Applicant 
 
                   Paragraph 2, Guideline E:             AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 2.a:                           Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. National eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                               
                                               
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
