 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03766 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Gregg A. Cervi, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on August 9, 2016, 
requesting a Department of Defense (DOD) security clearance. On December 13, 2017, 
the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant responded to the SOR on January 
4, 2018, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge.1  
 
The case was assigned to me on February 8, 2018. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on February 22, 2018, 
scheduling the hearing for March 15, 2018. The hearing was convened as scheduled. 
                                                          
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
2 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant and his father testified, and Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A was admitted into 
evidence without objection. In a post-hearing submission, Applicant submitted several 
documents marked as AE B that were admitted without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old industrial scale modeler for a government contractor. He 
received his general education degree in 2000, and has some college credit. He 
honorably served in the U.S. Navy from 2000 to 2009, and is a partially-disabled veteran. 
He twice deployed in 2004 and 2006. He was married in 2001, separated in 2011 and 
divorced in 2015. He has three biological children and another child that he has raised as 
his own as the child’s father was incarcerated and does not provide any child support. His 
ex-spouse has custody of the four children but is unemployed. Applicant has visitation 
rights for all four children every other week, and provides financial support for all, including 
voluntary support for the non-biological child. 
 
 Applicant was employed by a defense contractor from 2009 to 2013, but was 
discharged because of a dispute over lost work time and for his refusal to check off work 
that was not properly completed. He was self-employed from 2013 to 2016 as he tried to 
start an industrial modeling business, and then rehired by his previous employer. While 
self-employed, he struggled financially and had significant expenses as a result of his 
separation and divorce. He does not currently hold a security clearance, but has held one 
in the past without incident.  
 
 The SOR alleges four delinquent debts totaling nearly $22,000, including child 
support arrearages, two credit union debts, and a small medical debt. Applicant generally 
admitted the allegations, and provided extensive explanations and documentation with 
his Answer to the SOR.  
 
 While Applicant was self-employed he earned very little, and was supported by 
loans from his father and his veteran’s administration disability payments. He fell behind 
in his child-support payments as he was giving money directly to his ex-spouse and 
buying items for the children when they were with him, but not getting credit for the 
expenditures with the state child-support enforcement authorities. Once he regained full-
time employment, he began making substantial payments toward his child-support 
obligations, and by February 2018, he was no longer in arrears. He now pays the monthly 
amount owed through an automatic payment plan and is current on all obligations. The 
two credit union debts were from a consolidation loan while he was married and a credit 
card. Prior to the hearing, Applicant was in negotiations with the credit-union on 
repayment plans, but wanted to ensure he was current on his child-support payments 
first. Since resolving his child support issues, he has also settled and paid the two credit-
union debts and the small medical debt in full.  
 
 Applicant uses a credit-monitoring service and is current on all of his debts and 
expenses. He has saved about $15,000 toward the future purchase of a home, and has 
about $600 in net remainder after payment of monthly expenses. 
 
3 
 
Law and Policies 
 
The Director of National Intelligence (DNI) issued revised adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) in a Security Executive Agent Directive, on June 8, 2017. The revised guidelines are 
applicable to this decision. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . .  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has had financial problems and incurred delinquent debts following the 
loss of steady employment and his divorce. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 
5 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to falling behind on child-support 
payments and other debts during his separation and divorce, and loss of a steady job in 
2013. Once he was rehired, he was able to gain control of his finances and completely 
satisfy his debts. He provided evidence of actions taken with regard to the SOR debts 
and his financial status is now good. I believe Applicant’s financial management is now 
under control, and he no longer carries delinquent debts. The likelihood of a recurrence 
of financial difficulty is low. Applicant’s past financial issues no longer cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), (b), and (d) are 
applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis.  
 
I considered Applicant’s testimony, his honorable military service, and documents 
provided after the hearing. Applicant has shown current financial responsibility and 
appears to have control of his finances and child support obligations. 
 
 
6 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     For Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
