1 
 
 
 
 
                 DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
     DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
 ) 
    )   ISCR Case No. 17-02286 
   ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Blazewick, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Francis J. Flanagan, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant was investigated by the FBI in September 2009 for suspected Internet 
access to child pornography. Applicant was not prosecuted for any crime, and he denied 
any knowing access to child pornography. He engaged in online fantasy role-playing, and 
he continues to access adult-domination pornography. He has been open about the 
conduct and does not intend to access child pornography. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On October 18, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing a security 
concern under Guideline E, personal conduct. The SOR explained why the DOD CAF was 
unable to find it clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue security 
clearance eligibility for him. The DOD CAF took the action under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative 
 
2 
 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or Eligibility to 
Hold a Sensitive Position (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on November 7, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
Counsel for Applicant entered his appearance on November 10, 2017. On January 9, 
2018, the case was assigned to me to conduct a hearing to determine whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
On January 11, 2018, I scheduled a hearing for February 6, 2018.  
 
At the hearing, three Government exhibits (GEs 1-3) were admitted in evidence. A 
November 30, 2017 letter forwarding discovery of the GEs to Applicant’s counsel was 
marked as a hearing exhibit (HE 1) but not admitted as an evidentiary exhibit. Applicant 
testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on February 13, 2018. 
 
I held the record open to February 23, 2018, for documentary exhibits from 
Applicant. Applicant submitted four character references (AEs A-D), which were accepted 
into the record without any objections. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges under Guideline E (SOR ¶ 1.a) that the FBI seized Applicant’s 
personal laptop computer in September 2009 and conducted a preliminary search that 
revealed one or more images or videos of potential child pornography. When Applicant 
responded to the SOR, he admitted that the FBI seized “a family laptop computer” in 
approximately September 2009. He denied the allegation in part, averring that he was not 
the only person who had access to the laptop. He did not dispute that the preliminary 
search revealed one or more questionable images “that may have been child 
pornography,” but he was not arrested or criminally charged. 
 
 After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old senior technical support engineer with a bachelor’s degree 
awarded in December 1983. He served on active duty in the U.S. military at an enlisted 
rank for six months before being discharged into the inactive reserves. From September 
1979 to December 1983, he attended a military institute on an athletic scholarship. He 
entered another branch of the U.S. military in May 1984 and completed officer candidate 
school. He held a top secret clearance from approximately July 1985 to September 1988, 
when he was honorably discharged. (GE 1; Tr. 15-21.) 
 
On his discharge from the U.S. military, Applicant began employment with a security 
company, initially as an operations manager. He eventually transitioned to the personnel 
department and became regional security director. After the company won a contract to 
provide security for a defense contractor, Applicant became his branch’s facility security 
3 
 
officer (FSO). He held a secret clearance granted to him in 1989 or 1990. His clearance 
was no longer needed after he left that employment in 1991 or 1992. (GE 1; Tr. 19-20.) 
 
After a short employment with another security company, Applicant pursued a 
different career. He attended a community college from September 1993 to June 1995, 
and earned an associate’s degree in engineering. (GE 1; Tr. 20.) Available information 
does not include any details about Applicant’s subsequent employer(s) until May 2003, 
when he accepted a contract position as a tool designer. In June 2008, he began a new job 
where he again did not need a security clearance. (GE 1; Tr. 20-21.) 
 
In September 2009, Applicant was contacted at work by his then wife to whom he 
had been married since August 1991. She informed him that three FBI agents were at their 
home. When he arrived home, he was met by the FBI agents, who wanted to speak with 
him about his computer access. Applicant advised the agents that he had four email 
addresses, one of which was primarily for online fantasy role-playing with others about the 
rise of black power, black domination, and white enslavement. He denied any plan to act 
on the fantasies. He expressed interest in adult-domination pornography but not child 
pornography. Applicant informed the FBI agents that he had a laptop computer; that no 
one else used it; and that there was adult pornography on it but no child pornography. 
Applicant gave the FBI consent to seize and search all computers used in his home, and to 
use image-scan software in conducting its searches. The FBI seized two computer towers 
and Applicant’s laptop. (GEs 2, 3.) 
 
The FBI’s preliminary forensic examination of Applicant’s laptop on October 1, 2009, 
reportedly revealed over 200 images and six video files of “investigative interest” (possible 
child pornography) on his computer. An FBI task force officer filed a complaint with the 
state’s department of children and families (DCF) about Applicant’s possible involvement 
with child pornography because of the images found on Applicant’s computer. The FBI 
informed the DCF that its search revealed over 200 images and movies of child 
pornography. The report to the DCF was required by the state because Applicant’s 
underage step-grandchild was living in his home at the time. (Tr. 28.) There is no evidence 
that anything ever came of that complaint to the DCF. On June 2, 2010, the U.S. Attorney 
declined to file charges against Applicant because of a lack of prosecutorial evidence. (GE 
3; Tr. 25-26.) 
 
In mid-October 2010, Applicant and his wife divorced after 19 years of marriage. In 
December 2012, Applicant began a cohabitant relationship with his current significant 
other. She has three sons now ages 20, 23, and 25. (GE 1.) 
 
In February 2013, Applicant was laid off from his job as a tooling supervisor. He was 
unemployed until April 2014, when he accepted a short-term contract position as a process 
engineer. When he contract ended in June 2014, he was unemployed. He was a part-time 
engineering consultant from October 2014 to February 2015, when he began working for 
his current defense-contractor employer. (GE 1.) 
 
4 
 
On February 23, 2015, Applicant completed and certified to the accuracy of a 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86). He was granted an interim secret 
clearance for his duties working with engineering teams on design, manufacturing, and 
assembly issues. (Tr. 21.) 
 
On March 29, 2017, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in part about whether he had been involved in 
online pornography. Applicant indicated that he had consented to the FBI’s seizure of three 
computers in September 2009, which belonged to him, to his then spouse, and to his 
stepdaughter. A few months later, he was notified by the FBI that he could retrieve the 
computers, although his hard drive was retained by the FBI. He was told by an FBI agent 
that his hard drive contained several hundred pornographic images, one possibly of child 
pornography. Applicant denied to the OPM investigator that he had ever searched for or 
saved to his computer images containing child pornography or associated with child 
pornography. He acknowledged an interest in adult pornography and the domination-
submissive lifestyle since his teenage years. Applicant described himself as dominant and 
admitted that he had engaged in this lifestyle with both his ex-wife and his current 
cohabitant. Applicant indicated that his employer was unaware of his preferences in this 
regard, but that his family and friends were aware. He admitted that he accesses adult 
pornographic websites to view images and videos with a preference for male-on-female 
pornography, lesbian pornography, and dominant-submissive pornography. He also related 
that he participates in online sexual fantasy (role-playing) at least once a week on sites like 
FetLife.com, but he denied any intention or plan to act out these fantasies. (GE 2.) 
 
When asked at his security clearance hearing about why his laptop’s hard drive was 
not returned to him, Applicant stated that he was told by the FBI that they found “two 
questionable images” on his laptop. As to how the images were downloaded to his laptop, 
Applicant responded, “I go to a website and just right mouse click and copy.” (Tr. 41-42.) 
Regarding the discrepancy between his report to the FBI that he was the only person with 
access to his laptop and his SOR response where he described the computer as a family 
computer, he responded that his laptop was not password protected and sat on a table in 
his apartment at the time. (Tr. 34.) 
  
Applicant testified that the online fantasy activity was between consenting adults and 
that no children were involved. (Tr. 28, 40.) Regarding what assurance Applicant had in 
that regard, he indicated that to access one of the sites (FetLife.com), he had to attest to 
being of legal age for access. (Tr. 33-34.) He relied in good faith that the other persons 
involved were not minors. He was not sure how he could have assured there was no child 
pornography associated with the websites he had accessed. (Tr. 40.) 
 
Applicant maintains that he has changed his behavior in that, while he still enjoys 
pornography, he is “very, very careful of where [he is] going.” He denied any current 
involvement in fantasy role-playing. (Tr. 38-39.) He acknowledged that his employer lacked 
any knowledge of his interests in the dominant-submissive lifestyle and adult pornography, 
Applicant does not believe it would cause him any problems at work because of the 
prevalence in books, television, and movies of the lifestyle. (Tr. 32.) 
5 
 
Character references 
 
 Four character references authored letters for Applicant. They all think highly of 
Applicant. None of them spoke specifically about Applicant’s interest in adult pornography 
or dominant-submissive role-playing, so it is unclear what they know. 
 
 A friend of Applicant’s for the past four years expressed surprise that anyone could 
question Applicant’s integrity or loyalty. She considers Applicant to be honorable and 
honest. (AE A.) Another friend, who has known Applicant for about 15 years, indicates that 
Applicant is generous with his time by driving veterans to their medical appointments; loyal 
to his partner, family, friends, and employer; and very patriotic. He was supportive of her 
youngest son’s enlistment in the U.S. military in 2016. (AE B.) 
 
 Applicant’s partner attests to him being very supportive as she copes with a 
debilitating disease. He has also been a good stepfather to her sons in facilitating their 
involvement in Scouting and another boys’ group. He also volunteers his time to veterans’ 
groups by driving veterans to their medical appointments, assisting with their food 
shopping, and buying dinners anonymously for veterans. She indicated that Applicant told 
her about the issues hindering his approval for a security clearance, although she did not 
elaborate. She wholeheartedly attests to Applicant’s character. (AE C.) 
 
 Applicant’s brother knows that Applicant had some issues “several years ago,” and 
indicated that it might be difficult to believe that Applicant is a person of good character 
under the circumstances. He is convinced that Applicant “is a great person at the core.” 
(AE D.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge’s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
6 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of EO 10865 
provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 
3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern about personal conduct is articulated in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or 
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide 
truthful and candid answers during national security investigations or 
adjudicative processes. 
 
 Applicant was suspected of accessing child pornography online in September 2009. 
When he was interviewed by the FBI, he denied that he knowingly accessed child 
pornography, but he admitted that there was adult pornography on his laptop computer. 
With his consent, the FBI seized his laptop and conducted a preliminary search, which 
according to the FBI revealed over 200 images and six video files of “investigative interest” 
on his computer. Applicant’s hard drive was retained by the FBI, reportedly because some 
images may have been of child pornography. Based on its preliminary findings, the FBI told 
the state’s DCF that over 200 images and movies of child pornography were detected on 
Applicant’s laptop computer. Applicant asserts that he was told by the FBI three months 
later that there was one (GE 2) or two (Tr. 41) questionable images of possible child 
pornography. 
 
7 
 
 The U.S. Attorney’s declination of prosecution for lack of evidence raises some 
doubt about whether the images on Applicant’s computer were of child rather than adult 
pornography. It is possible that further forensic analysis of Applicant’s hard drive confirmed 
the presence of only one or two images of “questionable” child pornography, which may not 
have been enough to justify the time and expense of federal prosecution. Applicant 
admitted to the FBI and testified at his hearing that he has indulged his interest in fantasy 
role-playing involving the dominant-submissive lifestyle. Fantasy content is factually and 
legally distinct from child pornography. Fantasy may depict sexually explicit conduct by 
someone who appears to be a minor but may not be underage. Applicant is not likely to 
have so readily consented to the FBI’s seizure and search of his computer if he knew that 
his hard drive contained images of child pornography that could subject him to criminal 
prosecution. The FBI’s preliminary findings are not enough to meet the Government’s 
burden of establishing the controverted fact that he knowingly accessed child pornography 
or downloaded child pornography to his personal computer, especially given the absence 
of any criminal charges or DCF action against Applicant.  
 
 In evaluating the personal conduct security concerns, Applicant admits having had 
extensive access to adult pornography and downloading pornographic images to his home 
computer. He still enjoys pornography, although he testified that he is now much more 
careful about the websites he visits. Access to adult pornography may be viewed as 
morally repugnant by some, but the DOD is not in the position of passing judgment on such 
activities unless they are shown to be illegal or contrary to policy (e.g., using a government-
issued computer, access during duty hours, in circumstances showing a lack of discretion), 
or present an unacceptable risk of exploitation, pressure, or duress. 
 
 By continuing to search for and download pornography from the Internet, Applicant 
risks that some material downloaded might contain child pornography. Regarding that 
potential concern, I asked Applicant if he previously looked for assurances that no children 
were involved in his sexual role-playing or in the downloaded images from adult 
pornography websites. Applicant indicated that to access some of the website like 
FetLife.com, he had to attest that he was over 18, and so he assumed that others online 
had done likewise. About assuring himself of no child pornography, Applicant responded, “I 
am not sure how you would, considering some of these sites have—places like Yahoo and 
things like this, I wouldn’t think, would have child pornography on them.”1 Applicant took no 
steps to investigate the sites to ensure there was no child pornography and to exercise 
care in downloading images from such websites, but there is no proof that he engaged in 
                                                 
1 It is unclear whether Applicant is aware of 18 U.S.C. § 2257 (and § 2257A as to recordkeeping for simulated 
sexual conduct). That statute requires the producer of any book, magazine, periodical, film, videotape, digitally 
or computer-manipulated image of an actual human being, picture, or other matter which contains actual 
sexually explicit conduct and is produced, shipped, or intended for shipment or transport in interstate 
commerce to maintain individually identifiable records of every performer. The record keeping requirement 
imposes an obligation, subject to criminal prosecution for any violation, to ascertain the performer’s name and 
date of birth and maintain a record of that identifying information to ensure that such persons are not minors 
being sexually exploited. Regarding the knowing access of child pornography with intent to view, which is 
punishable under 18 U.S.C. § 2252A, it is an affirmative defense if the alleged child pornography was 
produced using no minors or if the person had less than three images of child pornography, and promptly and 
in good faith took reasonable steps to destroy the image or reported the matter to a law enforcement agency 
and afforded the agency access to the image. 
8 
 
illegal activity. The producer of a pornographic image is legally required to ensure that the 
participants are not minors, and companies like Yahoo are not likely to allow illegal content. 
Applicant has taken steps to minimize the risk of inadvertent access to child pornography 
by being more careful about the adult pornography sites that he visits and by no longer 
engaging in online fantasy role-playing. AG ¶ 17(d) applies. It provides: 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, unreliable, or 
other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Access to adult pornography is personal conduct that could trigger disqualifying AG 
¶ 16(e), which provides: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant does not believe that viewing adult pornography, which he still enjoys, is a 
potential source of exploitation for him. He was largely candid with the FBI about his online 
fantasy role-playing, his interest in adult-domination pornography; and the presence of 
adult pornography on his personal laptop computer. During his OPM interview, Applicant 
acknowledged that he had an interest in pornography since he was a teenager; that he 
visits pornographic websites to view images and videos with preference for male-on-female 
pornography, lesbian pornography, and dominant-submissive pornography; that he visits 
FetLife.com and participated in fantasies with other online personalities at least once a 
week; and that he has participated in a dominant-submissive lifestyle with his ex-wife and 
his current cohabitant. At his hearing, Applicant testified without embarrassment about his 
pornography viewing habits. He indicated that he has “nothing to hide.” 
 
 Applicant admitted that his employer is still unaware of his sexual interests. He does 
not believe that it would not cause him issues at work if his employer was to become aware 
because movies and books have largely removed the stigma about the lifestyle. Given 
Applicant was never prosecuted, he had no obligation to inform his employer. Applicant 
testified that his family and friends are aware of his interests. His character references, 
which include his life partner and his brother, indicate that they are aware of the reasons 
why his security clearance eligibility is being questioned. Applicant’s partner expressed that 
she understands “the complexities of this investigation.” Applicant’s brother referenced 
“some issues [Applicant] had several years ago.” He mentioned that Applicant has gone 
through “ups and downs” in his life and that it might be hard to believe that Applicant is “a 
good person” given the circumstances. It is unclear what they know about Applicant’s 
access to adult pornography and fantasy role-playing, and I cannot speculate in that 
regard. Even so, Applicant took significant steps under AG ¶ 17(e), “the individual has 
9 
 
taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress,” by candidly responding to the FBI and OPM investigators’ inquiries and 
volunteering information about his fantasy role-playing and his access to adult 
pornography. Any concerns of vulnerability are sufficiently mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
In the whole-person evaluation, the administrative judge must consider the totality of 
an applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative 
process factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2 Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under 
Guideline E, but some warrant additional comment. 
  
 The FBI’s investigation of Applicant’s computer in 2009 did not result in criminal 
prosecution. The U.S. Attorney, who likely had the FBI’s forensic investigation, declined to 
pursue federal prosecution because of a lack of prosecutorial evidence. Conduct may 
present a security concern regardless of whether an individual has been formally charged 
or prosecuted. However, the decision about Applicant’s security clearance eligibility must 
be based on facts and not speculation or improper inference. Applicant provided a 
reasonable explanation for the pornographic images on his computer in that he enjoys 
adult pornography. 
 
 Applicant’s patriotism is unassailable. He served honorably in the U.S. military, 
volunteered his time and talents to Scouting, and continues to help local veterans by 
driving them to medical appointments and buying meals for them. His family and friends 
describe him as supportive and honorable. He is not likely to jeopardize his employment by 
intentionally accessing child pornography in the future. He has taken steps to minimize the 
risk of possible inadvertent access to child pornography. After considering all the 
circumstances, I find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
access to classified information. 
 
Formal Finding 
 
Formal finding for or against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, is: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
                                                 
2 The factors under AG ¶ 2(d) are as follows: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the 
conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
10 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
_____________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
