 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02613 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 11, 2018 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D, Administrative Judge: 
 
     Statement of Case 
 
 On October 14, 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SF-
86). On August 29, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations.  The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines, effective within the DoD after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 9, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge.  The case was assigned to me on January 17, 2018.  
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
December 15, 2017, scheduling the hearing for January 19, 2018. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled.  The Government offered eight exhibits, referred to as 
Government Exhibits 1 through 8, which were admitted without objection.  Applicant 
 
2 
 
presented no exhibits at the hearing.  He testified on his own behalf.  The record 
remained open until close of business on February 1, 2018, to allow the Applicant to 
submit additional supporting documentation.  Applicant submitted one Post-Hearing 
Exhibit, marked as A, which was admitted without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 29, 2018. 
  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is 61 years old and married with six children, one is deceased.  He has 
a high school diploma, and a year and a half of college.  He is employed with a defense 
contractor as an Aircraft Painter.  He is seeking to obtain a security clearance in 
connection with his employment.    
 
Guideline F - Financial Considerations 
 
The Government alleged that Applicant is ineligible for a clearance because he 
made financial decisions that indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which raise questions about his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  
 
The SOR identified the fact that Applicant failed to file his Federal and state 
income tax returns for tax years 2006, 2007, 2010, 2011, and 2012.  It also alleged that 
Applicant’s delinquent debt include delinquent consumer debt, and credit cards, state 
tax liens, child support arrearage, and medical bills which total in excess of $45,000.  
Applicant admits allegations 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., 1.f., 1.h., 1.i., 1.k., 1.o., 1.p., and 1.q., in the 
SOR.  He denies allegations 1.d., 1.e., 1.q., 1.j., 1.l., 1.n., and 1.m.  (Applicant’s Answer 
to SOR.)   
 
Applicant testified that he has been working for his current employer since 2010, 
and has never held a security clearance before.  He attributes his financial difficulties to 
periods of unemployment, job lay-offs, and an injury on the job which have interrupted 
his ability to earn full compensation.  From 2013 to 2016, Applicant was off work due to 
an on-the-job injury which resulted in knee replacement surgery and recovery time. 
During that period Applicant received workers compensation and disability benefits only.           
 
During these periods of under-employment or no employment at all, Applicant 
continued to do his best to provide for his family, but allowed his other bills to fall 
behind.  Applicant does not reside with his wife or his children.  His children are all 
adults and he maintains contact with three of them.  His youngest child is 29 years old 
and his oldest is 42. He states that he still provides financial support to help them.  He 
also has seventeen grandchildren.  (Tr. p. 71.) 
 
As a result of his security clearance background investigation, Applicant 
understands the importance of resolving his delinquent debt, and he explained that he 
has now filed the income tax returns in question.  He stated that earlier, he had hired an 
old friend who runs a tax preparation business to prepare and file them for him, but 
 
3 
 
things went wrong and documents were lost.  In 2017, Applicant rehired his friend to 
again prepare and file his income tax returns.  This time, apparently the income tax 
returns in question were filed.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit A.) 
 
Turning to the delinquent debts listed in the SOR, all of them have been 
outstanding for many years.  It was not until October 2017 that Applicant sought out 
serious help and hired a law firm to assist him and his son in cleaning up their credit 
report and resolving his delinquent debts.  A number of delinquent debts have already 
been removed from Applicant’s credit report by the law firm claiming that they were 
either in dispute or erroneous.  Applicant provided a copy of the credit report removals 
which show that 13 separate creditors were removed from his credit report.  Those 
creditors listed in the SOR that have been removed from the Applicant’s credit report 
are 1.f., 1.g., 1.h., 1.i., 1.n., and 1.o. It is not clear from the evidence provided by the 
Applicant if the other creditors that were removed by the law firm are listed in the SOR.  
What is clear in this case is the fact that although he admitted many of the debts, 
instead of paying the debts, he hired a law firm to dispute them, and/or claim they were 
erroneous, and get them removed from his credit report.   
 
Applicant estimates that he still currently owes the state about $8,500, and the 
Federal Government approximately $12,000.  He has not yet set up payment 
arrangements to repay those taxes.  He also currently owes the child support 
arrearages in the amount of about $15,000.  (Tr. p. 60, and Applicant’s Exhibit Post-
Hearing Exhibit A.)     
 
   Applicant candidly testified that he did not really start to resolve his debt until 
he realized that it would have some impact on his security clearance and his 
employment.  Applicant testified that he works full time and his current salary is $27.18 
per hour.  He currently has $58 and some change in his checking account, and he has 
about $4.09 in his savings account.  He hopes that his overtime will continue and that 
he will be able to use that money to resolve any other debts.         
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
 
4 
 
unfavorable, in making a decision. The protection of the national security is the 
paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel 
being considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have 
avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to 
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F -  Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability 
to protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can 
also be caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible 
indicator of, other issues of personnel security concern such as 
excessive gambling, mental health conditions, substance misuse, or 
alcohol abuse or dependence. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds.    
 
5 
 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Four are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
  
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
  
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state or local  income tax as 
required.          
  
 Applicant failed to file his Federal and state income tax returns for five years, 
between tax year 2006 through 2012.  There are three state tax liens entered against 
the Applicant for tax years 2008, 2010 and 2015, totaling approximately $11,000 that 
remain outstanding as well as other delinquent debts.  The evidence is sufficient to raise 
the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Three are potentially 
applicable here.  
  
20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;    
 
20(c) the condition that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loos of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft, and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
20(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Although these mitigating conditions partially apply, they do not fully mitigate the 
fact that Applicant has not as of yet resolved his tax debt, and based upon his financial 
calculations he does not currently have the financial resources available to him to pay 
the other debts.   Although Applicant had several creditors removed from his credit 
report, he did so, knowing that he had incurred the debt.  He did not pay the debt, but 
instead, disputed the debt, and had it removed from his credit report, as the debt was 
old.  Under the circumstances, this does not show that Applicant is financially 
responsible or that his finances are stable.  Accordingly, this guideline must be found 
against him. 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant must continue to work to resolve his delinquent debt.  He must pay his 
back taxes.  He must also resolve his child support arrearage, and any other 
outstanding delinquent debt that is owing.  It obviously took time to get into debt, it will 
also take some time to resolve it.  He must show a pattern of financial responsibility.  
Assuming he does this, he may very well be eligible for a security clearance in the 
future, but not at this time.  I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Consideration security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.b.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f.:             Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.i.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.j.:   Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
Subparagraphs 1.k.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.l.:             Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.m.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.n.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.o.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.p.:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.q.:            Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s national 
security eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
                                                
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
