 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
) 
 [NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 17-03545 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
  
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
 Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns about his involvement with illegal 
drugs. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On August 19, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his 
employment with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing 
background investigation, adjudicators for the Department of Defense (DOD) could not 
determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have access 
to classified information.1 
 
                                                 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended. See also Directive, Section E3.1.1. 
 
2 
 
 On November 22, 2017, DOD issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed at Guideline H (Drug Involvement 
and Substance Misuse). Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision 
without a hearing. On January 24, 2018, Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant 
Material (FORM)2 in support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on February 12, 
2018, and was notified that he had 30 days to file a response to the FORM. He did not 
submit any additional information, and the record closed on March 14, 2018. The case 
was assigned to me on May 10, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Under Guideline H, the SOR alleged that Applicant used marijuana with varying 
frequency between May 2014 and May 2017 (SOR 1.a); that he purchased marijuana 
between September 2014 and May 2017 (SOR 1.b); and that he would not rule out future 
use of marijuana (SOR 1.c). In response, Applicant admitted, without explanation, each 
of those allegations. (FORM, Item 1)  
 
 The factual allegations in the SOR are established by Applicant’s admissions, and 
by his disclosures in his e-QIP, during his discussions with a government investigator 
during a personal subject interview (PSI) on July 18, 2017, and by his November 1, 2017, 
responses to DOD interrogatories. (FORM, Items 1 – 3) In addition to the foregoing, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a single, 22-year-old employee of a large defense contractor. He 
graduated from college in June 2017. The following month, he was hired as a permanent 
employee after previously interning there as a college student. Applicant smoked 
marijuana socially while he was in college but stopped using it during his internships. He 
has not used since May 2017 because he knew he would be working for a federal 
contractor with a strict drug policy and workplace drug testing. Applicant avers he has 
never failed a drug test. (FORM, Items 1 – 3) 
 
 In response to interrogatories from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, 
Applicant denied illegally using marijuana since May 2017. He also averred he would not 
use marijuana while employed by a federal contractor because doing so would violate 
federal law. He also addressed the fact that, in the state where he lives, personal 
possession and use of marijuana is not subject to criminal prosecution. Most people with 
whom Appellant associates, including family members, use marijuana. When asked about 
his future intentions regarding use of marijuana, Applicant indicated he would not use 
marijuana as long as his “employment or potential security clearance requires it” and that 
he would “abstain for the duration.” (FORM, Item 3) 
  
                                                 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included three exhibits (Items 1 – 3) proffered in 
support of the Government’s case. 
 
3 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,3 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative 
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(d) of the 
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are: 
 
 (1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not 
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified 
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or continue to have 
access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient reliable 
information on which DOHA based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a security 
clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove controverted 
facts alleged in the SOR.5 If the Department Counsel meets its burden, it then falls to the 
applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.6 
 
 Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for 
the applicant to have access to protected information.7 A person who has access to such 
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and 
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to 
classified information in favor of the Government.8 
 
                                                 
3 Directive, 6.3. 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
5 Directive, E3.1.14. 
6 Directive, E3.1.15. 
7 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
8 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Illegal Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
 The facts established through the Government’s information, and by Applicant’s 
statements and admissions, reasonably raise a security concern about illegal drug use. 
That security concern is stated at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
 Applicant has illegally used, purchased, and possessed a controlled substance as 
recently as May 2017. Appellant did not expressly state he would use marijuana in the 
future. However, his statements on the issue of future intent fall short of a commitment to 
abstain. At best, he expressed a willingness to abstain that is conditioned on his continued 
employment or eligibility for a security clearance. The foregoing requires application of 
the following AG ¶ 25 disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(g) expressed intent to continue drug involvement and substance misuse, 
or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue such misuse. 
 
 I also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 26 mitigating conditions: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
 
5 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and 
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug 
involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future 
involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of national security 
eligibility. 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s response to the Government’s information supports any of 
the mitigating conditions. On balance, Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns 
about his involvement with marijuana.   
 
 I have evaluated this record and applied the appropriate adjudicative factors under 
Guideline H. I also have considered the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(d). The 
record evidence as a whole does not support any of the whole-person factors. His drug 
use is recent, voluntary, and likely to recur. Applicant failed to present sufficient 
information of mitigation in response to the Government’s case. As a result, the doubts 
raised by the Government’s information remain unresolved. Because protection of the 
interests of national security is the principal focus of these adjudications, those doubts 
must be resolved against the Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
   Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request 
for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
MATTHEW E. MALONE 
Administrative Judge 
