 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-03658 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                              For Government: Mary Margaret Foreman, Esquire 
                                           For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On December 29, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline J (Criminal 
Conduct).1 In a response signed on January 26, 2018, he admitted all allegations raised 
and requested a determination based on the written record. On February 23, 2018, the 
Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) with nine attachments (“Items”). 
The case was assigned to me on May 23, 2018. Based on my review of the case file 
and submissions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate criminal conduct security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on or after September 1, 2006. Since that time, the AG were amended as 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse, and it is now in effect for any adjudications on or 
after June 8, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
2 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 26 years old and has been employed by the same defense 
contractor as a fire protection engineer since March 2015. He has earned a bachelor’s 
degree and completed a master’s degree in December 2017. At work, he was named as 
a “top performer,” which meant he ranked in the top 10% of employees in his company.  
Applicant is single and has no children.  
 
 Between August 2009 and December 2013, Applicant attended undergraduate 
school. He began using the prescription drug Adderall in about October 2012, then very 
briefly experimented with illegal drugs between September 2013 and November 2013. 
(FORM, Item 5, at 3) He ended his abuse of illegal drugs by graduation. 
 
After beginning his current job, Applicant completed a security clearance 
application (SCA). He was subsequently granted a secret clearance in July 2015. From 
around October 2015 until about December 2016, Applicant again used the prescription 
medication Adderall, although he had no prescription for the medication. Also in 
December 2016, he used MDMA, popularly known as “Ecstasy” or “Molly.”2 
 
 Indeed, Applicant’s use of MDMA coincided with his traveling to another state to 
see a concert. Between about 18:30 and 22:30, he consumed a couple of alcoholic 
beverages and a single capsule of MDMA.3 The effect of the MDMA wore off in about 
two hours.  
 
By 02:30, Applicant, his sister, and a female friend headed back to his home 
state by automobile. Around 03:00, he stopped at a rest area to nap. Within an hour, he 
had purchased an energy drink and was back on the road. Still exhausted, he began to 
doze behind the wheel. He was awakened by a passenger’s cry as he struck the rear of 
a parked tractor trailer. He was traveling at about 65 m.p.h. at the time. 
 
Stunned, and trapped behind deployed airbags, Applicant surveyed his injured 
passengers. Emergency personnel eventually arrived, having to cut into the vehicle to 
remove everyone. His sibling suffered from a broken sternum and collarbone, while 
Applicant had broken ribs and a collapsed lung. Another passenger, a female 
contemporary of Applicant, suffered the worst, requiring multiple surgeries to address 
her extremely serious injuries. Related surgeries and rehabilitation continue to date. 
During a search, a state trooper found the severely injured female passenger’s Adderall 
and MDMA, which the guilt-ridden Applicant volunteered as being his. (SOR Response)  
 
As a result, Applicant was summarily arrested for both driving under the influence 
of drugs and for felony possession of both Adderall and MDMA. In May 2017, he pled 
                                                          
2 MDMA stands for the chemical compound 3,-4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine, a psychoactive drug 
that produces effects that resemble both stimulants and psychedelics.  
 
3 In an August 2017 interview, Applicant volunteered this scenario. (FORM, Item 5, at 25; cf. FORM, Item 
2, at 3)  
 
 
 
 
3 
guilty to driving under the influence of drugs – 1st offense (DUI1), a misdemeanor.4 He 
was sentenced to 90 days in jail, with all but five days suspended. He remains on 
probation for the offense through at least May 2020. In August 2017, Applicant pled 
guilty to the possession of MDMA, a felony, and was granted probation before judgment 
for one year. He remains on probation for that offense until at least August 2018.  
 
As a result of the charges, Applicant has received significant education with 
regard to drugs, substance abuse, and mental health, including personal counseling. He 
found that education to be eye-opening. He has completed all ordered education and 
counseling-related components of his convictions. He is required to remain drug-free 
through the end of his probationary periods, a condition he has readily accepted in his 
grief for all the harm incurred by his sibling and passenger. He intends to never be 
illegally involved with controlled substances again. He views his life going forward as his 
“second chance,” and he does not intend to jeopardize that opportunity with any future 
association with controlled or illegal drugs.    
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of 
a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under the 
AG, any doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of the national interest. In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
                                                          
4 In its FORM, at page 3, the Government wrote that Applicant’s charge for driving under the influence 
was the result of a positive test for MDMA. It attributed this assertion at footnote 8 to the SOR Response 
at 3-4 (SOR Response). That document is at odds with this assertion to the extent Applicant denied 
taking a drug that night in his SOR Response. (FORM, Item 2, at 3) However, given his plea, his August 
2017 interview comments, and his admission to the related SOR allegation, I conclude that Applicant had 
consumed MDMA within sufficient time of the accident to carry the charge raised, although it remains 
unclear whether he tested positive for the drug.  
 
 
 
 
4 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Under the Directive, an applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or 
proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a 
favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in those granted access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard such information. Decisions shall be in terms of the 
national interest and do not question the loyalty of an applicant.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H – Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern for this guideline is set forth in AG ¶ 24, where it is noted 
that the illegal use of a controlled substance, and the use of other substances that can 
cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner inconsistent with their 
intended purpose, can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and 
trustworthiness. Such use also raised questions about a person’s ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Here, Applicant admitted he used MDMA in December 2016 and that he used 
Adderall without a prescription from about October 2015 to December 2016, both while 
granted a security clearance. These facts are sufficient to raise AG ¶ 25(a): any 
substance misuse and ¶ 25(f): any illegal drug use while granted access to classified 
information or holding a sensitive position. The Government’s substantial evidence, as 
confirmed by Applicant’s own admissions, raises security concerns under Guideline H. 
Therefore, the burden shifts to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate related security concerns.  
 
Under Guideline H, conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from 
drug involvement and substance misuse are enumerated. The following mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 26 potentially apply to Applicant’s case:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and 
substance misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence, including but not 
 
 
 
 
5 
limited to: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) 
providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement 
and substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or 
misuse is grounds for revocation of national security eligibility.   
 
Regarding AG ¶ 26(a), the drug use at issue occurred under mundane 
circumstances and the most recent incident was only about a year-and-a-half ago 
(December 2016). Indeed, in terms of time, the incident at issue was sufficiently recent 
as to otherwise sustain doubts regarding Applicant’s current good judgment, particularly 
given the fact he maintained a security clearance at the time.  
 
The subsequent trauma he personally suffered and his genuine sense of 
responsibility for the grievous injury inflicted on his peers, however, are apparent, well-
expressed, and understandable. This is not simply a story of carefree “partying” without 
consequences with only professional repercussions: He caused grievous injury to a 
sibling and a friend. It is apparent he has learned from both the experience and his 
subsequent counseling, and that this type of drug-related incident will not recur. While 
more time is needed to test his resolve in staying clear of drugs, I find the Applicant of 
today to be credible and genuine in his intention to eschew drugs in the future. 
Consequently, I find AG ¶ 26(a) to apply, in part, and AG ¶ 26(b)(1)-(2) to fully apply. 
 
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct 
 
 The concern raised by criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 Applicant admits he was arrested in December 2016 for driving under the 
influence of drugs and felony possession of Aderall, for which he lacked a prescription, 
and MDMA. In May 2017, he pled guilty to DUI1, a misdemeanor. He was sentenced to 
90 days in jail, all but five days of which were suspended. He remains on probation for 
this count through at least May 2020. In addition, in August 2017, he pled guilty to 
possession of MDMA, a felony, for which he was granted probation before judgment for 
one year. He remains on probation for this count until at least August 2018. Such facts 
and admissions are sufficient to raise disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 31(a): a pattern of minor offenses, any of which on its own would be 
unlikely to affect a national security eligibility decision, but which in 
combination cast doubt on the individual’s judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness; 
 
AG ¶ 31(b): evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, 
an admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, 
 
 
 
 
6 
regardless of whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or 
convicted; and  
 
AG ¶ 31(c):individual is currently on parole or probation.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant:   
 
AG ¶ 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment, and 
 
AG ¶ 32(d): there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to, the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
restitution, compliance with the terms of parole or probation, job training or 
higher education, good employment record, or constructive community 
involvement.   
 
 For many of the same considerations underlying my conclusion that AG ¶ 26(a) 
applies, in part, I find AG ¶ 32(a) similarly applies in part here, given the circumstances 
and repercussions at issue. Moreover, there is evidence that Applicant has learned from 
his mistake and from the drug counseling and education he has received. His guilt for 
the accident is apparent, as is his attempt to take responsibility for the injury inflicted on 
his passengers. However, less than two years have passed since the accident, and 
Applicant yet remains on probation for both the DUI1 and possession charges. The 
terms of those probations appear to be solidly considered gauges of committed 
abstinence and demonstrated rehabilitation. Consequently, while Applicant is clearly on 
the right track, insufficient time has passed to evidence successful rehabilitation given 
the facts presented here.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, one must evaluate security clearance eligibility 
by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. 
Consideration shall be given to the nine adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. 
The final determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based on careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.     
    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and conducted a whole-person 
analysis based on the record. In addition to Applicant’s drug use, I considered factors 
such as his age, profession, educational attainments, past employment, and lifestyle.  
 
This is not a situation involving youthful indiscretion. Applicant was solidly in his 
20s, had earned a college degree, and had been granted a security clearance when he 
decided to be involved with MDMA and Adderall. While his admissions led to his 
 
 
 
 
7 
criminal conviction for DUI1 and possession, it was his reckless behavior that led to the 
sad consequences that resulted. 
 
Through Applicant’s written narratives, there is little doubt that he is extremely 
contrite about what happened. He has stayed mindful of the horrific accident and the 
injuries sustained while he has moved on at work and in academe. Through harsh 
realities, appropriate education, and counseling, he has learned his lesson. I am 
persuaded that he will exercise better judgment going forward. However, he remains on 
probation for both convictions.  
 
Those probationary periods are appropriate for the criminal charges to which 
Applicant pled guilty. They provide more than sufficient time for him to demonstrate his 
commitment to eschew both drug use and drug involvement in the future. While 
probation through May 2020 may prove excessive, given Applicant’s personal 
successes and contrition, a period of only one-and-a-half years since his last drug 
involvement is insufficient to regain the level of trust expected from one to whom the 
government has granted a security clearance. Therefore, while I find Applicant has 
mitigated security concerns related to drug involvement and substance misuse, security 
concerns related to criminal conduct remain unmitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
