 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04170 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Michelle Tilford, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding drug involvement and 
substance misuse, criminal conduct, and personal conduct. Eligibility for a security 
clearance and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 10, 2014, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On December 28, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), dated 
December 10, 2016, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered 
 
2 
                                      
 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, effective June 8, 2017.1  
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline H (Drug Involvement and 
Substance Misuse), Guideline J (Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct), 
and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. On January 23, 2018, he responded to the SOR and elected to have his case decided 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the Government’s file of 
relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) on February 14, 2018, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a 
period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a 
copy of the Directive as well as the Adjudicative Guidelines applicable to his case. 
Applicant received the FORM on February 19, 2018. Applicant’s response was due on 
March 21, 2018. As of April 16, 2018, Applicant had not submitted any response to the 
FORM. The case was assigned to me on June 11, 2018.  
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted, with a brief comment, one of the 
factual allegations pertaining to drug involvement and substance misuse (¶ 1.b.). He 
denied the remaining allegation, also with some comments, and he failed to specifically 
address the allegations under criminal conduct and personal conduct of the SOR. 
Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration 
of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has served as a 
local area network (LAN) administrator since January 2014. Applicant previously worked 
with another employer as a network analyst from March 2013 until January 2014, and 
before that, as a junior systems administrator from October 2010 until August 2012. He 
is a 2004 high school graduate, and received a bachelor’s degree in an unspecified 
discipline in 2009. He has never served with the U.S. military. He was granted a secret 
clearance in 2014. Applicant has never been married, but has cohabited since 2014. He 
has no children. 
  
                                                          
1 Although the SOR caption and introductory portion refer to this case as an application for a Public 
Trust Position with an automated data processing (ADP) case number, Department Counsel indicated that 
there was a scrivener’s (sic) error, and that the case is actually an application for a security clearance and 
the case number prefix should be ISCR, not ADP. 
  
 
3 
                                      
 
Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse, Criminal Conduct, and Personal 
Conduct2 
On February 17, 2017, nearly three years after he was granted a secret clearance, 
Applicant was sitting in his vehicle at a shopping center waiting for a friend. A police officer 
approached the vehicle and knocked on the window to ask Applicant some questions. 
When Applicant lowered the window, the officer smelled marijuana coming from the car. 
When the officer indicated that he wished to search the vehicle, Applicant acknowledged 
that he did have marijuana in the vehicle. The officer found and seized “a couple grams 
of marijuana” from the vehicle. Applicant was arrested, cited for possession of marijuana, 
a misdemeanor, given a court date, and released on summons. In August 2017, Applicant 
accepted a plea offer under which he entered a plea of guilty to the reduced charge of 
trespassing, also a misdemeanor. He was sentenced to supervised probation for 12 
months, and fined $250 plus $91 in court costs.3  
 
Although Applicant later claimed that the marijuana belonged to a friend, he was 
unwilling to provide the friend’s name because he did not want to incriminate the friend. 
Applicant acknowledged that he and his friend were together earlier that day, and that the 
friend had left the marijuana in the car. It is unclear if Applicant used the marijuana with 
his friend in his vehicle as Applicant claimed to have “never used marijuana before,” that 
he “has never used drugs illegally,” and that he “has no intent for any future use.” 
 
Applicant continues to associate with lifelong, childhood friends who use marijuana 
recreationally. He did not indicate any intention to disassociate himself from any of his 
drug-using friends. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”4 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”5   
                                                          
2 The sources of information regarding Applicant’s association with illegal drugs are found in Item 
4 (Court Traffic/Criminal Case Details, downloaded February 9, 2018); Item 5 (Personal Subject Interview, 
dated September 19, 2017); (Joint Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS), Incident Report Adjudication, 
downloaded February 9, 2018); Item 2 (Answer to SOR, dated January 23, 2018). 
 
3 Item 4, supra note 2. 
 
4 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
5 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
 
4 
                                      
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”6 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish a 
potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of establishing 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced substantial 
evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant has the 
burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation or 
mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.7  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Furthermore, “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”8 
  
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”9 Thus, nothing in this 
                                                          
6 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate 
to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less 
than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
7 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
8 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
9 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision on any express 
or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an 
indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines the President and the 
Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In reaching this decision, 
I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded 
on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Abuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement and Substance 
Abuse is set out in AG ¶ 24:       
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
Furthermore, on October 25, 2014, the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
issued Memorandum ES 2014-00674, Adherence to Federal Laws Prohibiting Marijuana 
Use, which states: 
 
[C]hanges to state laws and the laws of the District of Columbia pertaining 
to marijuana use do not alter the existing National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines (Reference H and I). An individual's disregard of federal law 
pertaining to the use, sale, or manufacture of marijuana remains 
adjudicatively relevant in national security determinations. As always, 
adjudicative authorities are expected to evaluate claimed or developed use 
of, or involvement with, marijuana using the current adjudicative criteria. 
The adjudicative authority must determine if the use of, or involvement with, 
marijuana raises questions about the individual's judgment, reliability, 
trustworthiness, and willingness to comply with law, rules, and regulations, 
including federal laws, when making eligibility decisions of persons 
proposed for, or occupying, sensitive national security positions. 
 
The guideline notes two conditions under AG ¶ 25 that could raise security 
concerns in this case:  
 
 
6 
                                      
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia; and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
On February 17, 2017, nearly three years after he was granted a secret clearance, 
Applicant was arrested, cited for possession of marijuana, a misdemeanor, given a court 
date, and released on summons. In August 2017, Applicant entered a plea of guilty to the 
reduced charge of trespassing, a misdemeanor. He was sentenced to supervised 
probation for 12 months, and fined $250 plus $91 in court costs. AG ¶ 25(c) has been 
established. There is no evidence that Applicant actually “used” the marijuana in his 
vehicle. Notwithstanding the fact that the odor of marijuana came from the vehicle in which 
he was sitting, while there is some evidence of drug involvement, it is insufficient to prove 
that Applicant used marijuana to establish AG ¶ 25(f). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 26 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; and (3) providing a 
signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and 
substance misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is 
grounds for revocation of national security eligibility. 
 
Neither of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant acknowledged that there was 
marijuana in his vehicle, and eventually claimed it belonged to “a friend” whom he refused 
to identify. He continues to maintain friendships with drug-using individuals, and there is 
no expressed intent to disassociate himself from them. While Applicant claimed to have 
no intention to use illegal substances in the future, it should be noted that he did not 
submit a signed statement of intent to abstain from all drug involvement and substance 
misuse, acknowledging that any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation 
of national security eligibility. Under the circumstances, Applicant’s actions continue to 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in AG 
¶ 30:       
 
7 
                                      
 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The guideline notes two conditions under AG ¶ 31 that could raise security 
concerns in this case:  
 
(b) evidence (including, but not limited to, a credible allegation, an 
admission, and matters of official record) of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the individual was formally charged, prosecuted, or convicted; and 
 
(c) individual is currently on parole or probation.10 
 
The information and discussion above related to Drug Involvement and Substance 
Abuse are also significant under Criminal Conduct and are adopted herein. In February 
2017, Applicant was arrested, cited for possession of marijuana, a misdemeanor, given 
a court date, and released on summons. In August 2017, he entered a plea of guilty to 
the reduced charge of trespassing, a misdemeanor. He was sentenced to supervised 
probation for 12 months. There is no evidence in the case file that Applicant’s period of 
supervised probation has been decreased or that it has expired. Accordingly, AG ¶¶ 31(b) 
and 31(c) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 32 that could 
mitigate security concerns, but none of them apply. Under the circumstances, Applicant’s 
actions continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
                                                          
10 Unalleged conduct can be considered for certain purposes, as discussed by the DOHA Appeal 
Board. (Conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered: (a) to assess an applicant's credibility; (b) to 
evaluate an applicant's evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider 
whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular 
provision of the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-person analysis 
under Directive § 6.3.). See ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006); (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2003)). See also 
ISCR Case No. 12-09719 at 3 (App. Bd. April 6, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 14-00151 at 3, n. 1 (App. Bd. 
Sept. 12, 2014); ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006)). Applicant’s parole status and 
continued association with drug-users will be considered only for the five purposes listed above.   
 
 
8 
                                      
 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited 
to meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with 
medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of some conditions that could raise security 
concerns under AG ¶ 16: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
(2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is 
illegal in that country; 
 
(3) while in another country, engaging in any activity that, 
while legal there, is illegal in the United States; 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
My discussions related to Applicant’s Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse, 
and Criminal Conduct, are adopted herein. As noted above, in February 17, 2017, nearly 
three years after he was granted a secret clearance, Applicant was arrested, cited for 
possession of marijuana, a misdemeanor, given a court date, and released on summons. 
In August 2017, he entered a plea of guilty to the reduced charge of trespassing, a 
misdemeanor. He was sentenced to supervised probation for 12 months. Applicant 
initially acknowledged that the marijuana belonged to him, but eventually changed his 
position by claiming it belonged to “a friend” whom he refused to identify. He continues to 
maintain friendships with drug-using individuals, and there is no expressed intent to 
disassociate himself from them. AG ¶¶ 16(e) and 16(g) have been established. None of 
the remaining disqualifying conditions apply, especially AG ¶¶ 16(c) and 16(d), essentially 
because Applicant’s conduct in several different adjudicative areas are sufficient for an 
adverse determination under those other guidelines. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 17 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from personal conduct, but none of them apply. Under 
the circumstances, Applicant’s actions continue to cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d):  
 
10 
                                      
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.11   
 
 There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant is a 
32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has served as a LAN administrator 
since January 2014. He received a bachelor’s degree in 2009. He was granted a secret 
clearance in 2014. He claimed to have never used drugs illegally, and he has no intention 
to use illegal substances in the future. 
 
 The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. As noted above, Despite his maturity and employment responsibilities, while 
holding a security clearance in February 2017, he was in his vehicle when someone in 
the vehicle, perhaps even himself, used marijuana – an activity prohibited by the U.S. 
Government and his employer. The use was sufficient to enable a police officer to 
subsequently detect the odor of marijuana coming from the vehicle when Applicant 
lowered his window to speak with the officer. Inside the vehicle the officer found “a couple 
grams of marijuana.” It is especially troubling that Applicant refused to identify his drug-
using friend, he has not disassociated himself from his other drug-using friends, and he 
may actually still be on probation, indicating that he is not sufficiently rehabilitated to hold 
a security clearance. 
  
Overall, the evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug 
involvement and substance misuse, criminal conduct, and personal conduct. See SEAD 
4, App. A, ¶¶ 2(d)(1) through 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25, are: 
 
                                                          
11 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:     Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a.:     Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
