 
1 
                                      
 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01822 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding personal conduct. Eligibility for 
a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 12, 2016, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On October 13, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), 
(December 10, 2016), National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, effective June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
                                      
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), and 
detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. Applicant’s responses to the SOR are confusing. On an unspecified date, he 
submitted an unsigned statement; on another unspecified date, he submitted an 
incomplete statement in which he responded to most of the SOR allegations; and he also 
submitted a non-statement notarized on November 16, 2017, in which he elected to have 
his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. He followed that up with an e-
mail on November 22, 2017, in which he responded to the remaining allegations. A 
complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
Applicant by the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on January 31, 2018, 
and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, 
to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition 
to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the Guidelines 
applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on February 21, 2018. A response 
was due by March 23, 2018. Applicant timely submitted a response supported by 
documentation. The case was assigned to me on May 10, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answers to the SOR, Applicant admitted several of the factual allegations 
pertaining to personal conduct (¶¶ 1.a., a portion of 1.c., and 1.e.) in the SOR. He denied 
the remaining allegations.  After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the 
record, and upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of 
fact: 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been serving 
in an unspecified position in Africa with his current employer since about May 2017. A 
2006 high school graduate, Applicant continued his education and earned some college 
credits, but no degree. He has never served with the U.S. military. He was granted a 
secret clearance in 2010. He was married in 2008. He has a stepson, born in 2000, and 
a daughter, born in 2008.  
 
Personal Conduct  
 
In addition to a lengthy employment history involving a number of diverse positions 
and responsibilities, Applicant’s employment history is rather unusual in that it involves 
terminations (for a variety of reasons) and eventual rehiring by the same employers, as well 
as terminations by other employers (also for a variety of reasons).  
 
According to Applicant, he was a night stocker at a home improvement store for 
several months; a curb layer for one month; a dishwasher for two months; a tire changer for 
three months; a milk stocker for two months; a heating, ventilation and air conditioning 
 
3 
                                      
 
(HVAC) mechanic for seven months (terminated for unsatisfactory performance); an oil 
changer for six months; an HVAC mechanic, plumber, and electrician for two months; an 
HVAC installer for four months; an HVAC mechanic in Iraq for 12 months; an HVAC foreman 
in Afghanistan for seven months and then site manager in Afghanistan for 13 months; a 
maintenance supervisor for five months; an HVAC foreman for five months; an HVAC 
mechanic for four months; an HVAC mechanic for two months; an HVAC mechanic for nine 
months (received a letter of counseling in April 2014); an HVAC mechanic for three months 
(terminated for performance reason and not happy with management-employee relationship); 
an HVAC mechanic in Afghanistan for ten months; an unspecified security position for an 
unspecified period; and in his current unspecified position since about May 2017. He also had 
two relatively brief periods of unemployment in 2012 and 2013.  
 
The SOR alleged three incidents of termination; one incident of a written warning and 
counseling; and two incidents of either deliberate falsification or lack of candor regarding 
some of those incidents:  
 
 (SOR ¶ 1.a.): Applicant was employed as an HVAC mechanic in July 2014, when he 
was hired by the company owner. During the pre-employment interview, the type of work was 
described, but the discussions related to the equipment were non-specific. Applicant felt 
confident that he could work with the equipment already in use, but once he was actually 
hired, he found himself with unfamiliar equipment. He attempted to familiarize himself with 
the equipment, but the workload was very demanding and other technicians were unable to 
assist him, so the familiarization process during his probationary period was strictly hands-
on. In addition, Applicant had a personality conflict with his supervisor who felt Applicant was 
superfluous to the company’s needs as there was another employee in the same position. In 
his e-QIP, Applicant noted that he was terminated in October 2014 for performance reasons 
and not happy with management-employee relationships. During his interview with an 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM), Applicant added 
comments about his supervisor’s alcohol issues. Applicant felt he would be fired for no 
legitimate reason, so he left. In one of his Responses to the SOR, he said that he and the 
company mutually decided that he would depart during his probationary period, and the 
departure would not be due to misconduct. Although Applicant heard that he had been fired 
due to creating a hostile work environment and an aggressive attitude, he denied those 
characterizations and called them false. There is no documentation in the case file to support 
a conclusion that Applicant was actually fired.  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): Applicant was employed as an HVAC mechanic from October 2013 until 
July 2014. In April 2014, he was issued a letter of counseling based on a complaint from a 
50-year-old female administrator who claimed that Applicant had asked her to go to lunch 
with him “in a non-professional manner,” construed by the woman as “sexual advancements” 
or “sexual harassment.” Applicant denied he ever sexually harassed the woman and 
explained that he was simply being cordial by inviting her to join him at a local fast-food 
establishment. The purported actions and statements by Applicant are not known, and there 
is no evidence to support her accusations that they were sex-related. Moreover, there is no 
report of inquiry or investigation from the employer to support the allegations. Applicant 
believes the allegation was fabricated to discredit him.1 During his OPM interview, Applicant 
                                                          
1 Item 5 (Letter of Counseling, dated April 18, 2014); Item 3 (Personal Subject Interview, dated 
December 1, 2016), at 6-7. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
disputed the allegations made against him and noted that in July 2014 he left under favorable 
circumstances and the staff even threw him a farewell party.2 
 
The OPM investigator added into the Report of Investigation (ROI) the following:3 
 
[Applicant] was informed that it was developed he invited [the woman] to have 
lunch more than one time; that [Applicant] has honesty issues regarding job 
qualifications, unwillingness to follow rules and regulations, sexual 
harassment, and disruptive and dishonest behavior he self-admitted while in 
Afghanistan. 
 
[Applicant’s] qualifications were embellished and highly not accurate. 
[Applicant] was not considered reliable and was not willing to follow rules, 
regulations, and procedures. For several weeks between 10/2013 to 2/2014, 
[Applicant] continued to make sexual advancements to [the woman] after being 
asked to stop. After discussions [Applicant] was provided with a letter of 
admonishment and [Applicant] rebutted the letter; [Applicant] advised another 
coworker to falsify a resume to acquire a better employment. [Applicant] is not 
eligible to be rehired. 
 
There is no documentation, such as a report of inquiry, any statements from identified 
individuals, or letters from the employer, in the case file to support any of the characterizations 
or purported activities described by the OPM investigator, nor is there any comment by the 
OPM investigator that identifies the source(s) for those characterizations or purported 
activities. 
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.f.): Applicant worked for one particular company in Afghanistan on 
two separate occasions. During the initial period, he was terminated in February 2012 for 
failing to submit the required security clearance background documentation in a timely 
manner, claiming simply that he had forgotten to do so. He was home on leave at the time, 
and he received an e-mail from his employer informing him of the dismissal. Seven months 
later, he was rehired by the company. Applicant and his HVAC foreman/supervisor did not 
get along, with each claiming misconduct by the other. But while Applicant never reported his 
HVAC foreman/supervisor’s actions, his HVAC foreman/supervisor did report him. On 
January 20, 2013, Applicant received a final written warning from his HVAC foreman/ 
supervisor. It accused Applicant of purposely not following the directives provided to him by 
his HVAC foreman/supervisor; wasting manpower hours, materials, and a misappropriation 
of government funds; seriously damaging the public relations between the company and its 
client; a lack of knowledge, experience and skillset to do his job; constant insubordination; 
and the absence of leadership or skillsets required for his position. Applicant’s HVAC 
foreman/supervisor concluded that Applicant’s actions constituted “disorderly, abusive, or 
indecent conduct; use of abusive or inappropriate language . . . committing immoral, illegal, 
or violent acts; violating federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or Company procedures;” 
“making a false statement, either oral or written, to a supervisor, other employees of the 
                                                          
2 Item 3, supra note 1, at 7. 
 
3 Item 3, supra note 1, at 7. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
Company, the Company’s customers, or government agencies;” and “failing to perform work 
of an acceptable standard, being inattentive to job performance.”4  
 
The HVAC supervisor at the time disputed the above scenario:5 
 
Applicant’s [HVAC foreman/supervisor] demonstrated ill feelings toward 
[Applicant] on several occasions. The unfortunate “write up” from [the HVAC 
foreman/supervisor] against [Applicant] took place under [the HVAC 
supervisor’s] leadership, though [he] was away visiting another camp. This 
“write up” is considered a verbal write up since the documentation isn’t 
complete and was not submitted through the proper chain of command in [his] 
absence.  
 
He also added the following glowing comments:6 
 
Throughout his time with [the company], [Applicant] demonstrated critical skills, 
worked with integrity and exceeded expectations. [Applicant] was an excellent 
employee and asset to our organization during his tenure with [the company]. 
He has excellent leadership, mechanical skills, written and verbal 
communication skills, is extremely organized, can work independently, and is 
able to effectively multi-task to ensure that all projects are completed in a timely 
manner. . . .  
 
[Applicant] demonstrated excellent leadership skills and effectiveness that I 
assigned him additional responsibilities. These responsibilities included 
developing a training program for our employees for the HVAC shop. . . . 
 
[Applicant] was always willing to offer his assistance and had an excellent 
rapport with the many constituents served by our office including clients, 
employers, and other professional organizations. 
 
In February 2013, after returning to the United States, and aware that his HVAC 
foreman/supervisor did not want to continue working with him in the future, Applicant 
resigned. At the time he did so, there was no indication that he would be, or had been, fired.7 
Although the SOR alleged that Applicant had been terminated “in about 2013,” there is no 
documentation from the company to support that allegation. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): Applicant worked for another particular company on two separate 
occasions. During the initial period, he was terminated in October 2007 for unsatisfactory 
performance. Applicant acknowledged that in 2007 he did not possess the expertise and 
proficiency to work as an HVAC mechanic. He was called into the office of his supervisor one 
                                                          
4 Item 4 (Disciplinary Action Form, dated January 20, 2013). 
 
5 Letter, dated March 2, 2018, attached to Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
 
6 Letter, supra note 5. 
 
7 Item 3, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
day and simply fired.8 Once he had gained the knowledge and experience to be an effective 
HVAC mechanic, the same company hired him back in August 2013.9 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.e.): In March 2016, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he responded to 
some questions pertaining to his employment record. The questions in § 13C asked if, in the 
last seven years “at employment activities that you have not previously listed,” he had: been 
fired from a job; quit a job after being told he would be fired; left a job by mutual agreement 
following charges or allegations of misconduct; left a job by mutual agreement following notice 
of unsatisfactory performance; or received a written warning, been officially reprimanded, 
suspended, or disciplined for misconduct in the workplace, such as violation of a security 
policy? Applicant answered those questions with a “no.”10 The SOR alleged that in so doing, 
Applicant deliberately failed to disclose the relevant information found in SOR allegations ¶¶ 
1.a. through 1.c.  
 
In fact, Applicant clearly indicated in § 13A of the e-QIP that he had been terminated 
from the position discussed in SOR ¶ 1.a. for performance reasons and left by mutual 
agreement following notice of unsatisfactory performance;11 and that he had been disciplined 
in the position discussed in SOR ¶ 1.b. for bothering a female co-worker.12 As for the 
allegation associated with SOR ¶ 1.c., as noted above, although the SOR alleged that 
Applicant had been terminated “in about 2013,” there is no documentation from the company 
to support that allegation, and Applicant has been steadfast in claiming that he had already 
resigned and was not aware that he had supposedly been fired. 
 
Work Performance and Character References 
 
 The operations chief of base operating support (and primary liaison for the contract in 
the Horn of Africa), as well as the deputy branch chief (and primary contracting officer’s 
representative (COR) on the contract), both worked with Applicant during May-November 
2017. Applicant’s team provided outstanding support to the five contingency locations in the 
Horn of Africa and ensured zero mission failure in regards to power generation equipment, 
food refrigeration units and expeditionary-type air conditioning units for both facilities and 
communications equipment. Applicant “was extremely reliable and trustworthy, as he was 
often required to travel alone to repair and/or service vital equipment in austere locations that 
directly supported Special Operations Forces.” They both highly recommend Applicant for a 
top secret clearance.13 
 
                                                          
8 Item 3, supra note 1, at 5. 
 
9 Item 3, supra note 1, at 5. 
 
10 Item 2 (e-QIP, dated March 12, 2016), at 35-36. 
 
11 Item 2, supra note 7, at 20. 
 
12 Item 2, supra note 7, at 22. 
 
13 Memorandum, dated May 5, 2018); Memorandum, dated November 9, 2017, both attached to 
Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
 The primary COR on another contract in the Horn of Africa during early 2018 noted 
that Applicant was the lead power generation general foreman for a critical mission for the 
contractor. Applicant provided outstanding support to the contingency locations and ensured 
zero mission failure in regards to power generation equipment. Their day-to-day interaction 
and experiences were consistently positive and professional. “[Applicant] was extremely 
reliable and trustworthy. At no point did [he] question [Applicant’s] judgment or capabilities “in 
a combat environment.”14  
 
 Numerous other former co-workers over the years have commented favorably on 
Applicant’s exceptional professional abilities, outstanding skills, positive accomplishments, 
trustworthiness, dedication, honesty, and thoughtfulness.15 In addition, Applicant has 
received a number of certificates of appreciation from various military units, two of which 
include periods covered by his employment with the company identified in SOR ¶ 1.c.16 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”17 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”18   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
14 Memorandum, dated March 4, 2018, attached to Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
 
15 Letters, various dates, attached to Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
 
16 Certificates, various dates, attached to Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
 
17 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
18 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
 
8 
                                      
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”19 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.20  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”21 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”22 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
19 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
20 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
21 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
22 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result in 
an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security clearance 
action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security 
investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or releases, 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline notes conditions under AG ¶ 16 that could raise security concerns.  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information;  
 
10 
                                      
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
(2) while in another country, engaging in any activity that is 
illegal in that country; 
 
(3) while in another country, engaging in any activity that, 
while legal there, is illegal in the United States; 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the 
individual to the employer as a condition of employment; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
 
 As noted above, although there are unsupported allegations and speculation that 
Applicant had been fired from two specific positions and an acknowledgment that he had 
been fired from a third specific position, with the exception of that third incident, there is 
no documentation, such as a letter from the employers, to support a conclusion that 
Applicant was actually fired. Applicant denied that he had been fired on those two 
occasions, and there is no evidence to rebut his denials. As for the third incident, there is 
undisputed evidence that Applicant was fired by the employer because he had failed to 
 
11 
                                      
 
timely submit the required security clearance background information. That same 
company subsequently rehired him. 
 
There are unsupported allegations and speculation regarding Applicant’s 
purported conduct while in Afghanistan that are both denied by Applicant and disputed 
by the HVAC supervisor.  There is also evidence indicating that Applicant received a letter 
of counseling based on a complaint from a female co-worker who claimed Applicant had 
asked her to go to lunch with him “in a non-professional manner,” construed by the woman 
as “sexual advancements” or “sexual harassment.” Applicant denied he ever sexually 
harassed the woman and explained that he was simply being cordial by inviting her to join 
him at a local fast-food establishment. There is no statement in case file from the woman, 
so the purported actions and statements by Applicant are not known, and there is no 
evidence to support her accusations that they were sex-related. Moreover, there is no 
report of inquiry or investigation from the employer to support the allegations. In addition, 
the OPM investigator reported some purported characterizations and activities about 
Applicant that are unsubstantiated. There is no documentation, such as a report of inquiry, 
any statements from identified individuals, or letters from the employer, in the case file to 
support any of the characterizations or purported activities described by the OPM 
investigator, nor is there any comment by the OPM investigator that identifies the 
source(s) for those characterizations or purported activities. 
 
The SOR also alleged that when Applicant completed his e-QIP in March 2016, he 
deliberately falsified material facts and failed to disclose relevant information pertaining 
to his employment record. The allegation is without merit. In fact, Applicant clearly 
indicated in the e-QIP that he had been terminated from the position discussed in SOR ¶ 
1.a. for performance reasons and left by mutual agreement following notice of 
unsatisfactory performance; and that he had been disciplined in the position discussed in 
SOR ¶ 1.b. for bothering a female co-worker. As for the allegation associated with SOR 
¶ 1.c., as noted above, although the SOR alleged that Applicant had been terminated “in 
about 2013,” there is no documentation from the company to support that allegation, and 
Applicant has been steadfast in claiming that he had already resigned and was not aware 
that he had supposedly been fired. 
 
The final SOR allegation was that when the OPM investigator interviewed 
Applicant in December 2016, Applicant lied when he denied that he had been fired from 
the company associated with SOR ¶ 1.c. There is undisputed evidence that Applicant 
was fired by the employer because he had failed to timely submit the required security 
clearance background information, but that same company subsequently rehired him. 
While the SOR alleged that Applicant had been terminated “in about 2013,” there is no 
documentation from the company to support that allegation, and Applicant has been 
steadfast in claiming that he had already resigned and was not aware that he had 
supposedly been fired. In the absence of evidence supporting the allegation and disputing 
Applicant, there is no evidence that Applicant falsified material facts during that OPM 
interview. Based on the evidence, AG ¶¶ 16(c) and  16(e)(1) have been established with 
respect to the 2012 termination for failing to timely submit the required security clearance 
background documentation, and the 2014 letter of counseling. In the absence of evidence 
 
12 
                                      
 
that Applicant lied or deliberately falsified information when he completed the e-QIP or 
spoke with the OPM investigator, no other AGs have been established. 
    
 The guideline also includes examples of conditions under AG ¶ 17 that could 
mitigate security concerns arising from personal conduct. They include: 
  
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability 
to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
I have concluded that AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(f) apply. The February 2012 termination 
for failing to timely submit the required security clearance background documentation took 
place over six years ago; and the April 2014 letter of counseling occurred over four years 
ago. The 2012 incident can be considered “minor” and “unique,” and considering the 
amount of time that has passed without recurrence, it is unlikely to recur. It does not cast 
doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. The 2014 letter of 
counseling, based on information that is unsubstantiated, and unsupported by 
documentation, is not proof that the alleged conduct actually occurred, it simply noted 
that the generic counseling occurred. Applicant has an outstanding reputation for honesty 
and trustworthiness, and he has steadfastly denied the alleged conduct. Furthermore, 
there is no evidence to support that the conduct ever occurred. No other AGs apply.  
 
  
 
13 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.23  
  
    There is some information against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He was 
terminated for failing to timely submit the required security clearance background 
documentation when he first took a job with an employer in 2012. He received a letter of 
counseling in 2014.  
 
 The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. A 2006 high school 
graduate, Applicant continued his education and earned some college credits, but no 
degree. He was granted a secret clearance in 2010. He has served in a number of 
positions with various employers, and has been assigned to locations in several combat 
zones including Iraq and Afghanistan, as well as in unspecified positions in the Horn of 
Africa, in support of special operations forces. Applicant’s contributions to the various 
missions to which he was associated have been documented by those with whom he 
worked. The combination of Applicant’s proven actions, explanations, and beliefs do not 
cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. See AG ¶ 
2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
                                                          
23 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-
3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f.:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
