 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00241 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Gary M. Spritz, Attorney At Law 
 
 
June 11, 2018 
____________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge: 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 8, 2017, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after June 8, 2017.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 1, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 17, 2018. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 23, 2018, and the hearing was convened 
as scheduled on February 8, 2018. The Government offered eight exhibits, referred to 
as Government Exhibits 1 through 8, which were admitted without objection. The 
Applicant offered six exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through F, which 
were admitted without objection.  Applicant also testified on her own behalf. The record 
 
2 
 
remained open until close of business on February 15, 2018, to allow the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional supporting documentation.  Applicant requested 
additional time, and the record remained open until close business on March 15, 2018.  
Applicant submitted eight Post-Hearing Exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing 
Exhibits 1 through 8, which were admitted without objection.  DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 16, 2018. 
 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 61 years old and married with no children.  She has a Bachelor’s 
Degree.  She holds the positon of Program Cost Control Analyst for a defense 
contractor.  She seeks to obtain a security clearance in connection with her employment 
in the defense industry.  
 
Paragraph 1 Guideline F – Financial Considerations   The Government alleges that the 
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because she is financially overextended and at risk 
of  having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to timely file her Federal income tax 
returns for tax years 2012 through 2015.  She also failed to file her state income tax 
returns for tax years 2014 and 2015.  She is indebted to the Federal Government for 
delinquent back taxes in the approximate amount of $11,926 for tax years 2012 through 
2015.  She also filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy in about November 2010.  This 
bankruptcy was converted to a Chapter 7 in about March 2012, and her debts were 
discharged in 2012.  In her Answer, Applicant admits each of the allegations.  Credit 
reports of the Applicant dated May 20, 2015; and January 8, 2018, reflect that each of 
these debts were at one point owing.  (Government Exhibits 5 and 6.)  
 
 Applicant has worked in the defense industry in her present capacity for the past 
30-plus years.  Until 2008, she had no financial problems. 
 
 In 2000, she and her husband had tried to start an Arts Education Company.  
With the income that she and her husband earned, and from their side investments in 
the stock market, they were in a very lucrative positon, yet they were still incurring 
expenses in balancing their credit to debt.  In 2008, things drastically changed.  
Applicant’s husband lost his job.  By 2011, Applicant had lost her job, and she 
eventually had to stop making her mortgage payments. Their joint income dropped 
about 75 percent.  In total, Applicant estimates that as a result of this economic 
downturn in the stock market, the real estate market, and from their business, she and 
her husband lost almost two million dollars over the years.  By 2011, they had also 
accumulated a lot of credit card debt from their business start-up and they no longer 
had the financial resources to pay the bills.  Their house, which was purchased by her 
husband before they married in 2000, had two loans on it.  One for the purchase of the 
house and the other for a home equity loan totaling $625,000.   Applicant tried 
numerous times to get a loan modification on the property, but was unsuccessful.  She 
was also advised by counsel to stop making the monthly mortgage payments.  At some 
 
3 
 
point, Applicant’s income was all they had to manage the household expenses.  To 
further try to save their house, Applicant was advised by counsel to file Chapter 13 
bankruptcy, which she did in 2010.  Upon realizing that she could not save the house, in 
March 2012, the bankruptcy was converted to a Chapter 7 to discharge her other credit 
card debt that she could not afford to pay.   
 
 Applicant admits that during this period, she did not file her Federal and state 
income tax returns, but was focused on trying to salvage what they could of their house 
and their life.   Their income had substantially reduced, filing their taxes was simply not 
a priority at that time, and they did not have the money to pay their taxes.  Applicant’s 
house was ultimately foreclosed upon in 2015.  (Tr. p. 69.) Applicant worked part time 
jobs until 2014, when she went back to work full time.  Applicant has since filed all of the 
tax returns in question.  (See, Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits 1 through 7.)        
  
 Since then, Applicant has contacted both the IRS and the state tax authorities 
and has been working to resolve her back taxes.  In regard to her state back taxes for 
tax years 2014 and 2015, Applicant testified that she originally owed less than $2,000 
for both years combined.  She agreed to have her wages garnished, beginning in 2015 
to resolve the debt.  The garnishment was completed in August 2015.  (Applicant’s 
Exhibit F, and Tr. p. 51)  Applicant no longer owes the state for back taxes.  In regard to 
her Federal back taxes, Applicant originally owed about $11,926 for tax years 2012, 
2013, 2014, and 2015.  Her installment agreement indicates that she has been paying 
the IRS $150 monthly toward these combined tax debt, and as evidenced from the IRS 
Account Transcript for tax period December 2012 through 2016 and from December 
2013 through 2015; and from December 2014 through June 2017.  (Government 
Exhibits 4 and 7)  At this point, she has reduced her tax indebtedness to about $8,000.  
(Applicant’s Exhibit E.)  She currently owes $1,040 for Federal back taxes for tax year 
2016.  (Tr. p. 82.)  Applicant submitted a packet of documents marked Post-Hearing 
Exhibit 8 and did not explained its application.  It appears to show that she has resolved 
some of her back taxes owed to the Government.      
 
 Applicant’s current financial budget indicates that she has $32,000 in her 401K.  
She also keeps a balance of about $4,000 monthly in her checking account.  At the end 
of the month, after paying their regular monthly bills and their delinquent debts, she and 
her husband have about $700 in discretionary funds.  (Government Exhibit 8.) 
 
 A letter from a professional colleague of the Applicant indicates that Applicant is 
a responsible and reliable hard-worker, who is level-headed, demonstrates excellent 
customer relations, and has great team skill sets.  She is extremely knowledgeable and 
highly ethical.   She is recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.) 
 
 A letter from a coworker, from her previous place of employment, indicates that 
she considers Applicant to be a personal friend who is honest and trustworthy with 
strong values.  Applicant is described as a very dedicated, hardworking employee with a 
positive attitude.  She is recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.) 
 
 
4 
 
 A letter from a friend and extended family member indicates that Applicant is 
intelligent, precise, determined and respectful.  He is aware of her financial challenges 
in the past and her efforts to find a positive outcome by resolving her indebtedness.  
She is recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.). 
 
 A letter from Applicant’s company business manager, who hired her, indicates 
that Applicant is a star.  She is an excellent employee who is extremely trustworthy with 
the utmost integrity, and is recommended for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit 
D.) 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
5 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
 Applicant was unable to pay her debts and taxes and became delinquently 
indebted. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
6 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved  or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Beginning in 2008, Applicant’s financial situation began to decline.  Her husband 
lost his job, and then in 2011, Applicant lost her job.  They believe that they were 
victimized by the predatory lending practices, which affected many buyers in the real 
estate market.  They lost money on their investments in the stock market and in their 
business.  These unforeseen circumstances, or circumstances beyond her control, 
caused Applicant to acquire more debt than she could afford to pay.  She ultimately lost 
her house to foreclosure and was forced to file Chapter 7 bankruptcy.  Since getting 
back to work in 2014, her finances have been stabilizing, and she is making regular 
monthly payments toward her delinquent back taxes.  She has completely paid off her 
state taxes and is currently paying her Federal taxes.  She has also filed all of the state 
and Federal income tax returns in question.  She has acted reasonably and responsibly 
under the circumstances.  She has significantly reduced her debt and continues to work 
on doing so.  Applicant is now on the correct financial path.  Both she and her husband 
are now employed, which will further improve the family finances.   There are clear 
indications that the problem is resolved and under control, and there has been a good 
faith effort to resolve her debts. The Financial Considerations concern has been 
mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:   For Applicant 
 
 
   Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Darlene Lokey Anderson 
Administrative Judge 
