 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04196 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
June 15, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 31, 2017, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On January 9, 2018, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines effective June 8, 2017.   
 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on January 26, 2018, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) received the request on or about February 2, 2018. I received the case 
assignment on February 27, 2018. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 28, 
2018, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 26, 2018. The Government 
offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 and 2, which were received without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Exhibits (AppXs) A and B, without objection. Applicant also 
 
2 
 
 
asked that the record be kept open until May 25, 2018, for the receipt of additional 
documentation. On May 17, 2018, he submitted AppX C, which was also received 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR) on May 4, 2018. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in 
Paragraph 1 of the SOR, with explanations. Applicant is 26-years old. (GX 1 at page 5.) 
He has a degree in mechanical engineering, and has worked for a defense contractor 
since June of 2014. (GX 1 at page 14.) 
 
Guideline H – Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse  
 
 1.a. and 1.b. Applicant used marijuana about 30 times from 2009, until his last 
usage in March of 2017, about a year prior to his hearing. (TR at page 15 line 12 to 
page 21 line 12.) During this period of usage, Applicant used the illegal substance about 
five times after being employed by a defense contractor. (Id.) He also purchased 
marijuana once, prior to his current employment. (TR at page 18 lines 10~19.) 
 
 1.c. and 1.d. Applicant used both Adderall and Vyvanse, without valid medical 
prescriptions, 15~20 times from about 2010 to November of 2016. (TR at page 21 line 
15 to page 24 line 16.) 
 
 1.e. and 1.f. Applicant used cocaine twice in 2012 when he attended college, and 
15~20 times while employed by a defense contractor from 2016 until about January of 
2017. (TR at page 25 line 11 to page 31 line 21, and at page 34 line 20 to page 35 line 
7.) His recent usage was to self-medicate himself for pain. (TR at page 27 line 21 to 
page 28 line 22.) Applicant also purchased cocaine once in celebration of his 25th 
birthday. (TR at page 29 lines 2~7.) 
 
 1.g. Applicant used Norco, without a valid prescription, in July of 2016. (TR at 
page 24 line 17 to page 25 line 10.) 
 
 In a written statement dated April 16, 2018, Applicant avers he “will abstain from 
all drug involvement and substance misuse.” (AppX B.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline concerning Drug Involvement and 
Substance Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
 
4 
 
 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior 
may lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" 
as defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term 
adopted in this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Two conditions are established: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Appellant misused prescription drugs, and used both marijuana and cocaine after 
being employed by a defense contractor. Therefore, AG ¶ 25 (a) and (c) are 
established.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. None of them are applicable. In light of his fairly extensive and recent usage, 
Applicant’s eschewing the future use of illegal substances is not convincing. This 
allegation is found against Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant has submitted for my 
consideration a recent performance review. (AppX C.) 
 
5 
 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For this reason, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug involvement and 
substance abuse.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.~1.g.:   Against Applicant 
    
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Richard A. Cefola 
Administrative Judge 
