 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 17-02145 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erin P. Thompson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 13, 2016. 
On July 28, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DOD 
CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under 
Guidelines F and E. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated in Security Executive Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative 
Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 18, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 20, 2017, 
 
2 
 
and the case was assigned to me on April 13, 2018. On April 19, 2018, the Defense Office 
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was scheduled for 
May 16, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 
4 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified but did not present the 
testimony of any other witnesses or submit any documentary evidence. I kept the record 
open until May 31, 2018, to enable him to submit documentary evidence. He timely 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through D, which were admitted without objection.1 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 5, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a. He did 
not expressly admit or deny the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1c, but he stated that the 
debts had been paid. Regarding the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b that he falsified 
his SCA, he admitted that his answers in the SCA were incorrect, but he denied intentional 
falsification. He admitted the security violation alleged in SOR ¶ 2.c. His admissions in 
his SOR answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 53-year-old information assurance analyst employed by a defense 
contractor since February 2015. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from June 
1983 to November 1989 and received an honorable discharge. He served in the U.S. 
Coast Guard from May 1991 to March 2006, received an honorable discharge, and 
receives retired pay based on 20 years of military service. He has worked for various 
defense contractors since August 2007, and he has held a security clearance since at 
least 1994. (Tr. 23.)  
 
 Applicant married in February 1991 and divorced in July 2012. He has lived with a 
cohabitant since May 2013. He received an associate’s degree in computer building in 
July 2003; a bachelor’s degree in December 2004 and a master’s degree in June 2006 
security, both in computer security; and an associate’s degree in culinary arts in 
December 2014. (Tr. 23-24.) 
 
 During a personal subject interview (PSI in December 2016, Applicant was 
questioned about several delinquent debts, some of which were the result of his divorce. 
Several were resolved before the SOR was issued, but two of the three debts alleged in 
the SOR were not resolved. (GX 3 at 12-13.) 
 
                                                          
1 AX D, consisting of two pages is illegible. I contacted Applicant, who informed me that he would try to 
send more legible documents, but he did not submit anything further. In AX A, he stated that AX D reflected 
his current credit score of 676 on the TransUnion credit report and 693 on the Experian credit report, and I 
have accepted this statement as factually accurate. AX C, an Experian credit report, is missing pages 23-
26. The missing pages are part of an explanation for Applicant’s credit score but do not contain any 
information about Applicant’s debts. 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to the record. 
 
3 
 
Applicant co-signed the automobile loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a for his daughter in 
2010. After his daughter divorced, she was unable to make the payments. The loan was 
charged off for $12,894 in March 2014. (GX 3 at 3.) Applicant first discovered that the 
loan was delinquent in 2012, when he applied to continue his security clearance. He did 
not consider the debt to be his personal responsibility because his daughter had agreed 
to make the payments. (Tr. 25-26.) During a personal subject interview (PSI) in December 
2016, he told an investigator that he recognized his legal responsibility as a co-signer, but 
that he had no intention of paying the debt. (GX 2 at 13.) At the hearing, he denied telling 
the investigator that he was unwilling to pay the debt. (Tr. 28.) In Applicant’s post-hearing 
submissions, Applicant stated that his daughter and her ex-husband had reached 
agreement on the automobile, and her ex-husband agreed to refinance the automobile in 
his own name. Applicant provided no documentation of the agreement and no evidence 
that the loan had been refinanced.  
 
Applicant was unaware of the $675 medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b until he 
reviewed his credit report in October 2016. (GX 2 at 13.) He believed that his insurance 
company should have paid the debt. He paid it in February 2017. (AX B.)  
 
Applicant claimed that he paid the $128 debt to a book club, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
In the December 2016 PSI, he stated that the debt arose when he attempted to cancel 
his membership, and that he was not aware of it until confronted with the evidence during 
the PSI. (GX 2 at 13.) At the hearing, he testified that the debt had been paid in full, but 
he was unable to provide documentation of payment. (Tr. 30; AX A.) 
 
In January 2016, Applicant he plugged a personal activity tracker into his work 
computer. He testified that his personal computer and work computer were virtually 
identical and were alongside each other, and he accidently plugged the activity tracker 
into the wrong computer. His computer automatically locked up and sent an electronic 
message to security officials. No classified or sensitive information was compromised. 
Applicant’s access to classified systems was suspended pending completion of an 
investigation. He was counseled and required to complete cyber security awareness 
refresher training. The government client supported by Applicant’s employer asked that 
he be removed from the contract, because he could not perform any work while his 
clearance was suspended. Accordingly, Applicant’s employer terminated him. After the 
investigation of the security violation was completed, Appellant’s employer offered to 
rehire him, but by that time Applicant had already accepted a position with his current 
employer. (GX 2 at 7; Answer to SOR.)  
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA in February 2016, he answered “No” to the 
questions in Section 26 asking if, in the past seven years, he had defaulted on any type 
of loan, had bills or debts turned over to a collection agency, or had any account or credit 
card suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed. He did not disclose 
the delinquent automobile loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.b, or 
the debt to the book club alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. In his answer to the SOR, he admitted 
that he answered the questions incorrectly but attributed the error to haste in completing 
the SCA. 
 
4 
 
In the same SCA he answered “No” to a question asking if, I the last seven years, 
he had been fired, quit after being told he would be fired, or left by mutual agreement 
following charges or allegations of misconduct or following notice of unsatisfactory 
performance. In his SCA, Applicant stated that he left his job in September 2013 because 
it was a temporary position. (GX 1 at 15.) However, in his answer to the SOR and at the 
hearing, he admitted that he quit by mutual agreement because he could not keep pace 
with the workload due to an injury in a motorcycle accident. (Tr. 48-50.) 
 
Applicant’s current annual income from all sources, including his military retired 
pay and some income as a culinary chef instructor, is about $145,000 to $147,000. He 
has about $10,000 in savings and about $40,000 in his retirement account. (Tr. 34-35.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge 
applies these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. An administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
 
5 
 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at 3 
(App. Bd. Apr.20, 2016).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is financially 
overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or otherwise 
questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified information to raise money. It encompasses concerns about a 
person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting classified 
information. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information. See ISCR 
Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant is financially secure and able to resolve the delinquent debts alleged in 
the SOR. He has chosen to not pay the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and has not submitted 
documentary evidence that it is resolved. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c arose 
because of Applicant’s inattention, and the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is not resolved. His 
admissions and the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(b) (“unwillingness to satisfy debts 
 
6 
 
regardless of the ability to do so”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial 
obligation”). The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant:  
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
None of the above mitigating conditions are fully established. Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are recent, numerous, and were not incurred under circumstances 
making them unlikely to recur. The delinquent automobile loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was 
due to his daughter’s divorce and her inability to pay it, but Applicant has not acted 
responsibly. He acknowledged his legal responsibility as a co-signer on the loan, but he 
denied that he has a personal responsibility to resolve it. He claimed that it was resolved 
by a property settlement between his daughter and her ex-husband, but he provided no 
documentary evidence to support his claim. He claimed that the debt to the book club 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c had been paid, but he provided no documentary evidence to support 
his claim. When an applicant claims that a debt is resolved, he or she is expected to 
present documentary evidence supporting that claim. See ISCR Case No. 15-03363 at 2 
(App. Bd. Oct. 19, 2016). AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, 
which has been resolved. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . .  
 
 While Applicant may not have been aware of the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 
1.c when he submitted his SCA, he was clearly aware of his daughter’s failure to pay the 
debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He made it clear throughout the security investigation that he 
felt no personal responsibility to resolve the debt in SOR ¶ 1.a. I found his explanation 
 
7 
 
that he omitted this debt his due to haste in completing his SCA unconvincing. He is well 
educated and has been through the security-clearance process enough times to 
understand the importance of accuracy and candor. Thus, I conclude that SOR ¶ 2.a is 
established. 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant admitted that he quit his job by mutual agreement when 
he was unable to meet performance standards due to an injury, and that he falsely 
reported in his SCA that he left the job because it was a temporary position. Thus, I 
conclude that SOR ¶ 2.b is established. The conduct alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b and 
substantiated by the evidence is sufficient to raise the disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 
16(a): “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire . . . .” 
 
 The relevant disqualifying conditions for the security violation alleged in SOR ¶ 2.c 
are: 
 
AG ¶ 16(c): credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas 
that is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; and 
 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under 
any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of : . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty 
or rule violations . . . . 
 
 Neither disqualifying condition is established. Applicant’s violation was accidental 
and isolated one-time event, and he has had no further violations. After the security 
investigation was completed and Applicant completed remedial training, his former 
employer offered to rehire him.  
 
 The following mitigating conditions are relevant to Applicant’s falsification of his 
SCA: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and  
 
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. Applicant did not admit the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a until he was confronted with the evidence during the December 2016 PSI. Applicant 
was interviewed in a follow-up PSI in March 2017 about his termination of employment in 
September 2013, and he adhered to his statement in the SCA that he left his job because 
it was a temporary position. When he responded to DOHA interrogatories in July 2017, 
he admitted that he “misspoke” in his SCA and he admitted that he was terminated, but 
he did not consider it an “adverse” termination. (GX 2 at 3.) At the hearing, he admitted 
that he quit the job by mutual agreement because he was unable to keep up with the 
workload due to his injury.  
 
AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. Applicant’s falsifications were arguably infrequent, 
but they were not minor and did not occur under unusual circumstances. A security 
clearance investigation is not a forum for an applicant to split hairs or parse the truth 
narrowly. The government has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding 
classified information. That compelling interest includes the government's legitimate 
interest in being able to make sound decisions, based on complete and accurate 
information, about who will be granted access to classified information. An applicant who 
deliberately fails to give full, frank, and candid answers to the government in connection 
with a security clearance investigation or adjudication interferes with the integrity of the 
industrial security program. ISCR Case No. 01-03132 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2002). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances and applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).3  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were addressed under those guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
                                                          
3 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for 
the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of 
continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
9 
 
 Applicant has worked for multiple employers and held a security clearance for 
many years. He served honorably in the U.S. Navy and the U.S. Coast Guard. However, 
his lack of candor in his SCA, his unwillingness to accept responsibility for the automobile 
loan he co-signed, and his quibbling about the circumstances of his termination of 
employment in September 2013 raise unmitigated concerns about his reliability and 
trustworthiness. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under 
Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts 
and lack of candor in his SCA. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.c:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
