 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-01584 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the concerns raised under the Handling Protected 
Information, Use of Information Technology, and Personal Conduct guidelines. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 15, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under the Handling Protected Information, 
Use of Information Technology, and Personal Conduct guidelines. The SOR further 
informed Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD 
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 25, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on November 
15, 2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of 
 
2 
 
hearing on December 13, 2017, scheduling the hearing for January 8, 2018. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 
3, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. The 
record was left open until February 26, 2018, for receipt of additional documentation. On 
that date, he submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 5, 
2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.a, and 3.a. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He was employed 
by defense contractor 1 (DC-1) most recently from 2002 to February 27, 2015. He had 
previously worked for DC-1 in other capacities for brief periods of time. He has been 
employed with defense contractor 2 (DC-2) since March 2015. He held a security 
clearance from 2002 through 2015, while employed by DC-1, without incident. He is 
married, and has two sons, ages 12 and 14. (GE 1; Tr. 18-21.) 
  
 In 2015, Applicant accepted a job offer with DC-2 because his family wanted to 
relocate out of state. His new job with DC-2 was similar to the job duties he performed 
for DC-1. (Tr. 21-22.) He had left employment with DC-1 in the past, but always 
returned. He thought that he may return again in the future and wanted to store his work 
product so that he could pick up where he left off if he returned. As a result, he decided 
to make copies of his electronic work files. On February 19, 2015, he connected a 
personally-owned external hard drive, which could hold a terabyte of information, to his 
work computer. Company policy did not forbid the use of personally-owned external 
hard drives at that time. He selected the drive to copy, locked his computer screen, and 
then left for the night. He downloaded approximately 120,000 proprietary program files 
to his external hard drive over the course of the evening. He did not intend to use the 
files during his employment with DC-2. (GE 2; Tr. 32, 41-43.) He explained:  
  
I had a -- a hard drive laying around that I picked up on a Black Friday 
sale or something like that and -- and it was a large enough capacity to 
where I could just copy the entire network drive where I had stored all of 
my analysis over -- well, what I retained and saved of that analysis over 
the -- just about the entire time I had worked at [DC-1]. And it was, as you 
see by the evidence, a large number of files and it would have been just 
time-prohibitive to go through them all and cherry-pick need this one, this 
one, this one. So what I did is I just basically made a copy of the entire 
drive area. So it was mostly out of ease more than anything else. And that 
way, I would have everything backed up were I to return to that position. 
(Tr. 22-23.) 
 
 
3 
 
 All of the files copied were on a drive in which Applicant was the administrator, 
and were files that Applicant worked on and generated while working for DC-1. 
Applicant admitted that the files copied contained DC-1 proprietary information. None of 
the files contained classified information. (GE 2; Tr. 26, 30-31.)  
  
 After leaving DC-1, Applicant did not access the hard drive. Shortly after starting 
employment with DC-2 he received a letter, dated March 6, 2015, from an attorney with 
DC-1. (GE 2; Tr. 49.) It stated: 
 
It has come to my attention that before the end of your employment with 
[DC-1], you downloaded and removed a large amount of [DC-1] data and 
information. I am writing to demand that you immediately return all [DC-1] 
data and information that you removed from [DC-1] systems or premises, 
whether via electronic media, hard copy, or other means. I also demand 
that you refrain from disclosing any [DC-1] data or information to any third 
party, take all actions necessary to protect the confidentiality of such data 
or information, and provide me with a written account of all of your 
unauthorized disclosures of [DC-1’s] data and information. 
 
This is a very serious matter. Your actions may violate various state and 
federal laws governing the unauthorized access of proprietary computer 
systems, including the federal Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, 18 U.S.C. 
§ 1030; the federal Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 18 U.S.C. § 
2701; and the [state] Computer Crimes Law [citation omitted]. In addition, 
your actions likely violate the confidentiality agreement you signed when 
you were hired at [DC-1] and which you acknowledged in writing upon the 
termination of your employment. The confidentiality agreement legally 
obligates you not to use or disclose [DC-1] proprietary or confidential 
information that is not available to the general public. Your actions 
downloading and removing such information shortly before your 
employment ended seriously call into question whether you intended to 
comply with that agreement. (GE 3.) 
 
 When Applicant received this letter “the full weight of what [he] had done hit [him] 
immediately” and he called the attorney to “rectify the situation.” (Tr. 36.) The attorney 
requested he return the hard drive to DC-1. He mailed it back the following Monday. (Tr. 
36.) He fully complied with the letter. After mailing the hard drive to DC-1, he heard 
nothing further from DC-1. No legal actions were filed against him as a result of this 
incident. (Tr. 40-41, 50.) He is extremely remorseful and has gained a new appreciation 
for the protection of proprietary information. 
 
 Applicant informed his new manager and his security office at DC-2 of the letter 
from DC-1, and the circumstances that led to the letter. DC-2 has provided Applicant 
with briefings on company policy, computer security, security awareness, and the 
proper handling of protected materials. (AE B; AE C; AE D; Tr. 37.) 
 
4 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s 
national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Handling Protected Information is set 
out in AG ¶ 33:  
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
handling protected information-which includes classified and other 
sensitive government information, and proprietary information-raises doubt 
about an individual's trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness 
and ability to safeguard such information, and is a serious security 
concern. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 34. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(d) inappropriate efforts to obtain or view protected information outside 
one's need to know; 
 
(f) viewing or downloading information from a secure system when the 
information is beyond the individual's need-to-know; and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or 
sensitive information. 
 
Applicant downloaded files from the DC-1 computer system, in anticipation of 
leaving his employment there. He retained those files after he left DC-1, although he no 
longer had a need to access that information. His actions were in violation of company 
policies. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 35 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 35 including: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior, or it has happened so 
infrequently or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual responded favorably to counseling or remedial security training 
and now demonstrates a positive attitude toward the discharge of security 
responsibilities. 
 
 As noted below under the discussion of the applicability of AG ¶ 41, Applicant 
was extremely remorseful. He has realized the gravity of his error and similar 
misconduct is unlikely to occur. He has responded favorably to training and 
 
6 
 
demonstrates a positive attitude about his security responsibilities. Applicant mitigated 
the concerns raised by the Handling Protected Information guideline. 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Use of Information Technology 
is set out in AG ¶ 39:  
 
Failure to comply with rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology includes any computer-based, 
mobile, or wireless device used to create, store, access, process, 
manipulate, protect, or move information. This includes any component, 
whether integrated into a larger system or not, such as hardware, 
software, or firmware, used to enable or facilitate these operations.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 40. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system when prohibited by 
rules, procedures, guidelines, or regulations or when otherwise not 
authorized. 
 
In anticipation of Applicant’s departure from DC-1, he duplicated proprietary files 
prior to leaving his employment. He violated the confidentiality agreement he signed 
when he was hired at DC-1, as well as other laws. AG ¶ 40(f) applies. 
 
 AG ¶ 41 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 41 including: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done solely in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness; and 
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification to 
appropriate personnel. 
 
 Applicant’s decision to copy company proprietary files was made in the interest of 
what he perceived to be organizational efficiency. He wanted to preserve the files in the 
 
7 
 
event of his possible return to employment there. He acknowledged that he made a 
grave misjudgment. He immediately returned the hard-drive to DC-1, when he realized 
the implications of his actions. No further actions were taken by DC-1. He has been fully 
forthcoming about his mistake, both with his current employer and during the security 
clearance process. Three years have now passed since that incident. He has completed 
additional training with his current employer. Similar events are unlikely to occur. The 
above conditions apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo 
or cooperate with security processing, including but not 
limited to meeting with a security investigator for subject 
interview, completing security forms or releases, cooperation 
with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to 
lawful questions of investigators, security officials, or other 
official representatives in connection with a personnel 
security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment. 
 
  As stated under the analysis for the preceding guidelines, Applicant violated his 
non-disclosure agreement by removing DC-1 proprietary materials when he left 
employment there. The evidence is sufficient to raise this disqualifying condition.  
 
  
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all of 
the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 including: 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 As discussed in detail above under Guidelines M and K, the above mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines K, M, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has an extended history of working in the defense industry. This was a 
one-time incident, and he is unlikely to commit further violations. Overall, the record 
 
9 
 
evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated 
the Handling Protected Information, Use of Information Technology, and Personal 
Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline K:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline M:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
