 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03263 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Driskill, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 2, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. On November 24, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
On February 13, 2018, the case was assigned to another administrative judge. 
On March 8, 2018, the case was reassigned to me. On March 8, 2018, the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing scheduling the 
hearing for April 16, 2018. The hearing was convened on that date. On April 27, 2018, 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.).  
 
 
 
2 
 
Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified, did not call any witnesses, and submitted Applicant Exhibit 
(AE) A, a folder with 8 tabs, which was admitted without objection.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about Afghanistan. Applicant did not object, and the request was granted. The facts are 
summarized in the written request and will not be repeated verbatim in this decision. Of 
particular note is that the risk of terrorist activities in Afghanistan remains extremely 
high. No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence, and the potential 
exists throughout the country for hostile acts, either targeted or random, against U.S. 
and other Western nationals at any time. The country’s human rights record remains 
poor.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
  Applicant is a 30-year-old linguist employed by a defense contractor since 
February 2017. He seeks a security clearance as a requirement of his continued 
employment. (Tr. 16-17, 19, 64-67) 
   
  Applicant was born in a refugee camp to Afghan parents. He completed the 
equivalency of high school in 2008 in Afghanistan. While in high school, he began 
working for the U.S. Army as a linguist in 2008. He continued working as a linguist until 
2013 when he immigrated to the United States. (Tr. 21-22, 52-58; GE 1; AE A) Because 
of his work with the U.S. Army, he was eligible for a Special Immigrant Visa. (Tr. 24-25; 
AE A) 
 
  Shortly after receiving his “green card,” Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Navy. He 
served in the U.S. Navy from February 2015 to August 2016, and was honorably 
discharged as seaman apprentice (pay grade E-2) based on hardship. While serving in 
the U.S. Navy, he became a U.S. citizen in 2015, and was issued his U.S. passport that 
same year. It was Applicant’s desire to make the Navy a career until he encountered his 
hardship situation. (Tr. 18, 24-28, 61-63, 83; AE A) After he was discharged from the 
Navy, Applicant was employed as an Uber driver until he began his current job as a 
linguist. (Tr. 20-21, 63-64)   
 
  Applicant was deployed as a linguist to Afghanistan two times, from February 
2017 to July 2017 and from August 2017 to February 2018. (Tr. 19-20, 65-66) During 
his second deployment, it became unsafe for him to remain in Afghanistan after the 
Taliban and al-Qaeda discovered his involvement with the U.S. Army, prompting his 
early return to the United States with the full support of his supervisors. (Tr. 58-60, 79; 
AE A) 
 
3 
 
  Applicant married a native-born Afghan citizen in Afghanistan in 2016. She 
currently resides in Afghanistan with Applicant’s three brothers and their families, is a 
homemaker, and recently became the mother of their infant daughter. Applicant 
submitted a Consular Report of Birth Abroad to a U.S. citizen with the U.S. Embassy for 
his daughter, which will extend U.S. citizenship to her. Applicant’s wife has a pending 
visa application to immigrate to the United States. (Tr. 28-33, 67-71, 76; AE A) After his 
wife immigrates to the United States, Applicant plans to pursue a bachelor’s degree in 
civil engineering using his GI Bill. (Tr. 82) 
  
  Applicant’s mother is a citizen of Afghanistan and resident of the United States 
with a “green card.” She is in her 60s, a widow, a career homemaker, and is dependent 
on Applicant for support. (SOR answer; Tr. 34, 71; AE A) Applicant has four siblings – 
three brothers and one sister, who are resident citizens of Afghanistan. Two of his 
brothers alternate selling furniture and household items in Saudi Arabia for six months a 
year and spend the remaining six months in Afghanistan with their families. His sister is 
a homemaker, married and has a family. Applicant’s youngest brother is an unmarried 
university student in Afghanistan. None of Applicant’s immediate family members or in-
laws are employed by or associated with the Afghan government. Most or all of 
Applicant’s immediate family wish to immigrate to the United States. (SOR answer; Tr. 
35-64, 72-76) Lastly, Applicant has infrequent contact with an uncle, who is employed 
as a security guard for an Afghan government official. (SOR answer; Tr. 44-46, 76-77) 
 
 Applicant has weekly contact with his siblings typically through Facebook 
Messenger. (Tr. 47) He has frequent contact with an Afghan cousin and her family, who 
live in the United States. Applicant’s mother lives with this cousin. (Tr. 48, 72) Applicant 
has checking and savings accounts in the United States and has no bank accounts in 
Afghanistan. He sends money to his wife in Afghanistan through Western Union. 
Applicant does not own real property in the United States, but does own an automobile. 
He and his three brothers purchased a small plot of land in Afghanistan adjacent to their 
family home to provide the family with additional living space. (Tr. 50-52, 77-79; AE A) 
 
 Applicant stated that he would immediately report any contact by a foreign 
government, intelligence or security service, or terrorist organization, or any attempt to 
blackmail or coerce him. (Tr. 80-81) He received numerous recommendation letters, 
awards, and certificates for his service as a linguist in support of the U.S. Army. One 
senior U.S. Army officer noted that Applicant had gone on over 50 combat patrols and 
risked his life in support of U.S. military forces. (AE A) Applicant professed his undivided 
loyalty to the United States: 
 
I have worked six (6) years as a linguist in Afghanistan supporting the 
United States Government and its Military and always been very loyal and 
trustworthy to its missions and never [raised] any questions that harm the 
national interests of the US Government and its military. I also served on 
active duty for the United States Navy for 2 years. I am kindly requesting 
from DOD CAF to help and assist in adjudicating my security clearance. 
(SOR answer) 
 
4 
 
 Applicant became a U.S. citizen because of the protection afforded by the 
Constitution. He recognizes the opportunities available in the United States such as the 
right to work. He stated no one would ever want to go back to his or her country of origin 
because the United States is a great and beautiful country. (Tr. 60-61) 
 
Policies 
 
This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became 
effective on June 8, 2017. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
5 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
Applicant’s wife, four siblings, and some extended family members are resident 
citizens of Afghanistan. His uncle works as a security guard for an Afghan government 
official. The potential for terrorist violence against U.S. interests and citizens remains 
extremely high in Afghanistan, and it continues to have human rights problems. 
Applicant’s foreign contacts create a potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, and coercion. AG ¶¶ 7(a) 
and 7(b) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
6 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; and 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest. 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s ties to Afghanistan. Guideline B is not 
limited to countries hostile to the United States. The United States has a compelling 
interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, 
organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of 
whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.1  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made 
with caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and 
unexpectedly. Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of 
a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to 
conduct intelligence operations against the United States, or the foreign country is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous 
conditions in support of the national defense. He stated that he would immediately 
report any contact by a foreign government, intelligence or security service, or terrorist 
organization, or any attempt to blackmail or coerce him. The Appeal Board has stated 
that such a statement, standing alone, is of limited value, unless there is record 
evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar manner in the past in comparable 
circumstances, or that the applicant has a previous track record of complying with 
security regulations and procedures in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances in which he made a significant contribution to the national security.2 In 
                                                          
1 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
2 ISCR Case 07-06030 at 3-4 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008). 
 
7 
 
ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006), the Appeal Board discussed 
this issue as follows: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
I find that Applicant can be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. 
 
 
8 
 
Applicant’s work with the U.S. military in Afghanistan earned him a Special 
Immigrant Visa. He returned to Afghanistan two times since his immigration to work with 
the U.S. military. The Appeal Board has held that “an applicant’s proven record of action 
in defense of the United States is very important and can lead to a favorable result for 
an applicant in a Guideline B case.”3 The complicated state of affairs in Afghanistan 
places a significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his foreign 
family members do not pose an unacceptable security risk. He has met that burden.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant 
mitigated the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Robert Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
                                                          
3 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
