 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 17-01795 
  )    
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
BORGSTROM, Eric H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns about his financial problems. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is granted.  
        
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 16, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant responded to the SOR on July 24, 2017, and he elected a 
determination with a hearing. On October 30, 2017, a notice of hearing was issued, 
scheduling the hearing for November 15, 2017. The hearing proceeded as scheduled. 
Applicant testified and submitted 25 documents, which I admitted as Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A through Y, without objection. Department Counsel submitted four documents, 
which I admitted as Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript on November 27, 2017. After the hearing, Applicant timely 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
 
submitted an email with five attachments, which I admitted as AE Z through EE, without 
objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges financial considerations security concerns based on Applicant’s 
19 delinquent debts. In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied the debts in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a., 1.f., 1.k., 1.l., and 1.m., and he admitted the remaining debts. After a thorough and 
careful review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. From September 2006 to May 2011, Applicant attended 
undergraduate-level courses. Applicant’s employment history includes two lengthy 
periods of unemployment – April 2009 to March 2012 and April 2013 to November 2014 
– and he otherwise worked as a server or clerk in a restaurant. Since May 2016, Applicant 
has been employed full time by a DOD contractor. 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and his April 2016 and April 2017 credit reports establish 
the 19 alleged debts. Applicant paid all of the delinquent medical accounts (SOR ¶¶ 1.i., 
1.k., 1.l., 1.m., 1.p., 1.q., 1.r., and 1.s.), except for SOR ¶ 1.f., on which he has made 
payments totaling $1,150. Applicant also resolved one delinquent student loan (SOR ¶ 
1.o.).2 In total, Applicant has made payments totaling approximately $5,588 on alleged 
debts and payments totaling approximately $900 on unalleged medical debts between 
about June 2017 and January 2018.3 
 
 In October 2017, Applicant’s eight delinquent student loans (SOR ¶¶ 1.b.-1.e., 1.g., 
1.h, 1.j., and 1.n.) were consolidated. Applicant was approved for an income-driven 
repayment plan, whereby his payments were held in abeyance given his low income and 
no funds were currently due. Nonetheless, Applicant established an automatic monthly 
withdrawal and payments began in December 2017, with the intent to rehabilitate his 
student loan accounts.4 
 
 Applicant’s largest debt (SOR ¶ 1.a.) resulted from his treatment at an alcohol 
rehabilitation facility in 2014. At the time, the insurance provider sent funds to Applicant’s 
residence to pay for the rehabilitation program. Unbeknownst to Applicant, who was in 
detoxification and rehabilitation at the time, Applicant’s father used the funds to support 
his own gambling addiction. Applicant did not learn of this delinquent debt until his August 
2016 OPM interview. Applicant’s father acknowledged his responsibility for this delinquent 
debt and made two payments towards its resolution; however, he has not adhered to the 
repayment plan. After several months, Applicant recognized that his father would not 
adhere to the repayment plan, and Applicant, based on his father’s malfeasance, filed a 
formal dispute with the creditor. Applicant challenged his liability for the debt as he never 
                                                          
2 AE A, C, H, Q, R, S, AA. 
 
3 AE AA. 
 
4 AE I-P. 
 
 
3 
 
received the funs purportedly sent by the insurance provider. He included his father’s 
admissions of responsibility. The creditor held Applicant responsible for the debt, and 
Applicant currently lacks the funds available to obtain legal counsel to further contest his 
liability for this debt or otherwise recoup the funds from his father.5  
  
 Applicant attributed his student-loan delinquencies and medical expenses to his 
alcoholism. Applicant began his undergraduate education in September 2006. In spring 
of 2007, Applicant withdrew from classes because his alcoholism had progressed such 
that he was no longer functional. Between 2007 and 2011, Applicant repeatedly enrolled 
in courses and later withdrew when his alcohol consumption spiked. As a result, Applicant 
accrued significant student-loan debt. Applicant’s alcohol consumption resulted in several 
hospitalizations and emergency room vists – for a broken foot, multiple concussions, and 
pneumonia – at a time when Applicant did not have health insurance. All of the alleged 
student-loan accounts and medical expenses precede Applicant’s sober date of April 29, 
2014.6  
 
 After completing alcohol rehabilitation, Applicant began to take steps to improve 
his financial situation. Since 2015, Applicant has not incurred any additional delinquent 
debts. In May 2016, he attained full-time employment, but his initial salary ($31,000) was 
insufficient to fulfill his monthly financial obligations and address his delinquent debts. 
Applicant has closely adhered to his monthly budget for several years, given his small net 
monthly remainder. He has taken extreme steps to reduce his expenses, including 
shopping at thrift stores and receiving donated clothing. In June 2017, he received a small 
performance bonus, and he consulted a credit-counseling service and initiated some debt 
repayments. In September 2017, Applicant’s annual salary was increased to $42,000, 
providing Applicant additional funds to address his delinquent debts.7 
 
 Applicant is actively engaged with Alcoholics Anonymous and has a sponsor. He 
volunteers at his local parish and advises youths about the consequences of substance 
abuse. He also regularly volunteers at a homeless shelter and has organized clothing 
collections for homeless individuals. In addition to his recent performance-based salary 
increase, Applicant has received workplace awards and bonuses, and his work ethic and 
character are highly regarded by his peers and supervisors.8 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
                                                          
5 AE B-H. 
 
6 AE B, Tr. 44. 
 
7 Tr. 40-45. 
 
8 AE U, W, and Y. 
 
4 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction 
with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
 
5 
 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in 
illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s 19 debts total approximately $125,000. These debts became 
delinquent between 2011 and 2014. The Government produced substantial evidence to 
raise the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).  
 
 Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit counseling 
service; and there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved 
or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant bears the burdens of production and persuasion in mitigation to 
demonstrate that his financial problems do not cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Applicant’s delinquent debts were incurred prior to 
his April 2014 sober date. While in recovery, he has adhered to a strict monthly budget 
 
6 
 
and taken significant steps to reduce expenses. His recent salary increase enabled him 
to remain current on his monthly financial obligations and to make significant payments 
on his delinquent accounts. Applicant has provided documentary evidence of his financial 
responsibility and his exhaustive efforts to address his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(a) 
applies. 
 
Applicant’s financial delinquencies are linked directly and indirectly to his 
alcoholism and his father’s fraudulent conversion of the funds allotted for Applicant’s 
alcohol treatment. These circumstances were largely beyond Applicant’s control. Since 
2015, Applicant has incurred no additional delinquent debts. Although he has been 
employed by a DOD contractor since May 2016, his initial salary did not allow him to pay 
more than his monthly financial obligations. With his small performance bonus, he 
initiated some payments in June 2017, and he has taken significant debt-resolution steps 
since his larger salary increase in September 2017. Applicant exhaustively documented 
his monthly budget, his debt repayments, and the steps he has taken to reduce his 
monthly expenses. Applicant acted responsibly to fulfill his monthly financial obligations 
and then address his delinquent debts when his finances permitted. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
Applicant consulted a credit-counseling service in June 2017. While he found the 
service unhelpful, he self-initiated payments, payment arrangements, and disputes to 
resolve his delinquent accounts. All of Applicant’s delinquent medical accounts have been 
paid or nearly paid, and he has taken significant steps towards rehabilitating his student 
loan accounts. Although the alcohol-treatment expense remains unresolved, Applicant 
demonstrated a reasonable basis for his dispute – his father’s admitted malfeasance. He 
lacks the funds to obtain legal counsel to further dispute the debt, but he has taken all the 
steps his finances permit at this time. AG ¶¶ 20(c), (d), and (e) apply. 
 
Despite circumstances beyond his control, Applicant has acted responsibly to 
improve his financial stability and resolve his delinquent accounts since completing his 
alcohol rehabilitation. He strictly adhered to his monthly budget and has not incurred any 
delinquent debts since 2015. He has taken significant steps to repay and otherwise 
resolve his delinquent debts. Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security 
concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
7 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
      
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances 
surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F and the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(d) in this whole-person analysis.  
 
 Applicant is actively engaged in Alcoholics Anonymous and volunteers in his 
community. He has taken austere measures to reduce his expenses and adhere to his 
monthly budget, so as not to incur any additional delinquent debts. He has received 
multiple performance-based awards, and his work ethic and character are well regarded 
by his peers and supervisors. Since his April 2014, Applicant has turned around his career 
and substantially rehabilitated his finances. Given his burden to demonstrate financial 
responsibility, trustworthiness, and good judgment, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.s.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, I conclude 
that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Eric H. Borgstrom 
Administrative Judge 
