 
1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     ------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-03667 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicholas T. Temple, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for access to classified information. She did not present sufficient evidence to 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concern stemming from her history of 
financial problems or difficulties. Accordingly, this case is decided against Applicant.    
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86 format) on February 8, 2017.1 This document is commonly known as a 
security clearance application. Thereafter, on November 2, 2017, after reviewing the 
application and the information gathered during a background investigation, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland, sent 
Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified 
                                                          
1 Exhibit 2.  
 
 
2 
 
information. The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the factual reasons for the 
action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 25, 2017. She requested a decision 
based on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On December 14, 2017, Department Counsel submitted all relevant and material 
information that could be adduced at a hearing. The file of relevant material (FORM) 
consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documentation, some of 
which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, who received it on January 3, 2018. She made a timely reply to the FORM, 
which consists of a two-page handwritten memorandum. The case was assigned to me 
on June 6, 2018.   
 
  Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee who requires a security clearance for a job 
with a federal contractor in the defense industry.2 She is yet to begin that employment 
pending her application for a security clearance. She has otherwise been employed as 
a VIP reservationist for a casino since October 2016. Before that, she worked as a 
bookkeeper and officer manager from January 2009 to December 2015. She was laid 
off (and on maternity leave) and unemployed during January—September 2016, a 
period of about nine months. She received unemployment compensation until July 
2016, but otherwise had no income until resuming employment in October 2016. Her 
educational background includes an associate’s degree awarded in 2014. She has 
never married and she has lived with a cohabitant since 2014. She has one child, born 
in December 2015.  
 
The SOR alleges a history of financial problems or difficulties consisting of 43 
delinquent accounts grouped together as follows: (1) nine past-due student loans in 
various amounts; (2) four unpaid judgments for a total of about $3,793; and (3) 30 
collection or charged-off accounts for a total of about $30,000. In her answer to the 
SOR, she admitted the delinquent debts except for six charged-off accounts, which she 
claimed duplicated other alleged debts. The 43 delinquent accounts are established by 
Applicant’s admissions in her answer to the SOR, two credit reports from 2017, and 
court records concerning the four unpaid judgments.3   
 
Applicant attributes her financial problems to her 2016 period of unemployment.4 
She asserted in her answer to the SOR that the nine past-due student loans were in 
deferment, not past due, and she intended to consolidate the loans when the deferment 
ended. She submitted documentation of a settlement installment agreement for the 
                                                          
2 Exhibit 10.  
 
3 Exhibits 4-9.  
 
4 Answer to SOR; Exhibit 3.  
 
 
3 
 
unpaid judgment in SOR ¶ 1.qq, but did not include documentation showing proof of 
payment under the settlement.5 
 
In her February 2018 reply to the FORM, she made the following assertions: (1) 
she entered into a repayment arrangement with 12 creditors upon receipt of an income 
tax refund in February 2018; (2) six of the delinquent accounts are duplicates of other 
accounts; (3) the nine past-due student loans are current and she is working with the 
lender to consolidate the majority of the loans; (4) she contacted seven creditors to 
inform them of her situation and she will try to make some sort of payment every month; 
and (5) she has yet to contact nine creditors. She did not submit documentation to 
support her assertions. Likewise, she did not submit documentation (e.g., account 
statements, cancelled checks, bank statements, etc.) showing that any of the 43 
delinquent debts in the SOR were paid, settled, in a repayment arrangement, forgiven, 
cancelled, or otherwise resolved.  
 
Law and Policies 
 
 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), effective June 8, 2017.6 
 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.7 As 
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of the Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent 
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the 
side of denials.”8 Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt 
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of protecting national security. In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that 
the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of evidence.9 The Appeal Board has 
followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the 
substantial-evidence standard.10 
 
                                                          
5 Answer to SOR at 9-10.  
 
6 The 2017 AG are available at http://ogc.osd.mil/doha.  
 
7 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a 
‘right’ to a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no 
right to a security clearance).  
 
8 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
9 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted). 
 
 
4 
 
 A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted 
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.11 An 
unfavorable clearance decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing 
security clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.12 
 
 There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for 
access to classified information.13 The Government has the burden of presenting 
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.14 An 
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate 
facts that have been admitted or proven.15 In addition, an applicant has the ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.16 
  
Discussion 
 
 Under Guideline F for financial considerations, the suitability of an applicant may 
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive 
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties. The overall concern is: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .17 
 
 The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise classified or sensitive information to obtain money or something else of 
value. It encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other 
important qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified or sensitive 
information. 
 
 In analyzing the facts of this case, I considered the following disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions as most pertinent:  
 
 AG ¶ 19(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
                                                          
11 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
12 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 
 
13 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004). 
 
14 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
15 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15. 
 
16 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
17 AG ¶ 18. 
 
5 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic financial 
history sufficient to raise a security concern under Guideline F. There is no reliable 
documentary evidence that Applicant has made any forward progress in resolving the 
43 delinquent debts for more than $30,000. Her problematic financial history suggests 
she may be irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding 
classified or sensitive information.  
 
 What is missing here is documentation in support of Applicant’s case. There is 
insufficient documentation to establish that she initiated and is adhering to a good-faith 
effort to pay the delinquent debts. Although her financial problems are connected to a 
period of unemployment in 2016, I cannot conclude that she has acted responsibly 
since then given the state of the written record. It’s the responsibility of the individual 
applicant to produce relevant documentation in support of their case. For example, 
given her representations about her student loans, it is reasonable to expect Applicant 
to produce paperwork showing the accounts are no longer past due. She has not met 
her burden of production because she did not present sufficient documentation showing 
that she is making some sort of effort to resolve her numerous delinquent debts.    
  
 Applicant’s history of financial problems or difficulties creates doubt about her 
reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified information. In 
reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and considered if the 
favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice versa. I also 
considered the whole-person concept. Accordingly, I conclude that she did not meet her 
ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 The formal findings on the SOR allegations are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.qq   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 It is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to 
classified information.  
 
 
 
Michael H. Leonard 
Administrative Judge 
 
