 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03765 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 8, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 30, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 28, 2018. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 29, 
2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 16, 2018. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibit (AE) A and B. 
There were no objections to any of the exhibits offered, and they were admitted into 
evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript on April 24, 2018.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted Hearing Exhibits I and II, written requests that I 
take administrative notice of certain facts about Afghanistan and Iran. Applicant did not 
object, and I have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the requests that 
are supported by source documents from official U.S. Government publications.1 The 
facts are summarized in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He was born in Afghanistan. He completed high school 
there. He never married and has no children. He moved to the United States in 2000 and 
became a naturalized citizen in 2008. He testified that he renounced his Afghan 
citizenship. He has worked part-time for federal contractors in the United States from 
approximately 2003 to 2011, as a cultural advisor and role player. He has been employed 
by his current employer since September 2017.2  
 
 Applicant moved from Afghanistan in 1980 because the government wanted him 
to enter military service. He went to Pakistan as a United Nations refugee. He was in Iran 
for a period, Turkey for six months, Syria for five to six years, and Lebanon for eight to 
nine years. He eventually was granted entry into the United States through a United 
Nations refugee program.3  
 
 Applicant moved back to Afghanistan from July 2011 to April 2013, because he 
wanted to visit his family, to find a job with the U.S. Army, and potentially open a business. 
He worked in a bakery while there. In 2011, he opened a bank account in Afghanistan in 
case a business enterprise worked out. He took $45,000 with him from his U.S. account. 
When he left Afghanistan he transferred the money back to his U.S. bank. He continues 
to maintain a bank account in Afghanistan, but estimated there is only $100 in it.4  
 
                                                          
1 Source documents are attached to Hearing Exhibits III and IV. 
 
2 Tr. 19-20, 27-28, 45-46, 74-75; GE 1, AE B. 
 
3 Tr. 49-51. 
 
4 Tr. 42-47, 63-70; AE A. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant has three sisters, who are citizens of Afghanistan and residents of Iran. 
They moved there in approximately 1995 as refugees. They are all married to Afghan 
citizens and are housewives. One husband is retired, one is self-employed, and the other 
works in the fitness business. He explained his sisters moved to Iran during the Afghan 
civil war. In the past, he provided them some financial support, but has not done so for 
about ten years. In 2011, his sisters traveled from Iran to Afghanistan while he was living 
in Afghanistan to visit with him. He stated his sisters’ children missed him. So he visited 
them in Iran in 2013 for about six weeks. He testified that he applied for an Afghan 
passport, so he could visit his sisters in Iran. He could not visit them using a U.S. passport. 
He testified that he now has minimal contact with one sister, which is about every two to 
three years. The other two he has contact with every three to four months by telephone. 
Applicant traveled on his Afghan passport at the time.5  
 
 Applicant’s stepmother is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. He has not had 
contact with her since 2013, when he saw her in Afghanistan. He does not provide her 
financial support.6  
 
 Applicant has five half-brothers who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. He 
had some contact with them when he was living in Afghanistan from 2011 to 2013, but 
has not had contact since then. They work in a small business or are taxi drivers. He has 
a half-sister who is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. He had some contact with her 
when he lived there. She is married. He has not had contact since 2013.7 
 
 Applicant has five male cousins and four female cousins who are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. He has contact with two men and two women cousins. One 
woman cousin, who is like a sister, he contacts every two weeks by telephone. One of his 
male cousins is in the Afghan military. He contacts him about twice a month and 
occasionally sends him money. Another male cousin has a small business, and Applicant 
contacts him once or twice a month. Another cousin he contacts every couple of months. 
One female cousin lost her husband and has three children. Applicant sends her money 
to help with expenses. He testified that he sends his cousins money as they need it, but 
primarily sends it to two of them. He last visited these cousins in 2013.8  
 
 Applicant owns undeveloped land in the United States. He also owns a car and 
has about $11,000 in savings, but no other assets. He testified that he may return to 
Afghanistan in the future to live, but for now he will remain in the United States.9  
 
                                                          
5 Tr. 28-42, 44-48. 
 
6 Tr. 51-53. 
 
7 Tr. 53-57. 
 
8 Tr. 57-63. 
 
9 Tr. 71-73, 77. 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant provided certificates and letters of appreciation from employers. It was 
noted that he participated in multiple military training events where he played different 
roles as an Afghan citizen, which contributed greatly to the overall success of the 
exercise. His expertise in the Afghan culture and interaction with service members was 
considered priceless and essential to the mission. Applicant’s expertise, professionalism 
and outstanding service were applauded.10 
 
Afghanistan11 
 
 The United States Department of State’s travel warning for Afghanistan remains in 
effect and it warns U.S. citizens against travel there because of continued instability and 
threats by terrorist organizations against U.S. citizens. Travel there is unsafe due to 
ongoing risk of kidnapping, hostage-taking, military combat operations, and armed rivalry 
between political and tribal groups, militant attacks, suicide bombings, and insurgent 
attacks. These attacks may also target Afghan and U.S. Government convoys and 
compounds, foreign embassies, military installations, and other public areas.  
 
Extremists associated with various Taliban networks, the Islamic State in Iraq and 
Syria (ISIS), and members of other armed opposition groups are active throughout the 
country. These terrorist groups routinely attack Afghan, coalition forces, and U.S. targets 
with little regard for or the express intent to cause civilian casualties. Due to security 
concerns, unofficial travel to Afghanistan by U.S. Government employees and their family 
members is restricted and requires prior approval from the State Department.  
 
Afghanistan continues to experience aggressive and coordinated attacks by 
different terrorist groups. These groups remain active and were able to conduct a number 
of high-profile, mass-casualty attacks in Kabul against sectarian and Afghan government 
targets. They continue to plan such attacks against U.S. and coalition forces and Afghan 
interests. Border regions of Afghanistan and Pakistan remain safe havens for terrorists. 
The Afghan government struggles to assert control over this remote region.  
 
According to a June 2017 U.S. Department of Defense report on Afghanistan, 
Afghanistan faces a continuing threat from as many as 20 insurgent and terrorist networks 
present and operating in the Afghanistan-Pakistan region, in what is the highest 
concentration of extremist and terrorist groups in the world. 
 
 The State Department’s report on human rights for Afghanistan notes there was 
widespread violence, including indiscriminate attacks on civilians and killings of persons 
affiliated with the government by armed insurgent groups, widespread disregard for the 
rule of law and little accountability for those who committed human rights abuses. There 
was also targeted violence and endemic societal discrimination against women and girls.  
 
                                                          
10 Tr. 24-25; AE B. Applicant noted that he had about 50 character and reference letters, but he only 
provided a representative sample to be admitted into evidence.  
 
11 HE I. 
 
5 
 
 
 Afghanistan remains an important partner of the United States in the fight against 
terrorism, working with the U.S. to eliminate terrorist groups. The U.S. Government 
continues to invest resources to help Afghanistan improve its security, governance, 
institutions, and economy. The U.S. Government has a strong bilateral partnership with 
the Afghan government. 
 
Iran12 
 
 Iran has been designated as a State Sponsor of Terrorism since 1984. It remains 
the most prominent state sponsor of terrorism, providing financial aid, advanced weapons 
and tactics, and direction to militant and terrorist groups across the Middle East. It 
cultivates operatives across the globe as a contingency to enable potential terrorist 
attacks.  
 
 Iran uses terrorist groups to implement foreign policy goals, provide cover for 
intelligence operations, and create instability in the Middle East. It remains an enduring 
threat to the U.S. national interests. Iran and its primary terrorism partners pose a 
persistent threat to the United States and its partners worldwide. The U.S. Government 
does not have diplomatic ties or consular relations with Iran. The Department of State 
warns U.S. citizens not to travel to Iran due to the risk of arbitrary arrest and detention. 
 
 Iran continued to leverage cyber espionage, propaganda, and attacks to support 
its security priorities, influence events and foreign perceptions, and counter threats-
including against U.S. allies in the region. The U.S. Director of National Intelligence (DNI) 
has identified several countries, including Iran as posing a significant cyber threat against 
the United States. The DNI specifically noted that Iran will continue to penetrate U.S. and 
allied networks for espionage and to position itself for potential cyber-attacks. There is 
also concern that Iran will expand its influence in the region and will develop military 
capabilities that threaten U.S. forces.  
 
 In 2015, the Visa Waiver Program was amended. Under the amendment, citizens 
of Iran, Iraq, Sudan and Syria are ineligible to travel or be admitted to the United States. 
The exclusion of these countries from waiver eligibility reflects that the presence of an 
individual in that country increases the likelihood that the individual is a credible threat to 
the national security of the United States, that a foreign terrorist organization has a 
significant presence in the country; or that the country is a safe haven for terrorists. 
 
 Iran has a poor human rights record. There are severe restrictions on civil liberties, 
including freedom of assembly, association, speech, religion, and the press. Other 
problems include abuse of due process combined with the use of capital punishment for 
crimes that do not meet requirements for due process, as well as cruel, inhuman, or 
degrading treatment and punishment; and disregard for the physical integrity of persons, 
whom authorities arbitrarily and unlawfully detained, tortured, or killed. There are 
numerous other human rights problems in Iran.  
                                                          
12 HE II 
 
6 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B: Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
resulted in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts 
and interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or 
interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as 
whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive 
information or is it associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information; and  
 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign country, 
or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could subject the 
individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation or personal 
conflict of interest.  
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(f) require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” 
required to raise these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. “Heightened 
risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living 
under a foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The totality of 
Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be 
considered.  
 
Applicant maintains a small balance in a bank account in Afghanistan. The amount 
held in the account does not rise to the level of a substantial financial interest in a foreign 
 
8 
 
 
country. AG ¶ 7(f) does not apply. However, the existence of the bank account will be 
considered when analyzing the whole-person, and Applicant’s ties to Afghanistan.  
 
The mere possession of a close personal relationship with a person who is a citizen 
and resident of a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline 
B. However, depending on the facts and circumstances, this factor alone is sufficient to 
create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. 
 
The U.S. Department of State warns U.S. citizens against travel to Afghanistan 
and Iran because of continued instability and threats by terrorist organizations against 
U.S. citizens. It also has serious concerns about terrorist activities in both countries. 
Extremists associated with various Taliban networks, ISIS, and members of other armed 
opposition groups are active throughout Afghanistan and terrorist threats are equally a 
serious concern in Iran.  
 
Terrorist groups routinely attack Afghan, coalition forces, and U.S. targets. Border 
regions of Afghanistan and Pakistan remain safe havens for terrorists. The Afghan 
government struggles to assert control over this remote region. Iran remains the most 
prominent state sponsor of terrorism, providing financial aid, advanced weapons and 
tactics, and direction to militant and terrorist groups across the Middle East. Both Iran and 
Afghanistan have serious human rights issues.  
 
Applicant three sisters are citizens of Afghanistan and have resided in Iran since 
the 1990s. Applicant maintains contact with them and has visited them in Iran after 
becoming a naturalized citizen of the United States. He returned to Afghanistan from 2011 
to 2013, and his sisters traveled there to visit him.  
 
Applicant has an ongoing relationship with his cousins who are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. He is closer to some of his cousins than others. He provides 
two of them occasional financial support. He contacts some of them regularly.   
 
Applicant’s stepmother is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. He has five half-
brothers and a half-sister who are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. He has not had 
any contact with them since 2013. He did have contact with his half-siblings when he was 
living in Afghanistan. He does not know if in the future he will return to Afghanistan to live. 
This uncertainty raises concerns that he may rekindle his relationship with his half-siblings 
and stepmother. Applicant’s family residing in Afghanistan and Iran creates a heightened 
risk and a potential foreign influence concern. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply.  
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to rebut them or otherwise prove mitigation. 
Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially applicable to the disqualifying 
security concerns based on the facts: 
 
 
9 
 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
  
Applicant’s family, includes his sisters who are citizens of Afghanistan and reside 
in Iran. His step-mother, half-siblings, and cousins are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. He stays in contact with his sisters and some cousins. His sisters traveled 
from Iran to Afghanistan to visit him when he was living in Afghanistan. He also obtained 
an Afghan passport so he could visit them in Iran. They maintain telephonic contact. 
Applicant stays in contact by telephone with some of his cousins in Afghanistan. He 
occasionally sends financial support to two of them. Applicant testified he has not seen 
his stepmother or step-siblings since 2013. He stated that when he lived there he had 
more contact with them. He also testified that he did not know at this time whether he 
would move back to Afghanistan in the future. Because of this uncertainty, it is unknown 
whether he would reestablish ties with these family members. Applicant’s contact with 
some of his family may be infrequent, but it is not casual. Insufficient evidence was 
produced to apply AG ¶ 8(c). 
 
I have considered Applicant’s close relationship with his sisters in Iran and his 
cousins in Afghanistan. It is an unsafe place for those residing in either country, and 
especially for U.S. citizens. Terrorism and human rights abuses for people living in both 
countries are rampant. These groups conduct kidnappings and hostage-taking. Terrorist 
groups in Afghanistan target U.S. citizens. I cannot find that it is unlikely that Applicant 
would be placed in a position of having to choose between sisters, cousins, and other 
relatives and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant has been a U.S. citizen since 2008. He returned to Afghanistan from 
2011 to 2013 where he worked. He obtained an Afghanistan passport so he could travel 
to Iran to visit his sisters. His sisters traveled from Iran to Afghanistan to visit him because 
their children missed him. He helps his family financially. He is obviously devoted to his 
family.  
 
I have considered Applicant’s loyalty, devotion, and commitment when working 
with federal contractors in the United States in support of missions conducted in 
 
10 
 
 
Afghanistan. I have considered his contributions, letters of recommendation, and 
certificates of appreciation stating that Applicant is loyal to the United States. However, 
Afghanistan and Iran continue to have significant terrorist activity that specifically targets 
both Afghans and Americans. Applicant’s close relationship with his family in Afghanistan 
and Iran, his visits to see the family, and his financial support for them is commendable. 
He took the extraordinary effort to obtain an Afghan passport so he could travel to Iran to 
visit his sisters and their families. His familial ties are not minimal. It is too great of a 
burden to expect him to be loyal to the interests of the United States and resolve any 
conflicts in favor of the United States over those of family. AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 46 years old and has been a naturalized U.S. citizen since 2008. He 
has strong family ties with his sisters and cousins in Iran and Afghanistan. I have given 
considerable weight to Applicant’s service and commitment to the United State, but it is 
not outweighed by his deep familial ties and loyalty to his siblings and cousins in 
Afghanistan and Iran. It is too great a burden to expect him to resolve a conflict of interest 
in favor of the United States instead of his family. The heightened risks raised by familial 
ties in Afghanistan and Iran continue to raise security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence, and remain unmitigated. The record evidence leaves me with questions and 
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph   1.g:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
