 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 17-00330 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Brittany Muetzel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
06/11/2018 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement and Substance Misuse. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 27, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on May 26, 2017. He requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 4, 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing 
 
2 
 
 
on March 22, 2018, for a hearing on May 11, 2018. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 through 2, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and presented two witnesses. I held the 
record open for submissions of documentation until May 25, 2018, and Applicant provided 
one exhibit, which was marked as Applicant Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on May 22, 2018.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DOD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions1 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I 
considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same under either set of 
guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 28 years old. He is an IT manager for a defense contractor. He is 
married and has no children. He graduated from high school in 2008 and received an 
undergraduate degree in 2014. He has never held a security clearance. (GX 1) He has 
been employed with his current employer since 2016. He completed his security 
clearance application (SCA) in April 2016. On his SCA, he disclosed marijuana use from 
2009 to December 2015. 
 
Applicant was aware in January 2016 that his employer had a company policy 
against illicit drug use. He understands that marijuana is illegal. He used marijuana in 
college and afterwards with friends. (GX 2) He reported that he and his friend shared a 
bowl of marijuana. He noted in that interview that he smokes the drug because his current 
employer does not have a drug policy. His intent was to stop using marijuana should it be 
required for employment. He has not had any interactions with law enforcement with 
regard to illegal drugs. 
 
 In his SCA, Applicant reported that his last use was December 2015.  However, 
he explained that he ceased all drug activities when he had the opportunity for his current 
employment. (GX 1) He stated that it was simple and easy to stop smoking the marijuana. 
(GE 2) 
 
 Applicant, at the hearing, testified that he had stopped using marijuana for about 
11 months at one undefined period of time. (Tr. 19)  He again stated that he never gave 
                                                          
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
3 
 
 
money for the marijuana, but would provide food in exchange. He still occasionally sees 
some of the friends with whom he smoked marijuana. (Tr. 21) 
 
 Applicant told his employer about his prior drug use, but not in detail. He 
remembers discussing it was after he completed his SCA. His current employer does drug 
testing. (Tr. 22) He has never been drug tested. Applicant acknowledged that he made a 
decision to use marijuana after he stated in his SCA that he had stopped. (Tr. 24) He said 
that it was Memorial Day weekend. (Tr. 22) 
 
 Upon questioning, Applicant initially admitted that he also used marijuana in 2017 
about three times with some of the same friends. (Tr. 27) This was despite his earlier 
statement that he had matured and had concerns about his health and career opportunity. 
He was very cavalier that he just made a personal decision and that the usage had 
lessened. He admitted that he chose to violate company policy and the law. (Tr.29) 
Applicant stated that his last marijuana usage was in 2018, before the hearing. (Tr. 30) 
 
 Applicant’s employer (president of the company) testified that he knew of some 
prior use of drugs by Applicant, but was not familiar with all of it. He stated that Applicant 
is a prompt, reliable worker. (Tr. 38) He stated that he has done an excellent job. The 
witness was not familiar with the specifics of the SOR. 
 
 A second witness agreed that a referral to the EAP would be a good idea. He 
emphasized that the current policy at Applicant’s place of employment is zero drug 
tolerance.  After hearing the testimony, he believes Applicant is an honest person. He is 
trusted with various information. (Tr. 46) He stated the company will take measures to 
see that Applicant adheres to the drug policy. He submitted a letter (AX A) after the 
hearing referring to random drug testing and a personal performance plan. 
  
           Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
 
4 
 
 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Finally, Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement and Substance 
Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Three conditions are established: 
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(f) any illegal drug use while granted access to classified information or 
holding a sensitive position. 
 
 Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from 2009 to 2018. He used it 
after signing the SCA and having an interview. He stated that he would not use it again, 
but he made the decision to do so on more than one occasion during the clearance, after  
discussing the drug. He believes his honesty outweighs the use. Therefore, AG ¶ 25 (a),  
and (f) are established.  
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Two conditions may be applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of 
national security eligibility. 
 
 Applicant’s last drug use was as one month before the hearing in 2018. I do not 
find that sufficient time has transpired for mitigation in this case given the period of time 
in his life that he illegally used drugs. He told his employers about his marijuana use, 
signed a letter of intent, and they have agreed to monitor him. However, his lack of  
concern about breaking rules does not outweigh another promise to stop using marijuana. 
I did not find him credible about his intent to now stop using marijuana I do not find 
mitigation under this guideline. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
6 
 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions in light of all pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this 
case. Applicant is respected by those who know him. He performs well at work. He is 
married. He reported his drug use to his employers, and disclosed use from 2009 to 2015 
on his SCA. 
 
Applicant kept using marijuana after he stated that he would not continue to do so 
in 2016. This is troubling. His employers are willing to monitor him, but the fact that he 
disregarded rules, including during the security clearance process leaves me with doubts 
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate concerns under Guideline H.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
