 
1 
 
                                                             
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-02973 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
KILMARTIN, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated foreign influence security concerns. Eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 5, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign 
influence) and Guideline E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG’s) implemented by the DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 17, 2017, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
file of relevant material (FORM) on February 2, 2018. Applicant received the FORM on 
March 5, 2018, and had 30 days to submit material in refutation, extenuation, or 
mitigation. Applicant did not respond. The Government’s documents, identified as Items 
 
2 
 
1 through 9, were also admitted into evidence without objection. The case was assigned 
to me on June 8, 2018.  
 
                                      Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a written request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts about Ukraine. The request and the attached source documents were 
not admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. All 
of the documents referenced in the Request for Administrative Notice and the facts 
asserted therein, are from open sources and are dated. Ukraine has been plagued by 
corruption and human rights abuses; it is often lawless; and it has been occupied 
militarily and ruled by an authoritarian Russian regime. Applicant did not object, and I 
have taken administrative notice of the facts contained in the HE I source documents, 
and incorporated them by reference. The facts are summarized in the written request 
and will not be repeated verbatim in this decision. A few salient facts are as follows: 
 
Ukraine is a republic with a semi-presidential political system. Russian forces 
entered Ukraine’s Crimean Peninsula in February 2014 and occupied it militarily. The 
United States does not recognize the attempted “annexation” of Crimea by the Russian 
Federation. Russian Law has de facto applied in Ukraine’s Crimea since the Russian 
occupation. Individuals, including U.S. citizens, have been threatened, detained or 
kidnapped for hours or days after being stopped at separatist checkpoints. The situation 
in Ukraine is unpredictable and could change quickly. The most significant human rights 
developments in the Ukraine are the result of ongoing conflict and internal corruption. 
The country suffers from impunity for corruption and deficiencies in the administration of 
justice.  
 
Department Counsel made a motion to withdraw SOR ¶ 2.a under AG E 
(Personal Conduct). That motion was granted and SOR ¶ 2.a was withdrawn.   
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old interpreter-linguist sponsored for a security clearance 
by a defense contractor. He is pending employment as a linguist in Ukraine since March 
2016 as he speaks Ukrainian. This is precisely why the United States sought Applicant 
out and hired him – for his esoteric language skills. He was born in Ukraine and 
graduated from high school there in 1998. He has since obtained an associate’s degree 
in the U.S. in 2012. Applicant’s father sent him $30,000 to help with tuition while he was 
in college. In 2008, Applicant sent $6,000 to his then girlfriend, now wife, before she 
came to the U.S. He also sent small amounts of money to his mother-in law in Ukraine 
                                                          
1 Unless otherwise stated, the basis for these findings of fact is Applicant’s Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions (SCA) dated May 11, 2016 (Item 5) and the summary of his clearance interview by a 
clearance investigator on June 1, 2016. (Item 9) 
 
 
3 
 
and a former girlfriend several years ago. Applicant purchased a home in North Carolina 
in 2015.  
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SCA) on 
May 11, 2016.2 He came to the United States in 2004 and was naturalized in November 
2008. He renounced his Ukrainian citizenship at that time. Applicant has been married 
since 2010 and reports one son, age two. Applicant’s parents are retired and live in 
Ukraine. His father was a warehouse director and his mother was an accountant and 
homemaker. They own two houses and two apartments in Ukraine. Their primary 
residence in Ukraine is valued at $100,000. Applicant visits Ukraine once a year and he 
has weekly contact with his parents by phone. He also has monthly contact with his 
brother living in Ukraine. They are not affiliated with the Ukrainian government, or any 
other foreign government. Applicant visited Ukraine in 2009, 2010, 2011, and 2013.  
 
 Applicant was a member of the New Jersey (NJ) Army National Guard from July 
2007 to January 2016 and he received an honorable discharge. He deployed to Iraq in 
November 2008 for one year. He was a supply sergeant (E-5) and intends to continue 
to drill with the Air National Guard. Applicant had a previous security clearance since 
2008. In his May 9, 2016 counterintelligence (CI) interview Applicant stated that he also 
deployed to Qatar from August 2014 to April 2015. He has yearly contact with two 
cousins in Ukraine – one is a major in the Ukraine Army and the other is a retired 
colonel. In response to question one of his CI questionnaire, Applicant responded that 
there is no other country that he has allegiance to over the U.S.3 He elaborated that his 
heart will always be in Ukraine because that is where he was born and spent the 
majority of his life. He would never return to live in Ukraine because of the corruption 
there. The CI interviewer suggested that Applicant might present a CI and force 
protection threat and this is a possible foreign influencer.  
  
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations under Guideline B, SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.e, in his Answer to the SOR of November 2017. Applicant attached a letter to his 
Answer to the SOR stating that he was in basic training in Oklahoma in fall 2007 when 
he completed the SCA, and he was working as a CAT-2 linguist for the U.S. in Ukraine 
when he responded to the SOR in 2017. Other than his two recent deployments with the 
National Guard, Applicant has been unemployed since March 2016.4 He presently 
receives $2,000 a month in unemployment benefits and $900 a month in GI Bill 
benefits. He does not feel that his family members in Ukraine are under any threat, and 
he was never approached for classified or sensitive information at any time by any 
person. Applicant has no sympathy, preference for, or alliance with foreign nationals. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 Item 5. 
 
3 Item 6. 
 
4 Item 9. 
 
4 
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 6: 
 
5 
 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable 
to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or is associated 
with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
 
 (f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business that could 
subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation 
or personal conflict of interest. 
 
Applicant’s parents, brother, in-laws and cousins are citizens and residents of 
Ukraine. That’s because he was born there. Ukraine is unstable and continues to have 
human rights problems, rampant corruption, and terrorist attacks. It remains under the 
control of Russia’s authoritarian regime. Applicant’s foreign contacts may create a 
potential conflict of interest and a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, and coercion, both directly and through his family members. He 
may stand to inherit his parents’ real estate holdings in Ukraine, when they pass. 
However, he will likely liquidate them as he expresses no desire to live in Ukraine. AG 
¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(f) have been raised by the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could potentially mitigate foreign influence security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
 
6 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can 
be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
  
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation;  
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 I considered the totality of Applicant’s foreign contacts and interests. Guideline B 
is not limited to countries hostile to the United States:  
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.5  
 
 The distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with 
caution. Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 
7 
 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism.  
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 2004. He became a U.S. citizen in 2008. 
He purchased a home of unknown value in North Carolina and is raising a son. 
Applicant served honorably with the N.J. National Guard in Iraq and he intends to 
continue drilling with the Air National Guard. Applicant has gone in harm’s way and 
served in the U.S. military in a war zone. He has longstanding relationships and 
loyalties here. Although he has provided financial support to foreign citizens in the past, 
it was de-minimis and reasonable under the circumstances. He has the opportunity to 
be gainfully employed by a federal contractor and appears to be a solid citizen. He 
continues to have only fleeting, occasional contact with his family members in Ukraine. 
There is no indication that they are affiliated with the Ukrainian government or 
intelligence services, except for his cousin who is a major in the Ukraine Army. 
Applicant is committed to his new life here. AG ¶¶ 8(a), (b), and (c) are applicable to the 
Ukrainian family members and in-laws foreign contacts, which are alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a through 1.e. Because Applicant’s ties to Ukraine are minimal and inconsequential, I 
find that all foreign influence concerns have been mitigated. 
  
 Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated foreign influence security concerns.  
 
8 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – e:   For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:                        Withdrawn 
 
     Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
         ________________________ 
         Robert J. Kilmartin 
                                               Administrative Judge 
