 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                                                  
             DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS                               
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00236 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Heintzelman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David Green, Esq. and Lawrence Ward, Esq. 
Dorsey & Whitney, LLP 
 
 
______________ 
  
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file his 2012 and 2014 Federal income tax returns, as 
required. He has since resolved all formerly outstanding tax issues, and demonstrated 
his financial solvency. Resulting security concerns were not mitigated. Based upon 
evaluation of the testimony, pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility is denied. 
 
History of Case 
 
On February 17, 2016, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 13, 2017, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the DoD after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on April 7, 2017 (Answer), and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) assigned the case to me on May 17, 2017. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing 
on July 11, 2017, setting the hearing for July 26, 2017. On that date, Department 
Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into evidence. Applicant 
testified, and offered Exhibits (AE) A through D into evidence. All exhibits were admitted 
without objection except GE 2, which is an unsworn summary of Applicant’s October 17, 
2016 interview prepared by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator as 
part of the OPM Report of Investigation. Applicant objected to the admissibility of GE 2 
under Directive ¶ E3.1.20 and, in the absence of an authenticating witness, GE 2 was 
not admitted. I granted requests by the parties to leave the record open until August 9, 
2017, to permit submission of additional evidence. DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on August 2, 2017. Neither party submitted additional evidence after the 
hearing, and the record closed as scheduled.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines, implemented new adjudicative 
guidelines that came into effect on June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
determinations issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new 
National Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as promulgated in 
Appendix A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the 
new AG, in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. This decision is issued 
pursuant to, and cites, the new AG; but my decision would be the same under either set 
of guidelines. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant has been employed by a Federal contractor since May 2012, and 
applied for a security clearance in connection with that work. The SOR contained the 
single allegation that Applicant failed to file his Federal income tax returns for tax years 
2012 and 2014, as required. Applicant admitted the allegation, with explanations. 
(Answer.)   
 
 Applicant is 32 years old and married for the second time. He shares custody of 
his nine-year-old daughter with his first wife. He was honorably discharged in April 2009 
after a four-year active duty enlistment in the Marine Corps, and again in April 2013 
after completing his inactive reserve commitment. He has never held a security 
clearance. (Answer; GE 1; Tr. 12, 56-57.)  
 
 Applicant and his first wife separated, pending divorce, around the time he began 
his current employment in mid-2012. Their decree of dissolution was granted and filed 
effective July 29, 2013. Applicant knew that the divorce was pending in April 2013, 
when his 2012 Federal income tax return was due. He said that he did not file that 
return because he did not have the necessary income documents from his former 
 
 
 
 
3 
employer, was not certain which marital status to elect when filing, was too involved 
time-wise and financially in the divorce to seek help from the tax preparation company 
he had used previously, and had too many other demands on his time and attention to 
get it done. He did not request an extension of time to file. He said that the employer for 
whom he worked during the first five months of 2012 later asked him to pay a fee for a 
replacement W-2 statement, so he unsuccessfully attempted to obtain a free copy from 
the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). (Answer; Tr. 68-76, 87-89.)  
 
 Applicant said that he timely filed his Federal income tax return for 2013, with the 
assistance of a national tax preparation company. He informed the company that he 
had failed to file for tax year 2012, and engaged their services to help him correct that 
situation. However, he said that he was too busy with other activities in his life to attend 
follow-up appointments with the company or provide them with the necessary 
documentation to file his 2012 return. He also failed to file his return for tax year 2014 
because he was very busy and did not schedule an appointment the company so they 
could prepare it for him. He testified that his 2015 and 2016 returns were timely filed.1 
(Answer; Tr. 70-74, 86-94, 101-102.) 
 
 On his February 2016 e-QIP, Applicant disclosed that he had failed to file his 
Federal income tax returns for 2012 and 2014. He said that he had been in consultation 
with the national tax preparation company about filing for those periods, for which they 
suggested he was likely due a small refund.2 He certified on the e-QIP that each of 
those returns, “will be filed with 2015 taxes.” (GE 1 at 37.) His 2015 return indicates that 
it was “Self-Prepared,” and contains a total of 80 pages with numerous attached Forms 
and Schedules relating to his claims for various tax credits. (Answer Exhibit 7.) During 
his October 2016 OPM interview, he said that he had not yet filed his 2012 or 2014 
returns, but that he would file them soon. He explained to the interviewer that he had 
not filed them because he was busy, did not make it the priority that he should have, 
and just didn’t take the time to do it. (Tr. 95-100.) 
 
 Applicant signed the receipt for the SOR on March 20, 2017. He completed and 
signed his 2012 and 2014 Federal income tax returns on April 5, 2017, and mailed them 
to the IRS on April 6, 2017.3 Each of these returns comprised three total pages. The 
2012 return reflected a small refund due, for which the three-year claim period had 
expired. His 2014 return reflected $728 in unpaid taxes, for which amount he submitted 
a check. (Answer Exhibits 4 through 6.) On July 1, 2017, Applicant received notice from 
the IRS, stating that he owed an additional $317.87 for Failure-to-file and Failure-to-pay 
penalties and interest charges in connection with his 2014 Federal income taxes. He 
mailed another check to the IRS for that amount the following day. (AE B.)   
 
                                            
1 Applicant’s wife filed their 2016 joint return listing Applicant as her spouse. (Answer Exhibit 8.) 
2 Applicant said he based this conclusion on the absence of IRS payment demand letters. (Tr. 72.) 
3 Applicant filed this 2012 return without the income information from his previous employer, the absence 
of which he said delayed his earlier timely filing of the return. On June 19, 2017, after finally obtaining the 
pertinent W-2 form, he filed an amended 2012 return and included a $592 check to cover the related 
additional taxes. (AE A.) 
 
 
 
 
4 
 Applicant received a 30% VA disability rating for his active duty service, 
comprising 10% each for a leg injury, potential hearing loss, and potential Post-
Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). He presented no evidence of a PTSD diagnosis, but 
underwent 22 sessions of counselling with a licensed marriage and family therapist 
between June 2012 and September 2013. These sessions started when his wife moved 
out to begin their marital separation and ended shortly after their divorce was final. 
Applicant said he sought the counseling to assist with communication and adjustment 
difficulties in his marriage around that time. No evidence established a causal 
connection between Applicant’s attendance at these counseling sessions, or his 
underlying emotional concerns, and his ability to fulfill his responsibilities. He was 
successfully performing at work and attending evening classes at a community college 
during the same period. (AE C; AE D; Tr. 48-49, 56, 63-67, 85-86, 90.)  
 
 Applicant’s financial situation is now stable and solvent. He has substantial 
savings from the equity he obtained after selling his former home, and has no 
outstanding delinquent debts that might form a basis for pressure or duress. (Answer; 
Tr. 81-83, 102-105.) 
 
 Two supervisors who have worked with Applicant throughout his current 
employment testified to his good character, responsibility, and excellent performance. 
He has received regular raises and promotions into increasingly responsible supervisory 
positions, and performed well. (Tr. 38-56.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 
 
 
5 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 says that an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 AG ¶ 19 describes one condition that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax  returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required. 
 
Applicant did not timely file his 2012 or 2014 Federal income tax returns as 
required. These facts establish prima facie support for the foregoing disqualifying 
condition, and shift the burden to Applicant to mitigate the resulting security concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial irresponsibility:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is 
being resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax 
authority to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
  
Applicant’s failure to file the tax returns in question initially occurred in 2013 and 
2015, but continued until the day before he submitted his Answer to the SOR in April 
2017. This lengthy pattern of disregard for an important Federal legal requirement 
suggests that it would have continued absent the imminent pending threat to his request 
for a clearance. His belated filing of the two three-page returns does not, accordingly, 
demonstrate current reliability, trustworthiness, or improved judgment in the absence of 
such a threat. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) was not established.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Applicant asserted that he failed to file the returns in question because he was 
undergoing marital separation and divorce; sought counseling from a marriage and 
family therapist for his post-service adjustment and marital problems; was missing a W-
2 from a prior employer; and was busy with work, school, and child-custody issues 
related to his divorce. Those issues were contemporaneous with his failure to file the 
2012 return, but he did not establish a causal link between them and his failure to file 
that return until April 2017. None of those factors were either contemporaneous or 
causally linked to his failure to file the 2014 return. To the contrary, Applicant failed to 
file the two tax returns in question because he chose to spend his time in other ways 
and to disregard this Federal legal requirement until continuing to do so directly 
jeopardized his clearance request. This timing diminishes the good-faith nature of his 
belated effort to resolve his tax problems, and the mitigating effect of his belated 
compliance with the tax authority’s requirements. Under the past several years of 
Appeal Board precedent, Applicant failed to establish sufficient mitigation under AG ¶¶ 
20(b), (c), (d), or (g). This precedent most recently includes ISCR Case No. 16-01211 
(App. Bd. May 30, 2018), which involved an older, and pre-SOR-resolved, failure to 
meet income tax obligations by a retired career military officer with a lengthy history of 
honorable service and successful compliance with all security procedures.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. Recent Appeal Board 
precedent, as noted above, establishes a very high bar for mitigation of failure to file 
income tax returns. 
   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is accountable for his decisions and the prioritization choices that led to his failure 
to file two Federal income tax returns, as required. He otherwise demonstrated strong 
character, and honorably served for four years in U.S. Marine Corps combat units. His 
 
 
 
 
8 
performance and dedication at work have been excellent, and he is recently remarried 
with a stable family situation. Applicant has no history of significant delinquent debt. He 
demonstrated sufficient resources and income security to ensure solvency in the future. 
The potential for pressure, exploitation, or duress is minimal, since the formerly 
delinquent returns are now filed and all taxes, interest, and penalties have been paid. 
His most recent two Federal income tax returns were timely filed.  
 
Overall, the evidence is nearly sufficient to eliminate any doubt as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance created by his failure to file two Federal 
income tax returns in a timely manner. However, recent decisions granting clearances 
to equally or more worthy applicants, by numerous administrative judges who met and 
evaluated the applicants in person, have been regularly reversed for abuse of discretion 
and/or for reaching conclusions that were not within the realm of reasonable 
disagreement. Despite the recent promulgation of new mitigating condition 20(g) 
explicitly addressing this situation, and strong evidence concerning pertinent whole-
person factors, I cannot resolve the resulting doubt in Applicant’s favor while according 
required deference to DOHA Appeal Board precedent. Accordingly, Applicant failed to 
meet his burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. National security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
                                        
         
 
DAVID M. WHITE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
