 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
.  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00671 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John Berry, Esq. 
 
06/22/2018 
______________ 
 
           DECISION 
 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement and Substance Misuse. She did not mitigate the security concerns under 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 1, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility 
(DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse and Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (Answer) on May 13, 2017. She requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 4, 
 
2 
 
 
2017. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Notice of Hearing 
on March 22, 2018, for a hearing on May 31, 2018. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
The Government offered Government Exhibits 1 and 2, which were admitted without 
objection. (GX 1-2).  Applicant testified on her own behalf and presented two witnesses. 
She submitted Applicant Exhibits (AX) A through L, which were admitted into the record 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 8, 2018.  
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came into 
effect within the DOD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive (SEAD) 
4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements new 
adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility decisions1 
issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National Security 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information or 
Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix A of SEAD 4. I 
considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, in adjudicating 
Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same under either set of 
guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 25 years old. She graduated from high school in 2011 and received 
two undergraduate degrees in 2015. She has never held a security clearance. (GX 1) She 
has been employed with her current employer since 2015, as a program analyst. (Tr. 18) 
Currently, she is working abroad on a company contract. Her significant other lives with 
her.  She completed her security clearance application (SCA) in December 2015. On her 
SCA, she disclosed her use of marijuana and other illegal drugs such as cocaine and 
ecstasy from approximately 2008 to 2015. (GX 1) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant used and purchased marijuana with varying 
frequency from about 2008 to July 2015; that she was charged with marijuana possession 
of two ounces or less and possession of drug paraphernalia in October 2011; that she 
used Ecstasy and purchased Ecstasy with varying frequency form about June 2001 to 
May 2015; that she purchased and used cocaine with varying frequency from about 
December 2011 to May 2015; that she sold prescription medication from about May 2013 
to May 2015; and that she used the prescription medication Xanax, not prescribed to her 
in May 2016. Applicant admitted all the allegations. Under personal conduct, the 
allegations from drug use were cross alleged; additionally, it is alleged that in May 2012 
she was responsible for theft at the University Bookstore and disciplined by the Dean; 
and finally that she shoplifted on various occasions from at least 2012 to August 2016.  
 
Applicant explained that her prior drug use occurred during a period of immaturity 
and experimentation in her life (during high school and college.) She stated that it does 
not affect her current lifestyle. She feels negatively towards these actions and has no 
                                                          
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
3 
 
 
intention of taking part in any unlawful action in the future. (GX 2) She signed a statement 
of intent to never use illegal drugs again. She also admitted that she sold prescription pills 
for $5 to other students who wanted to concentrate for their exams. (GX 2) She took a 
pre-employment drug test in 2015. (AX K) 
 
During her 2016 subject interview, Applicant stated that she and her friends would 
smoke marijuana out of a pot and occasionally purchase marijuana. She received a 
citation for possession of marijuana from two undercover campus police who saw the 
Applicant and her friend and confiscated the marijuana. She claimed responsibility and 
was written a citation for the possession of marijuana and paraphernalia. She attended 
court and pled guilty. She completed 16 hours of community service. (GX 2) She 
estimates that she smoked marijuana   maybe 50 times to have fun with her friends. She 
stated that it was the college culture. This was between 2008 and 2015.  She explained 
that she only sold to her friends.  She has never received counseling for the marijuana 
use. She quit smoking because she knew she was going to work for an employer that 
prohibited drugs. (GX 2 at 5) On her initial application for employment, she did not list the 
incidents of illegal drug use because she believed she did not have to list it. (GX 2) 
 
  As to Ecstasy, she stated that she used it five times or less.  Her last use was in 
2015.  She used with her ex-boyfriend for experimentation and at concerts. She obtained 
the drug by purchasing it from friends. She stated that it would heighten the music 
experience. (GX 2) 
 
Applicant used cocaine for the first time in 2011. (Tr. 28) She reported that she 
would purchase it and snort it while at parties with friends. She believes it was less than 
ten times. She never attended counseling or rehabilitation for the use. (GX 2) The last 
use was in 2015. She also purchased the cocaine on certain occasions.  
 
Applicant sold her prescription medication from approximately 2013 to May 2015. 
(Tr. 28) At first she would give it away to students who asked, but then she sold it as she 
realized that she had to pay for her prescription. The students considered them study 
drugs. She now realizes that was wrong. (Tr. 29) 
 
Applicant used a prescription drug, Xanax, which was not prescribed to her in May 
2016. She was given the prescription medication by a family member to help her sleep 
on a long flight. (Tr. 30) She usually has anxiety when flying and honestly did not believe 
it was illegal to take the prescription medication from her family. (Tr. 30) 
 
At the hearing, Applicant explained her varying roles in the company. She performs 
very well, earning the highest rating in 2017. She is working abroad with a team to help 
with an important project. (Tr. 23) 
 
 Applicant submitted seven character references from individuals. She also 
provided her performance reviews from 2016 and 2017. (AX A, B) Each attests to her 
professionalism and commitment to work.  She has been trustworthy and reliable and 
 
4 
 
 
understands that she has made mistakes in the past. (AX C-I and L) One letter made 
reference to knowledge of the SOR.  
 
 Applicant’s first supervisor testified at the hearing that he has known her since 
2015. He is the Director of Operations. He hired her for her position out of 17 possible 
candidates. (Tr. 52) He described her as a high performer with strong integrity. She has 
been rated at the top of the scale. Applicant informed the witness of her prior drug use 
and the shoplifting issues.(Tr. 55) He believes that despite that, she is worthy of a security 
clearance. He believes in forgiving youthful mistakes. 
 
Applicant’s significant other testified at the hearing. He has known Applicant since 
childhood. He now resides with her abroad. He states that she is an extremely hard 
worker.  She is career oriented. He is aware of the SOR allegations.  He began dating 
her seriously in 2016 and he has not seen any evidence of shoplifting or illegal drug use. 
(Tr. 61)  Since she is working with people on a focused team project who have security 
clearances, those are the people she socializes with. She avoids drug use at all costs.  
(Tr. 62) He believes she has a lot of remorse about the drug and shoplifting issues that 
brought her to the hearing today. (AX D) 
 
 Applicant testified that she was immature and did not think of long-term 
consequences.  She did not think about how using illegal drugs might affect her and for 
that she is regretful. (Tr 25) Applicant explained that in college she only used with her 
friends and because these things were common, it did not register that it was illegal. She 
noted that she made sure to stop before her employment. (Tr.26). She admits she 
executed poor decision making and takes full responsibility. She also explained that she 
sold her prescription medication because it was part of the environment. She now realizes 
that it is wrong.  As to the use of Xanax, a family member gave her some so that she 
could sleep on a long flight. (Tr. 29) She has never received counseling. 
 
Under Guideline E, SOR 2.a, the allegations are cross-alleged. However, SOR 2.b. 
and 2.c allege that in 2012 Applicant was found responsible for theft at the college 
bookstore in May 2012 and that she has shoplifted on various occasions from at least 
2012 to August 2016.  
 
As to SOR 2.b, Applicant took a bottle of water from the college bookstore. (Tr. 31) 
She was disciplined by the Dean when it was discovered. (Tr. 30) She had no good 
reason for taking the item. She could have paid for it. She stated that she has no excuse 
for it and she stands embarrassed. (Tr. 30)  She did not list any information about 
shoplifting on her SCA.  As to 2.c, Applicant admitted that she shoplifted on various 
occasions from at least 2012 to 2016. She believes it was about ten times. (Tr.32) 
Applicant admitted that they were all small items such as chap stick, lipstick, and eye 
drops. She knows shoplifting is illegal and is sorry. (Tr. 33) She stated that it was 
impulsive, immature, and dumb. 
 
In her subject interview, Applicant was confronted about the theft on the college 
campus. She walked out of a college bookstore with a water bottle and was confronted 
 
5 
 
 
by the campus police. The interview reflects that she was asked if she paid for the item, 
and she lied and told them it was hers. Tapes were reviewed and she was notified that 
she had to attend a one day course. (GX 2) She admitted that she did it for the thrill of it, 
and wanted to see if she could get away with it. She was asked when she started shop 
lifting and she could not recall the date but thought she had previously done it about five 
times, in places like Target. Applicant related that she had never been caught except at 
the campus bookstore. (GX 2) She elaborated that she only shoplifted when she was 
alone because she does not want to pay the high prices of the items. She admits that it 
is stupid. She always had enough money to pay for the items. Her intent is to stop 
because when talking to the investigator she was embarrassed. (GX 2 at 7) At the 
hearing, Applicant testified that she believed in the four year period in question, she 
shoplifted about ten times. (Tr.32) 
 
Her career is important to her and she realizes that she is now mature and works 
with mature people who hold security clearances. She does not associate with the same 
people that she did in college. She provided a signed statement of intent. 
 
      Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used 
in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 
6 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Finally, Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H: Drug Involvement and Substance Misuse 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement and Substance 
Misuse is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
The illegal use of controlled substances, to include the misuse of 
prescription and non-prescription drugs, and the use of other substances 
that cause physical or mental impairment or are used in a manner 
inconsistent with their intended purpose can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because such behavior may 
lead to physical or psychological impairment and because it raises 
questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, 
and regulations. Controlled substance means any "controlled substance" as 
defined in 21 U.S.C. 802. Substance misuse is the generic term adopted in 
this guideline to describe any of the behaviors listed above. 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 25 contains seven conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying. Two conditions are established: 
 
(a) any substance misuse (see above definition); and 
 
(c) illegal possession of a controlled substance, including cultivation, 
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of 
drug paraphernalia. 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations about illegal use and the purchase of such 
drugs as marijuana, Ecstasy, and Cocaine. She also sold her prescription drug to others 
for $5 a pill. These incidents occurred between 2008 and 2016 with varying frequency. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 25 (a) and (c), are established.  
 
 
7 
 
 
The guideline at AG ¶ 26 contains four conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns. Two conditions may be applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her drug involvement and substance 
misuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence, including, but not limited to: 
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were 
used; and  
 
(3) providing a signed statement of intent to abstain from all 
drug involvement and substance misuse, acknowledging that 
any future involvement or misuse is grounds for revocation of 
national security eligibility. 
 
 Applicant’s last drug use was in 2015. She was in a college environment. She 
signed a letter of intent and has changed her friends and lifestyle. I find that sufficient time 
has transpired for mitigation in this case given the period of time in her life that she illegally 
used drugs. She disclosed this information on her SCA. She has mitigated the security 
concerns under this guideline.  
 
 
GUIDELINE E: PERSONAL CONDUCT 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive 
information. Of special interest is any failure to cooperate or provide truthful and candid 
answers during national security investigative or adjudicative processes. The following 
will normally result in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate 
with security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security 
investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or releases, 
cooperation with medical or psychological evaluation, or polygraph 
examination, if authorized and required; and 
 
 
8 
 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful questions of 
investigators, security officials, or other official representatives in 
connection with a personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
 
16. Conditions that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying include: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine national security eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, 
security official, competent medical or mental health professional involved 
in making a recommendation relevant to a national security eligibility 
determination, or other official government representative; 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack 
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the individual may not properly safeguard 
classified or sensitive information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. This 
includes, but is not limited to, consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of 
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information, 
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or government 
protected information; 
 
(2) any disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior; 
 
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other 
employer's time or resources; 
 
9 
 
 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress by a 
foreign intelligence entity or other individual or group. Such conduct 
includes: 
 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, could affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing; 
 
The allegations were cross alleged under 2.a and the discussion about the illegal 
drug use has been completed. 
 
As to 2.b and 2.c, I find the shoplifting more troublesome. She lied to the campus 
police about taking the water bottle. She revealed this in her interview but did not seem 
bothered except for the embarrassment that it caused to now share this information. She 
continued to shoplift after the disciplinary action from the dean. Applicant did not disclose 
this information on her SCA. She admitted that she engaged in this behavior at least ten 
times. She also failed to disclose this information on her employment application. 
 
17. Conditions that could mitigate security concerns include: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was caused 
or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a person with 
professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made aware of the 
requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the individual 
cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to 
recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to 
exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
 
10 
 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply 
with rules and regulations. 
 
I do not find that Applicant has mitigated the personal conduct with respect to the 
shoplifting. She did it for the thrill of it and after she was disciplined in 2012 while in college 
by the Dean. She at first denied the college incident. She continued the behavior for a 
number of years. She said that she had never been caught except for the one time at 
college. Theft is not a minor incident. She did not disclose the history of shoplifting on her 
applications. She has not examined the reasons for her shoplifting and it was recent. I 
doubt her judgment and reliability.  
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered the potentially disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions in light of all pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this 
case. Applicant is respected by those who know her. She performs well at work. She is 
in a significant relationship. She disclosed her drug use on her SCA and to employers. 
 
Applicant stopped illegal drug use because she was entering the work force and 
wanted a career. She disclosed the information on her SCA.  
She believes she is mature and would not use illegal drugs to jeopardize her career.  She 
signed a letter of intent. As to the shoplifting, I find it very troubling. She lied at first, did 
not list it on her SCA and did it for the thrill of it. She continued to shoplift after the college 
incident, when she was disciplined by the Dean. There is a history of shoplifting. She was 
 
11 
 
 
embarrassed about having to share the information. I have doubts about her in this area 
and all doubts must be found in favor of the government. 
 
I have significant reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also 
considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. It is not the purpose of security clearance 
adjudications to punish an applicant for past acts of misconduct.  The purpose of the 
security clearance adjudication is to make “an examination of a sufficient period of a 
person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is an acceptable 
security risk.”2 In these cases, the degree of acceptable risk is less than that acceptable 
to mere access to employment.3 Applicant has proved herself an acceptable employee, 
but her actions, specifically her lack of candor and trustworthiness, make her an 
unacceptable security risk.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.I:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.b-2.c:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
2 AG ¶ 2(a). 
 
3 See Gayer v. Schlesinger, 490 F.2d 740, 750 (D.C. Cir. 1973).  
