 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03445 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence. 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 13, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B. The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by DOD on June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 10, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On January 19, 2018, the case was assigned to me. On 
March 1, 2018, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
that the hearing was scheduled for March 19, 2018. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government exhibits (GE) 1-2 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
The Government’s exhibit list, discovery letter, and request for administrative notice 
were marked as hearing exhibits (HE) I-III. Applicant testified, but offered no exhibits at 
the hearing. Post-hearing, he submitted an exhibit (AE A), which was admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on March 26, 2018. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I took administrative notice of facts concerning India. Department Counsel 
provided supporting documents that verify, detail, and provide context for the requested 
facts. The specific facts noticed are included in the Findings of Fact.1 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings.2 Usually administrative notice in ISCR proceedings is 
accorded to facts that are either well known or from U.S Government reports.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the SOR allegations. His 
admissions are incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. He came to the United States from India in 1990 on a 
student visa. He received a master’s degree and began working in this country as a 
software engineer. In 1994, he moved to the state where he currently resides. He 
married his wife in 1995. He was granted U.S. citizenship in 2004. He did not retain his 
Indian citizenship. His wife is a naturalized U.S. citizen. His two children are native-born 
U.S. citizens.4 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant’s three brothers, a sister, and his mother-in-law 
are citizens and residents of India; and he is co-owner of a home in India valued at 
approximately $200,000.  
                                                          
1 The Government’s request and the supporting background documents were marked as hearing exhibit 
(HE) III. 
 
2 See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. 
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986). 
 
3 See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for 
administrative notice).  
 
4 Tr. at 6, 17-18, 20; GE 1. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was born in India, but has resided in the United States since 1990. He 
married his wife here, has owed his own home here since 1997, and his two children 
were born and attend school here. He estimated his current net worth of his U.S.-assets 
is approximately $500,000. He has no plans to ever return to India, except to visit 
family. His last visit was in November 2017 to attend a wedding. He usually travels to 
India once every two to three years, usually for some sort of family gathering. When he 
visits, none of his Indian relatives inquire about the nature of his work. His sole loyalty is 
to the country he adopted and where his family lives, the United States.5 
 
 Applicant’s three brothers reside and are citizens of India. All work in the retail 
business. None have any affiliation with the Indian government. Applicant has 
infrequent contacts with them averaging about once every two or three months. All three 
brothers live in the house they inherited (along with Applicant) from their father. 
Applicant’s sister is a homemaker, whose husband is in the garment business. They 
have no government ties and Applicant’s contact is once every two months. Applicant 
provides no financial support for any of his siblings. Applicant’s mother-in-law has no 
affiliation to the Indian government. She receives a small pension from her teachers’ 
retirement fund (approximately $300 monthly). Applicant’s contact with her is about 
once every three months. She visited the United States once when his son was born.6 
 
 Applicant inherited a 25 percent share of his father’s home when he died. His 
three brothers inherited the remaining interest. Applicant estimated that the property is 
valued at about $200,000. His three brothers and their families reside in the home and 
Applicant derives no financial benefit from it. He does not believe his brothers intend to 
sell the property because they would then have no place to live. If they were to sell the 
property, he would likely not accept his share of the proceeds.7 
 
 Applicant offered recommendations from three coworkers. He is described as 
professional and an outstanding employee.8 
 
 India is a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic. It is a multiparty, 
federal parliamentary democracy with a bicameral parliament and a population of 
approximately 1.1 billion. 
 
 The Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but serious 
problems remain. Police and security forces have engaged in extrajudicial killings of 
persons in custody, disappearance, torture, and rape. The lack of accountability 
permeated the government and security forces, creating an atmosphere in which human 
rights violations went unpunished. A number of violent attacks were committed in recent 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 17-18, 20; 23-24; GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. at 25-31; GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 32-33; GE 2. 
 
8 AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
years by separatist and terrorist groups. In November 2008, terrorists coordinated an 
attack at a hotel in Mumbai, frequented by westerners. 
 
The United States recognizes India as key to strategic interests and has 
sought to strengthen its relationship with it. The two countries are the world’s 
largest democracies, both committed to political freedom protected by representative 
government, and share common interests in the free flow of commerce, in 
fighting terrorism, and in creating a strategically stable Asia. However, differences 
over India’s nuclear weapons program and pace of economic reform exist. There are 
also concerns about India’s relations with Iran, including their increasing cooperation 
with the Iranian military. 
 
There have been cases involving the illegal export, or attempted illegal export, of 
U.S. restricted, dual-use technology to India, including technology and equipment 
which were determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs 
for the development of weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery. 
Foreign government and private entities, including intelligence organizations and 
security services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of U.S. technology. 
In March 2008, an American businessman pleaded guilty to conspiring to illegally 
exporting technology to entities in India. 
 
The United States views India as a growing world power with which it 
shares common strategic interests. There is a strong partnership between the two 
countries and they are expected to continue addressing differences and shaping a 
dynamic and collaborative future. The United States and India seek to elevate the 
strategic partnership further to include counterterrorism, defense, education, and joint 
democracy promotion. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a careful weighing of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” as 
follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern 
if they create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign 
contacts and interests should consider the country in which the foreign 
contact or interest is located, including, but not limited to, considerations 
such as whether it is known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or 
sensitive information or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
(a) contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or 
resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology; and 
(f) substantial business, financial, or property interests in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business that could 
subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation or personal conflict of interest. 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member or friend is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against 
the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of terrorism. The 
relationship between India and the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships 
with his relatives living in India do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be 
placed in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United 
States and a desire to assist his relatives living in India who might be coerced by 
governmental entities, or pressured to assist India.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”9 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound 
disagreements with the United States over matters they view as important to their vital 
interests or national security. Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in 
espionage against the United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and 
technical fields.  
 
                                                          
9 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
 
7 
 
 
The relationship he has with his Indian siblings and mother-in-law is sufficient to 
cause the application of AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). His interest in the property owned jointly 
with his brothers satisfies the requirements of AG ¶ 7(f).   
 
AG ¶ 8 lists conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns, 
including:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the group, 
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and  
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant credibly testified that his family and life are here in the United States, 
where he has resided since 1990. He has minimal contact with siblings and his mother-
in-law. That contact is limited to once every two to three months. He presented sufficient 
evidence to establish that it is unlikely that he would be placed in a position to choose 
between the interest of his family living in India and those of the United States. AG ¶ 
8(a) applies. AG 8(c) partially applies. 
 
Applicant has met his burden to establish his “deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” He has resided in the United States for over 28 
years. He became a U.S. citizen in 2004. His wife is a U.S. citizen and his two children 
were born here. His U.S.-based financial assets far surpass his small interest in a home 
in India, which he acquired through inheritance. The evidence supports that Applicant 
has longstanding ties to the United States and would resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(b) and 8(f) apply. 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The circumstances tending to 
support granting Applicant’s clearance are more significant than the factors weighing 
towards denying his clearance. I considered the recommendations of his coworkers. I 
also considered his strong ties to this country, thereby demonstrating his longstanding 
loyalty to the United States. Therefore, he provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the 
security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude that the security concerns arising under Guideline B, foreign influence 
concerns were mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs     1.a: - 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
