1 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:  ) 
  ) 
            [REDACTED]  ) ISCR Case No. 17-00333 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence security concerns raised by the fact 
that her parents and four siblings are citizens and residents of Ukraine. Access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on August 13, 2015. 
On March 8, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent her a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline B. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order (Ex. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
   
Applicant answered the SOR on March 16, 2017, and requested a decision on the 
record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case 
2 
 
and a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), which included Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 6, was sent to Applicant on August 15, 2017. She was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s evidence. She received the FORM on August 23, 2017, and did not file a 
Response.1 The case was assigned to me on January 2, 2018. 
 
The SOR was issued under the AG implemented on September 1, 2006. The DOD 
implemented the amended AG on June 8, 2017, while this decision was pending. This 
decision will be based on the amended AG effective June 8, 2017.  
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of facts concerning 
Ukraine. The relevant facts are discussed below. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant’s parents, sister, and three brothers are citizens 
and residents of Ukraine. Applicant admits each of the allegations and her admissions 
are incorporated in my findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old housekeeping lead currently employed by a federal 
contractor since May 2014. She has been employed by federal contractors since at least 
2004, however, this is her first application for a security clearance. She is married, and 
she and her husband have six children. Four of Applicant’s children were born in Ukraine, 
and two were born in the United States. Applicant properly disclosed her foreign contacts 
during her background investigation. (GX 4; GX 5.)   
 
Applicant was born and reared in Ukraine. She came to the United States in 1996 
with her husband and four young children, and became a naturalized US citizen in March 
2015. Initially, Applicant’s parents and siblings intended to move to the United States with 
her. However, after Applicant had prepared the requisite paperwork, Applicant’s parents 
decided against moving to a foreign country where they did not know the language, and 
her parents and younger siblings remained in Ukraine. Applicant has monthly contact with 
her family members. Two of Applicant’s sisters and their families immigrated to the United 
States when Applicant did. Applicant visited her family in Ukraine in 2008 and 2013. 
Applicant has lived in the United States for over 20 years, and considers it to be her home.  
(GX 4; GX 5 .) 
 
 In 2014, Russia seized and occupied Crimea in an effort to annex it, which caused 
the United States to impose sanctions against those entities and individuals responsible 
for the aggression. The conflict is ongoing. The U.S. State Department advises U.S. 
citizens to avoid separatist-controlled areas of Ukraine, particularly the eastern regions of 
Donetsk and Luhansk where separatist groups have detained and kidnapped U.S. 
                                            
1 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) transmittal letter is dated August 15, 2017, and Applicant’s 
receipt is dated August 23, 2017. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that she had 30 days after receiving 
it to submit information.   
 
 
3 
 
citizens. The U.S. State Department has also warned U.S. citizens to avoid all travel to 
Crimea due to the continued presence of Russian Federation military forces occupying 
the region as a de facto government and committing abuses against the local population.  
 
Applicant’s family members live and work near Ukraine’s capital city, which is 
controlled by the Ukrainian government. The capital is nearly 1,000 kilometers away from 
the separatist-controlled areas. While the Ukrainian government has committed human-
rights violations against its citizens, including prisoners, women, and children, the focus 
appears to be on political dissidents. Applicant’s parents are retired and none of 
Applicant’s family members currently serve in the military or work for the government. The 
record does not contain any evidence to suggest that Applicant’s family members are 
involved in any political activity. There is no evidence that Applicant travels to separatist-
controlled areas or the Crimea Peninsula.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
4 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
  
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
       
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The concern is set forth in AG ¶ 6: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests, including, but not limited to, business, 
financial, and property interests, are a national security concern if they result 
in divided allegiance. They may also be a national security concern if they 
create circumstances in which the individual may be manipulated or induced 
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way 
inconsistent with U.S. interests or otherwise made vulnerable to pressure 
or coercion by any foreign interest. Assessment of foreign contacts and 
interests should consider the country in which the foreign contact or interest 
is located, including, but not limited to, considerations such as whether it is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain classified or sensitive information or 
is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions are applicable: AG ¶ 7  
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact, regardless of method, with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen 
of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
and 
5 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country 
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation 
to protect classified or sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information or technology. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) requires evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened risk” required 
to raise this disqualifying condition is a relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes 
a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family member living under a 
foreign government or owning property in a foreign country. The mere possession of 
ties with family in a foreign country is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline 
B. However, if an applicant has such a relationship, this factor alone is sufficient to create 
the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the compromise of 
classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 
2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). There is a rebuttable 
presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, their immediate family 
members. See generally ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). The totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as 
each individual family tie must be considered. 
 
The Ukrainian government is known to commit human rights violations, including 
government intervention on personal freedoms. Separatist groups, present in several 
regions, are known to specifically target U.S. citizens. Given the ongoing conflicts in 
Ukraine between the elected government and separatist groups and the potential threats 
against U.S. citizens, Applicant’s relationships with her family members create a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation and coercion and the potential risk for a conflict of 
interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) are established. 
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those 
of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.” 
ISCR Case No. 00-0317, (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
The following mitigating conditions are potentially applicable:  
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States;  
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest; and 
 
AG ¶ 8(d): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
The evidence in the record mitigates the concerns about Applicant’s relationships 
with her family members who are Ukrainian nationals. Applicant’s family members are not 
involved in professions or activities that are likely to place Applicant in a position of having 
to choose between foreign interests and U.S. interests. Applicant has lived in the United 
States for more than 20 years and considers it to be her home. She became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen in 2015. Furthermore, there is no indication that Applicant travels to areas in 
Ukraine that increase her exposure to separatist groups that may have anti-American 
sentiments. AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(d) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I have also 
considered the following: 
 
 Applicant has worked for a defense contractor for nearly 14 years. She has lived 
in the United States for over 20 years and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2015.   
7 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by her contacts with her family in Ukraine. 
Accordingly, I conclude she has carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the following 
formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:    For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
