 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03784 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Aubrey M. De Angelis, Esq., Department Counsel  
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) certified on January 
14, 2016. On November 14, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns 
under Guideline F.1 Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the case decided 
on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting 
documents, known as the File of Relevant Material (FORM), undated, was submitted by 
Department Counsel. 
 
                                                     
1 The DOD CAF acted under Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented on June 8, 2017. 
 
 
2 
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on February 6, 2018, and submitted a 
response. The Government’s exhibits included in the FORM (Items 1 to 9) and Applicant’s 
response to the FORM are admitted into evidence. The case was assigned to me on April 
12, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old electrical technician employed by a defense contractor 
since 2004. He graduated from high school in 1989 and honorably served in the U.S. Air 
Force from 1991 to 1995. He married in 1997 and has one child. He currently holds a 
DOD security clearance. 
 
The SOR alleges nine financial allegations, including a Federal tax lien filed in 
2008 for $37,935; a state tax lien filed in 2013 for $5,324; delinquent Federal taxes for 
2009 ($4,473), 2010 ($5,134), 2011 ($23,978), 2013 ($5,344), and 2014 ($8,929); a 2016 
wage garnishment for unpaid state taxes for $9,750; and a 2001 Chapter 7 bankruptcy, 
filed in July 2001 and dismissed in October 2001. Applicant admitted all of the allegations 
with explanations, except he denied the Federal tax lien, claiming it is not on his credit 
report, and denied the state tax wage garnishment noting the debt was to be paid in full 
by the end of 2017. 
 
In his 2016 SCA, Applicant noted that he is indebted to the IRS for unpaid Federal 
taxes of about $42,100, for tax years 2009–2014. He explained that his spouse was 
receiving workers’ compensation, household finances were tight, and he needed to adjust 
his employer’s withholding so he would not owe as much in taxes in the future. At that 
time, Applicant noted that he arranged an IRS payment plan. 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant noted that he bought a house a year and a 
half ago, and is back on track and paying all bills on time. He stated he will pay off the 
state tax obligation by the end of the year, and that he is on an IRS installment agreement 
to repay $600 per month for tax years 2010, 2011, 2013, and 2014. He stated the 2009 
IRS debt and the 2010 debt would be paid off by the end of 2017. 
 
Applicant provided evidence in his response to the FORM, that his state tax debts 
have been paid and that he has a zero balance for tax years 2000-2016. He also showed 
that from December 2017 to January 2018, he paid the IRS a total of $10,247 for 2009 
and 2010 tax debts.2 As of February 2018, he still owed the IRS $38,299 for unpaid taxes 
for tax years 2011, 2013, and 2014. He did not provide a copy of an IRS installment 
agreement or an installment payment history, except as noted above. Applicant provided 
Federal tax transcripts in response to DOHA interrogatories. They show for tax years 
2005 and 2006 that a lien was entered in 2008 for unpaid taxes, and that Applicant filed 
his tax returns both years, incurring interest and penalty charges for late payments. The 
                                                     
2 $600 was paid in December 2017 (Item 3); the remainder was paid in January 2018 (FORM Response). 
 
3 
 
transcripts note an installment agreement entered in 2016. For tax years 2005 and 2006, 
the IRS “wrote off” nearly $14,000 in debts in August 2017, and canceled the installment 
agreement. Applicant’s employer noted in a security clearance incident history report that 
in July 2016, Applicant disclosed that he set up a “wage garnishment” in May 2016 with 
state tax authorities to permit a deduction from his wages to repay $9,750 in delinquent 
state taxes.3 
 
Applicant’s 2016 and 2017 credit reports shows the Federal and State tax liens.  
Applicant provided a 2018 credit report that does not show any tax liens, and reflects that 
his payments are current on all consumer accounts. Applicant’s personal financial 
statement shows a monthly net remainder of $2,116, but it does not reflect any payments 
to the state or Federal tax authorities. It also shows savings and investments valued at 
about $186,000. In addition to his salary, Applicant receives military disability pay and a 
401k survivor benefit. 
 
Law and Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865 § 2. 
 
National security eligibility is predicated upon the applicant meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. 
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies 
these guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider a person’s stability, trustworthiness, reliability, 
discretion, character, honesty, and judgment. AG ¶ 1(b). 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” Exec. Or. 10865 
§ 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the applicant 
                                                     
3 Item 5. 
 
4 
 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the criteria 
listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 at 3, 
1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02- 
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-
20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if 
they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 1(d). 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . .  
 
The relevant disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19 include: 
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(f) failure to . . .  pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as required. 
 
5 
 
Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence supporting the 
SOR allegations are sufficient to establish the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
(f) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
  Applicant’s claimed financial distress that led to the tax debts and 2001 bankruptcy 
filing have not been established. He noted his spouse received workers’ compensation, 
presumably because of a workplace injury, and tight financial conditions, with improper 
withholding from his pay to cover taxes owed resulting in nonpayment of taxes. He has 
not established with particularity, when or how these conditions arose, and how they 
prevented him from satisfying his tax obligations. Debts listed in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.g, 
and 1.h have been paid, but well after they were incurred and after the SOR was issued. 
Payments of state and some Federal tax debts amounted to delayed action and was too 
little, too late. Applicant has long been aware of his tax debts. The evidence shows an 
IRS installment agreement was terminated in 2017 and the IRS “wrote off” sizable debts. 
The complete picture of his efforts over the years to resolve his tax debts is largely absent 
from the record. Despite his sizable savings and investments, and his ability to purchase 
a home, Applicant failed to take timely action to address his debts, and did not provide 
sufficient evidence of a payment history or progress toward tax debt resolution. His poor 
 
6 
 
financial status dates back to at least 2001 when he filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and he 
did not sufficiently explain the circumstances of the filing or its dismissal the same year. 
 
  Applicant’s financial history is replete with irresponsible handling of his taxes, and 
his financial status was in jeopardy as far back as 2001. Despite a long employment 
history, Applicant’s failure to comply with the tax laws for several years and his 
unconvincing explanations for his failures, raise significant concerns that Applicant may 
be lacking in the judgment expected of those who enter into a fiduciary duty with the U.S. 
for the protection of national secrets. The DOHA Appeal Board has noted in the past that 
a person who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations, such as paying taxes 
when due, does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required 
of those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15- 06707 at 
3 (App. Bd. Aug. 15, 2017). Despite recent efforts to repay overdue tax debts, the record 
does not support full application of any mitigating condition. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶¶ 2(a), 2(c), and 2(d), the ultimate determination of whether to grant 
national security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the whole-person 
concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d). Although adverse information concerning a single criterion 
may not be sufficient for an unfavorable eligibility determination, the individual may be 
found ineligible if available information reflects a recent or recurring pattern of 
questionable judgment, irresponsibility, or unstable behavior. AG ¶ 2(e). 
 
I considered all of the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of 
fact and comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Applicant’s financial 
condition remains an ongoing concern, and his past practices with regard to tax 
obligations have been unacceptable. He has not shown sufficient efforts to resolve his 
tax liabilities before they became a security clearance issue, and his recent payments 
were not timely. Applicant’s financial irresponsibility with regard to tax obligations, despite 
full employment since 2004 and previous military service, has not reflected the judgment 
and reliability expected of a person entrusted with classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.g, and 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.c – 1.f, and 1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national security interests of the 
United States to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
 
_______________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
