 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-04400 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 2, 2018, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 28, 2018, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 28, 2018. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 29, 
2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 19, 2018. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. There were no objections and the exhibits were admitted into 
evidence. Applicant did not offer any exhibits. The record was held open until May 3, 
2018, to allow Applicant to submit additional documents. She provided one document that 
was marked Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was admitted without objection, and the 
record closed.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript on April 27, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, and denied the allegation 
in 1.c. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 48 years old. She earned a bachelor’s degree in 2003. She is not 
married and has no children. She has worked on contracts as an independent contractor 
for a parent company since 2002. From 2003 to 2012, she worked several contracts in 
different states. She traveled to the work location during the week and flew home to 
another state for the weekend. 2  
 
 Applicant took off from work for seven months in 2017 after her mother passed 
away. She lived off of her savings, her mother’s life insurance proceeds, and credit cards. 
She explained her mother died unexpectedly, and she managed her mother’s estate and 
helped her siblings during this time. She also was not emotionally ready to continue 
working. She provides some support to a 29-year-old younger sister who is in college and 
works part-time. She helps support another sister with three children. Her older sister had 
medical issues in July 2017, and stays in Applicant’s house. Applicant testified that from 
2015 to 2016, she provided care for her mother, and helped with medical bills that were 
not covered by Medicare.3 
 
 Applicant owes about $30,000 in student loans that she testified are current. She 
purchased a house in 2003. She has two 2015 vehicles because when she commuted 
between states for work it was less expensive to own a second car rather than renting a 
vehicle. She rented a one-bedroom apartment in the second location where she worked. 
She received a stipend from her employer for her rent, but it did not cover what she paid.4  
 
 Applicant did not pay any estimated federal taxes or have taxes withheld from her 
income from 2005 to 2013. Some of these years she did not file returns, but did not know 
what years. She testified she filed her 2005 federal income tax return, but did not pay the 
taxes. She also stated that she owed federal income taxes for tax years 2003 and 2004, 
which were not paid timely, but were resolved, and are not included in her current tax 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibit I is Government Counsel’s email memorandum. 
 
2 Tr. 14-17. 
 
3 Tr. 17-19, 51, 54-56. 
 
4 Tr. 36-37, 54, 61-62. 
 
3 
 
 
debt. In approximately 2005 or 2006, she engaged a certified public accountant (CPA) to 
calculate her federal income taxes owed. It was estimated to be approximately $50,000. 
It is unknown what tax years were included in the calculations. She stated that because 
she was an independent contractor the billing process was complicated and she was not 
doing it properly.5  
 
 Applicant stated that the CPA gave her a structured payment plan for what she 
should be paying in estimated taxes, and she became more educated on the process and 
paid some of the taxes she owed. She stated that she used the CPA to file her tax returns 
and calculate her federal income taxes each year. It is unknown what tax year returns 
were filed by her CPA. However, she did not pay the federal income taxes she owed. She 
did not think she paid any estimated taxes for those tax years. Her explanation was she 
did not have the money to pay. Applicant admitted that she did not pay estimated tax or 
federal income taxes owed from 2005 through 2013. Each year her CPA completed her 
federal income tax returns and filed them. The CPA was aware she was not paying her 
taxes. She hired a new CPA in 2012.6  
 
 In December 2013 and August 2014, the IRS filed tax liens of $185,295 and $2,880 
respectively against Applicant’s property. She testified that in 2014, she reached out to 
her CPA to resolve the tax issues. She estimated the current tax balance is over 
$200,000.7 
 
 In January 2015, an agreement was made with the IRS to pay $1,500 monthly. 
Applicant testified that she made the payments until the later part of 2016 and then 
stopped for two months. She said the monthly installment agreements increased in 
October 2016 to $3,045. She did not provide documentary evidence of making 
payments.8  
 
Applicant said her mother had knee replacement surgery in 2016, and she helped 
pay the co-pay and deductible. When Applicant stopped making installment payments, 
the IRS agreement went into default. She said she did not make any payments in 2017 
and 2018. Applicant provided a copy of the IRS agreement, from December 2014, which 
includes tax years 2005, 2006, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013. She explained 
                                                          
5 Tr. 23-36; GE 2; Applicant’s failure to file federal income tax returns was not alleged in the SOR. Her 
failure to pay her federal income taxes was also not alleged, except as it is reflected in the tax liens that 
were alleged. Any derogatory information that was not alleged in the SOR will not be considered for 
disqualifying purposes, but will be considered when making a credibility determination, in the application of 
mitigating conditions, and in a whole-person analysis.  
 
6 Tr. 23-37. 
 
7 Tr. 38-40, 48-49; GE 2, 3, 4. 
 
8 Tr. 40-44, 58. 
 
 
4 
 
 
she stopped making the installment payments because it was financially difficult. She did 
not tell her CPA until after she stopped the payments. 9 
 
 Applicant testified that she filed her 2014 federal income tax returns as an 
independent contractor. She said that she paid a portion of what was owed for that year, 
but likely still owes a balance. She did not provide documentary evidence to support her 
statements. She stated she filed her 2015 federal income tax returns, but did not pay the 
taxes. She became a W-2 employee in 2015 and had federal income taxes withheld, but 
she believed she likely owes more taxes than what was withheld. She has not paid them. 
She had the option of becoming a W-2 employee earlier, but she thought she could earn 
more as an independent contractor. She filed her federal income tax returns for 2016 and 
2017 and received refunds that were involuntarily applied to her delinquent federal 
taxes.10 
 
 Applicant explained that she neglected her tax obligations because of many family 
financial responsibilities. She said that she has been irresponsible by letting the tax debt 
increase and has created a mess. She said the tax lien on her house has hurt her. She 
does not have a budget. She has not had any financial counseling. Her credit cards are 
being paid timely.11  
 
 Applicant disclosed on her April 2017 security clearance application that she took 
a vacation to Mexico in August 2014; a vacation to Dominican Republic in December 
2015; and a trip to Mexico in September 2016 to attend a wedding. She explained a friend 
had free airfare passes, and they split the cost of a hotel. She described these as mini-
vacations. She thinks about her IRS tax debt every day, but her job is stressful, and she 
needed a vacation.12  
 
Applicant testified that when she began work as a consultant (independent 
contractor) she was irresponsible, illiterate to the complexity, and unknowledgeable about 
setting up a correct accounting system. She accepted responsibility and regretted her 
action. The recent events have shown her that she needs a system to keep her financial 
affairs in order. Her goal is to pay her federal income taxes. She stated she has made 
attempts to do so, and she is not irresponsible any more. She began working with her 
new CPA in 2016, but he was in an accident, and her account got shifted around the 
office, and it was difficult to communicate with him.13  
 
 In Applicant’s post-hearing email, she stated she was unemployed from June 2012 
to February 2013 and not earning an income. She did not explain if she lost her job or 
                                                          
9 Tr. 40-44, 50, 53, 59-60. 
 
10 Tr. 44-47, 57-58. 
 
11 Tr. 50-52, 56. 
 
12 Tr. 62-64; GE 1. 
 
13 Tr. 70-72. 
 
5 
 
 
chose to not work during this time. She explained this was the period when she began 
missing payments on the IRS payment plan. She stated when she resumed working she 
reinitiated payments on her IRS plan when she was informed by her CPA that she was 
already in default. Applicant did not provide documents to corroborate her post-hearing 
statements that she had been making payments to the IRS prior to her unemployment. 
That statement is inconsistent with her testimony and the documents from the IRS that 
show the installment agreement was to begin in January 2015.14  
 
 Applicant’s post-hearing email states she contacted the IRS to discuss a new 
payment plan and other options to pay her federal taxes . She said she is committed to 
resolving her delinquent tax debt.15  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.c is for a delinquent credit card. Applicant testified that she 
was making monthly payments and then it became past due. In August 2017, the creditor 
demanded the entire balance be paid. Applicant had resumed work in May 2017 after 
taking off seven months. The balance on his debt was paid in full in December 2017. She 
provided documents to substantiate the payment.16 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
                                                          
14 AE A. 
 
15 AE A. 
 
16 Tr. 19-22; Answer to SOR.  
 
6 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 
7 
 
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(f) failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income tax as 
required.  
 
 Applicant has two unresolved federal tax liens that were filed in 2013 and 2014. 
She also had a delinquent credit card. There is sufficient evidence to support the 
application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
 Applicant was aware that she had not paid estimated taxes or federal income taxes 
for numerous tax years. She hired a CPA in 2005 to file federal income tax returns. She 
failed to follow his instructions to pay her estimated taxes for numerous years and her tax 
debt began to increase. She provided insufficient corroborating evidence to show she is 
resolving her taxes. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that her behavior is unlikely 
to recur. Applicant’s failure to pay taxes casts doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to a seven-month period in 2017 when 
she did not work. She decided to take off work and use her savings to pay living costs 
after her mother passed away. She used that time to take care of her mother’s estate. 
She also attributed her financial problems to helping several family members, including 
her mother. Voluntarily taking off work was within her control. Helping family members 
may have been beyond Applicant’s control, but they occurred years after she failed to pay 
her federal income taxes. These factors did not affect her ability to comply with tax laws 
and obligations. The federal tax liens were entered in 2013 and 2014. She testified she 
did not pay her taxes for eight years. In 2015 she became a W-2 employee. Her sister’s 
medical issue was in 2017. These matters may have impacted her ability to repay the 
taxes, but they were not the cause of the tax problem. There is minimal evidence that 
Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant paid the credit card debt in SOR ¶ 1.c. AG ¶ 20(d) only applies to this 
debt. There is no substantiated evidence that Applicant has an installment agreement or 
current arrangements with the IRS. She provided a copy of the past agreement with the 
IRS from 2015, but nothing to show payments on that plan. She did not provide 
documents from her CPA to show actions she has taken to resolve the tax liens. AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and 20(g) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old educated woman. She neglected to pay estimated taxes 
for many years as an independent contractor, even after her CPA became involved and 
instructed her to do so. The tax liability became overwhelming. Although she had family 
commitments and helped them financially, these obligations were not the cause of the 
problem. Despite being aware each year of her pending tax liability, she failed to act 
responsibly. She failed to provide corroboration of any payments she may have made or 
a current installment agreement with the IRS. The DOHA Appeal Board has held that:  
 
Someone who fails repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not 
demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability required of 
those granted access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 
14-01894 at 5 (App. Bd. August 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & Restaurant 
Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), 
aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961). 17 
 
Applicant’s history of non-compliance with a fundamental legal obligation to pay 
federal income taxes, which resulted in federal tax liens, raises serious concerns. The 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.c:   For Applicant 
   
 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
17 ISCR Case No. 12-10933 at 3 (App. Bd. June 29, 2016). 
