 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
 
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No: 17-02095 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne M. Driskill, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant failed to mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. The 
personal conduct security concerns are found in her favor. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, national security eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On July 17, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information 
(AG), effective within the DOD on June 8, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
  Applicant answered the SOR on August 25, 2017, and requested that her case be 
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing (Answer). On 
October 3, 2017, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case. A 
complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing seven Items, was 
mailed to Applicant and received by her on October 12, 2017. The FORM notified 
Applicant that she had an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. Applicant did not 
submit a response to the FORM or object to the Government’s Items. They are admitted 
into evidence without objection. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
assigned this case to me on February 14, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact  
 
 Applicant is 44 years old, married, and has five children. She graduated from a 
military academy in 1995, served on active duty for ten years, and received an honorable 
discharge. (Item 2) 
 
 Applicant attributed her financial delinquencies to a business she and her husband 
owned and operated from 2002 to 2009. She said the business, which provided items to 
military service members, was successful until a supplier encountered production 
problems. At the end of 2008, she was unable to deliver orders and customers demanded 
refunds that she could not provide. The state in which she was operating subsequently 
sued her personally and her company, and assessed a civil penalty of more than 
$105,000.1 The Federal and state governments filed tax liens in 2010 for unpaid payroll 
taxes for 2008 and 2009. (Items 1, 2)   
 
 In March 2016, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA). In it, 
she disclosed a 2010 Chapter 7 bankruptcy that was discharged in 20112; outstanding 
payroll taxes for 2007 and 2008 that she said she was paying; and the civil penalty 
assessed by the above mentioned state. She stated that she had reduced the $105,000 
civil penalty to about $60,000. She indicated that all of the debts alleged in the SOR 
related to her failed business. (Item 2) 
 
 During a September 2016 interview, Applicant explained that her delinquent debts 
related to the closed business. She said that all business debts were discharged in the 
2010 bankruptcy, except for the unpaid taxes and the state civil penalty. She stated she 
had paid a portion of her taxes and also a portion of the civil penalty. She said she 
anticipated paying the remaining Federal payroll taxes of about $12,000 by December 
                                                 
1 In February 2009, Applicant entered into a consent order with State, in which she agreed to pay refunds 
to customers and provide an accounting to the State court. Applicant did not comply with that consent order, 
and State moved to have the bankruptcy court determine that the debt was non-dischargeable, which it did. 
(Item 7) 
2 The Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition listed the total liabilities owed to creditors as $2,838,966 and listed the 
total assets as $1,261,488.    
 
 
3 
 
 
2016. She stated she was trying to resolve the remaining $60,000 owed to the state for 
its civil penalty. (Item 3)    
  
 Based on Applicant’s disclosures, court records, and credit bureau reports (CBR) 
from May 2017 and April 2016, the SOR contained six allegations: a 2010 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy; an unpaid state civil penalty of $105,574; a Federal tax lien for $66,728; a 
state tax lien for $17,899; an unpaid $709 cell phone debt; and a $51 unpaid medical bill. 
These debts began accumulating in 2008. The civil penalty and tax liens were not 
discharged in the bankruptcy, and the two smaller debts postdate it. (Items 1, 4, 5, 6 and 
7)  
 
  In her August 2017 Answer, Applicant again stated that she paid about $25,000 of 
the $105,000 civil penalty alleged. She admitted that she filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
2010 and discharged debts in 2011 that were attributable to her business failure. She 
stated that the she owed $17,700 on the Federal tax lien and had settled the $17,900 
state tax lien in 2010. She said she resolved the $709 cell phone bill and had no 
knowledge of the $51 medical debt. (Item 1)  
 
  Applicant did not provide documentary evidence to corroborate her assertions that 
she paid or is paying a portion of the alleged civil penalty and the Federal and state payroll 
taxes. She did not submit documentation that she resolved the cell phone debt or medical 
bill. There is no evidence that Applicant participated in financial or credit counseling. She 
did not provide a budget, or other information related to her financial resources and 
obligations, from which to determine her current or future financial solvency and reliability. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions 
and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s national 
security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number of 
variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
 
 
4 
 
 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere speculation or 
conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants national 
security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or sensitive information.  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case. Three may potentially apply:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant has a history of being unable or unwilling to meet financial obligations, 
which began in 2008, includes a 2010 Chapter 7 bankruptcy, and continues to the 
present. The evidence raises security concerns under the above disqualifying conditions, 
and shifts the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from Applicant’s financial problems. The following five are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(g) the individual has made arrangements with the appropriate tax authority 
to file or pay the amount owed and is in compliance with those 
arrangements. 
 
Applicant’s delinquent debts began in 2008 and remain unresolved. AG ¶ 20 (a) 
does not apply. Applicant attributed her financial problems to a business that began failing 
in 2008, which may have involved circumstances beyond her control. She did not provide 
evidence demonstrating that she has acted responsibly in managing her financial 
obligations. AG ¶ 20(b) provides limited mitigation. There is no evidence that she 
participated in credit or financial counseling. She failed to provide documentary evidence 
to show that her delinquent debts are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶ 20(c) 
does not apply. Despite assertions to the contrary, she did not submit evidence of good-
faith efforts to resolve her tax liens, a large state civil penalty, or other debts. Nor did she 
submit documented proof that she has payment plans with the taxing bodies. The 
evidence does not establish mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(d) or 20 (g).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains the security concerns relating to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes.  
 
AG ¶ 16 contains no disqualifying condition that would support security concerns 
in this case that are independent of those comprehensively addressed under Guideline 
F. The SOR merely re-alleges, by reference, the allegations raised under Guideline F. 
While any conduct involving questionable judgment or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can theoretically fall under Guideline E, as well as other guidelines, no 
value is added to the analysis of Applicant’s national security eligibility by doing so in this 
case.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s national security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national 
security eligibility must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the applicable guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(d) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
  Applicant is a mature individual who honorably served in the military for 10 years. 
In the FORM, she was informed that the evidence she submitted in her Answer to the 
SOR was probably insufficient to mitigate the financial allegations. Despite that notice, 
she did not provide additional documentary evidence to confirm her assertions that she 
had resolved some of the alleged debts, or was in the process of resolving them. The 
amount of delinquent debt alleged in the SOR was about $191,000. The absence of 
mitigating evidence for the Guideline F allegations compels a finding that she failed to 
meet her burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:          AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:          FOR APPLICANT 
    
  Subparagraph 2.a:                      For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. National security eligibility is denied. 
                                                   
 
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
