KEYWORD: Guideline E; Guideline J
DIGEST: Applicant contends the Judge erred in finding that she was arrested for the child
cruelty charge in 2014.  In support of this claim, she submitted a Detention Certificate that post-
dates the Judge’s decision.  This Detention Certificate constitutes new evidence that the Appeal
Board cannot consider.  We note that, in her security clearance application, Applicant disclosed
that she “was arrested” for the 2014 incident, and a police record also reflects she was arrested
on that occasion.  The Judge’s finding that Applicant was arrested for the child cruelty charge in
2014 is supported by substantial evidence. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 17-00709.a1
DATE: 06/28/2018
DATE: June 28, 2018
In Re:
-------------------------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 17-00709
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On June
2, 2017, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive). 
Applicant requested a decision on the written record.  On March  20, 2018, after considering the
record, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Stephanie C. Hess
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in her findings of
fact and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  In 2011, child protective
services (CPS)  took custody of Applicant’s two children after daycare workers observed a visible
hand print on one child’s arm.  The children were placed in foster care.  The police questioned
Applicant, and she was referred to CPS for counseling.  Noncompliance with the counseling
program could have resulted in loss of custody of the children.  Applicant completed the required
counseling. 
In 2014, daycare providers contacted the police because they suspected one of Applicant’s
children had been abused.  An investigation led to Applicant being arrested and charged with felony
child cruelty.  She was arraigned and released from jail.  Police reports reflected that Applicant
grabbed one child by the neck, threw her to the floor, and punched her.  Due to this incident,
Applicant was separated from her children for about two months.  She and her husband were
required to attend child-abuse-perpetrator classes, which she completed.  In early 2016, she checked
on the status of her criminal case at the county courthouse and was given a document that stated, “no
cases or charges found.”  Decision at 3.  She never received a notice that her case was dismissed and
provided no documentation as to the status of the charge.
Applicant denies making a false statement during a background investigation.  She told the
investigator that she spanked her child three times the day before her arrest and denied ever having
made a statement about punching her child.  She also denied falsifying her security clearance
application (SCA) in 2014 when she responded “No” to the question that asked if, in the past seven
years, she consulted with a healthcare professional regarding an emotional or mental health
condition.  She claimed that she did not list the CPS-ordered counseling because she did not
understand the question. 
The Judge’s Analysis
In 2011, Applicant’s children were removed from the home due to her suspected child abuse.
In 2014, she abused one of her children and was arrested and charged with felony child cruelty. 
Applicant’s denial of culpability for these alleged incidents casts doubt on her reliability,
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
Applicant denies the falsification allegations, and the mere omission of information does not
prove a falsification.  Applicant’s claim that she never described the 2014 incident as she is reported
to have stated in two police reports is simply not plausible.  The Judge concluded that she
intentionally falsified her statement to the background investigator about that incident.  The Judge
found in favor of Applicant on two allegations that she falsified her SCA by failing to disclose
mandated counseling because no evidence established that it was for an emotional or mental health
condition. 
Discussion
Applicant contends the Judge erred in finding that she was arrested for the child cruelty
charge in 2014.  In support of this claim, she submitted a Detention Certificate that post-dates the
Judge’s decision.  This Detention Certificate constitutes new evidence that the Appeal Board cannot
consider.  Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  We note that, in her security clearance application, Applicant
disclosed that she “was arrested” for the 2014 incident, and a police record also reflects she was
arrested on that occasion.  Items 3 and 4 of the File of Relevant Material.  The Judge’s finding that
Applicant was arrested for the child cruelty charge in 2014 is supported by substantial evidence, i.e., 
“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in
light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 16-04094 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2018). 
Applicant also challenges the Judge’s findings regarding the alleged SCA falsifications.   She
argues that she did not understand the question.  However, we need not address that assignment of
error because the Judge found in favor of Applicant on those allegations.  
The balance of Applicant’s arguments amount to a disagreement with the Judge’s weighing
of the evidence.  For example, she contends that the Judge was mistaken about her not being
remorseful.  These arguments fail to establish that the Judge weighed the evidence in a manner that
was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR 17-00257 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec.7, 2017). 
Applicant has failed to identify any harmful error.  The Judge examined the relevant
evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the decision.  The decision is sustainable on
the record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent
with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528
(1988).  See also Directive, Encl. 2, App. A ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being
considered for national security eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Charles C. Hale                
Charles C. Hale
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                 
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
