 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03834 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 30, 2017, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application. On November 13, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to her, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
and modified (Directive); and Directive 4 of the Security Executive Agent (SEAD 4), 
(December 10, 2016), National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) for all covered 
individuals who require initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, effective June 8, 2017.  
 
 
2 
                                      
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), 
and detailed reasons why the DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a sworn statement, dated December 8, 2017, Applicant responded to the SOR and 
elected to have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete 
copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant by the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) on February 5, 2018, and she was 
afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the FORM, to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the 
FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the Adjudicative 
Guidelines applicable to her case. Applicant received the FORM on February 14, 2018. 
Applicant’s response was due on March 16, 2018. Applicant timely submitted a brief one-
page response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 10, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted with comments several of the factual 
allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., and 1.g.) of the SOR. 
Applicant’s admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a 
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration 
of same, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has been serving 
as a repair cycle technician with her current employer since June 2011, and held a similar 
position with a different government contractor from September 2006 until June 2011. 
She is a 1985 high school graduate. Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Air Force Reserve in 
October 1986, and she served in that capacity or with the U.S. Air Force until she was 
honorably discharged in March 1997. She was granted a top secret security clearance in 
1987, and in 2006, she was granted a secret security clearance. Applicant was married 
in August 1988, and divorced in April 1994. She remarried in February 2005, but the 
status of that marriage has not been reported. She has two children, born in 1989 and 
1998. 
 
Financial Considerations1 
Other than the brief information mentioned in Applicant’s e-QIP, her Personal 
Subject Interview, and her Answer to the SOR, very little is known about her, her military 
accomplishments, or her finances.  Applicant mentioned some family members with their 
                                                          
1 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: Item 3 (e-QIP, dated March 30, 2017); Item 4 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, 
dated July 8, 2017); Item 5 (Personal Subject Interview, dated July 24, 2017); Item 2 (Answer to the SOR, dated 
December 8, 2017). 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
own financial problems, and her efforts to assist them over difficult periods, as well as 
some discussions with her husband in considering a divorce. When initially interviewed 
by an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in July 2017, 
Applicant claimed that she was unaware of several of the delinquent accounts in her 
name, and seemed confused as to other delinquent accounts. Nevertheless, she 
indicated that she planned to obtain a copy of her credit report regarding her delinquent 
accounts, including those about which she was unaware, and she intended to pay off her 
debts. 
The SOR identified nine purportedly delinquent accounts that had been placed for 
collection, charged off, or repossessed, as generally reflected by Applicant’s 2017 credit 
report. Those debts, totaling approximately $24,318, their current status, according to the 
credit report, and other evidence submitted by the Government and Applicant, are 
described as follows:  
 (SOR ¶ 1.a.): This is an automobile installment loan with a high credit of $16,467 
and past-due balance of $12,401 that was placed for collection and the vehicle was 
repossessed.2 Applicant initially told the OPM investigator that she had co-signed for the 
loan on a vehicle for her husband, but in her Answer to the SOR she changed her story 
to say that it was a loan for her nephew. She said that she was unaware that her husband 
stopped making the payments at about the time they were discussing whether or not to 
divorce, and she was not aware of the repossession. In addition, in her Answer to the 
SOR she contended that her nephew “has been making payments,” but she failed to 
furnish any specifics regarding the repayment arrangements. She also failed to submit 
any documentation, such as letters, receipts, checks, bank account statements, etc., to 
support her contentions that payments have been made. The account has not been 
resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): This is another automobile installment loan with a high credit of 
$11,649 and past-due balance of $11,490 that was placed for collection. The creditor 
charged off $6,515 in November 2013.3 The vehicle was eventually repossessed. 
Applicant initially told the OPM investigator that she had co-signed for the loan on a 
vehicle for her close friend, but in her Answer to the SOR she changed her story to say 
that it was a loan for her husband’s daughter. In addition, in her Answer to the SOR she 
contended that her close friend/husband’s daughter “has been making payments,” but 
she failed to furnish any specifics regarding the repayment arrangements. She also failed 
to submit any documentation, such as letters, receipts, checks, bank account statements, 
etc., to support her contentions that payments have been made. Applicant has had no 
communication with her close friend/husband’s daughter, and she does not know the 
current status of the account. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.e., 1.h., and 1.i.): These are unspecified accounts with unpaid 
balances of $2,133, $687, $502 (for a telephone account), and $250 (for insurance) that 
                                                          
2 Item 4, supra note 1, at 6. 
 
3 Item 4, supra note 1, at 6; Item 5, supra note 1, at 4. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
were placed for collection.4 Applicant claimed that she had no knowledge of the accounts 
and contended that they were opened by her “ex-husband.” She did not indicate that she 
had made any effort to contact the creditors to resolve or dispute the accounts. The 
accounts have not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): This is a charge account with a high credit of $4,200 and a past-due 
balance of $991 that was placed for collection.5 Applicant explained that she had used 
the card for family members who had fallen on hard times, and she contended that it was 
being paid with direct deposits. In July 2017, during her OPM interview, she expected to 
pay off the remaining balance “in just a few weeks.” In her Answer to the SOR, she said 
that payments were being made. She failed to submit any documentation, such as letters, 
receipts, checks, bank account statements, etc., to support her contentions that payments 
were being made. The account has not been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.f.): This is an account with an unpaid balance of $43 that was placed for 
collection.6 Applicant contends that this does not refer to a debt, but rather to a credit.7 
She failed to submit any documentation to support her contention. The account has not 
been resolved. 
(SOR ¶ 1.g.): This is a medical account with an unpaid balance of $796 that was 
placed for collection.8 Applicant said that the account was for her son, that payments were 
being made, and the true balance should be $230.9 She failed to submit any 
documentation, such as letters, receipts, checks, bank account statements, etc., to 
support her contentions that payments were being made. The account has not been 
resolved. 
It is not known what Applicant’s financial resources may be because she did not 
submit a Personal Financial Statement to reflect her net monthly income; monthly 
expenses; and any monthly remainder that might be available for discretionary spending 
or savings. There is no evidence of a budget. There is no evidence of any financial 
counseling. Although she claimed to be able to handle her other debts, Applicant offered 
no evidence to indicate that her financial situation is now under control. She admitted that 
“in the past, [she] used less than good judgement to help [her] family members and that 
is just proof that [she is] human, not unscrupulous.”10  
                                                          
4 Item 4, supra note 1, at 6-7, 9-10. 
 
5 Item 4, supra note 1, at 7; Item 5, supra note 1, at 3. 
 
6 Item 4, supra note 1, at 7. 
 
7 Item 2, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
8 Item 4, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
9 Item 4, supra note 1, at 9. 
 
10 Response to FORM, dated March 12, 2018. 
 
5 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security emphasizing, 
“no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”11 As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to 
grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”12   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the guidelines in SEAD 4. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility 
for access to classified information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known 
as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”13 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, extenuation 
or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s case. The 
burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.14  
 
                                                          
11 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
12 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as 
amended and modified.    
 
13 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 
at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla 
but less than a preponderance.”  See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 
1994). 
 
14 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as well. It is 
because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to repose a high 
degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants access to classified 
information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  Furthermore, “security 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”15  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense 
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”16 Thus, nothing in this 
decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict guidelines 
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  In 
reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, 
and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing 
inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
 
                                                          
15 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
16 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG 19:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; 
 
(b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Nine purportedly delinquent debts, totaling approximately $24,318, were placed 
for collection, charged off, or resulted in repossessions, as generally reflected by 
Applicant’s credit report. There is no evidence that Applicant was unwilling to satisfy her 
debts, but there is some evidence of a reluctance to do so, especially regarding the two 
repossessions. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) have been established. AG ¶ 19(b) has not been 
established. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties under AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts;17 and 
                                                          
17 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must 
present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some 
other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not 
define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must do more than 
merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy [or 
statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
 
8 
                                      
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue.  
I have concluded that none of the mitigating conditions apply. The nature, 
frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing financial difficulties make it difficult to 
conclude that it occurred “so long ago” or “was so infrequent,” or that it is “unlikely to 
recur.” While Applicant attributed some of her financial difficulties to co-signing car loans 
for friends or family members, or to helping family members in times of their own financial 
difficulties, she failed to describe how those actions impacted her finances, or how or why 
she did not attempt to resolve those accounts, knowing that she was financially 
responsible for the loans or the charge accounts used by her.  
Applicant indicated a willingness to engage her creditors in good-faith efforts to 
resolve her delinquent debts, but without the appropriate documentation, there is no 
evidence that she did so. She contended that payments were being made, but she failed 
to submit any documentation, such as letters, receipts, checks, bank account statements, 
etc., to support her contentions that payments were being made. Furthermore, it is not 
known what Applicant’s financial resources may be because she did not submit a 
Personal Financial Statement to reflect her net monthly income; monthly expenses; and 
any monthly remainder that might be available for discretionary spending or savings. 
There is no evidence of a budget. There is no evidence of any financial counseling. There 
is no evidence of disputes. Although she claimed to be able to handle her other debts, 
Applicant offered no evidence to indicate that her financial situation is now under control. 
Applicant’s actions under the circumstances cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.18 
Clearance decisions are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The guidelines do not 
require an applicant to establish resolution of every debt or issue alleged in the SOR. An 
applicant needs only to establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant 
actions to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant immediately 
resolve issues or make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a 
requirement that the debts or issues alleged in an SOR be resolved first. Rather, a 
reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the payment of such debts, or 
resolution of such issues, one at a time. Mere promises to pay debts in the future, without 
further confirmed action, are insufficient. 
    
  
                                                          
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
18 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(d): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under SEAD 4, App. A, ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have 
evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence 
and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.19   
There is some evidence mitigating Applicant’s conduct. She has been serving as 
a repair cycle technician with her current employer since June 2011, and held a similar 
position with a different government contractor from September 2006 until June 2011. She 
enlisted in the U.S. Air Force Reserve in October 1986, and she served in that capacity 
or with the U.S. Air Force until she was honorably discharged in March 1997. She was 
granted a top secret security clearance in 1987, and in 2006, she was granted a secret 
security clearance. Applicant financially assisted her family and friends. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is simply more 
substantial. There are nine delinquent accounts, including some that were charged off or 
resulted in repossessions, alleged in the SOR with a combined unpaid balance of 
$24,318. Her unsubstantiated comments that she contacted her creditors and payments 
are being made to resolve them, without more, are simply insufficient to prove that she 
made any of those good-faith efforts. There is no evidence that she disputed any of the 
accounts.  
Considering the lack of evidence regarding her current finances, I am unable to 
reach a positive conclusion pertaining to Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. 
                                                          
19 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:20 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of actual 
debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is not 
required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to resolve his [or 
her] financial problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” 
The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the extent to which that 
applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible 
and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, 
a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment 
of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first 
debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones 
listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has demonstrated an extremely poor track record of debt reduction and 
elimination efforts, seemingly avoiding the debts in her name, and failing to take timely 
corrective actions. While her unsubstantiated comments refer to her resolution efforts, 
she failed to submit documentation to support those efforts. Overall, the evidence leaves 
me with substantial questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate 
the security concerns arising from her financial considerations. See SEAD 4, App. A, ¶¶ 
2(d)(1) through AG 2(d)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f.:    Against Applicant 
                                                          
20 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
Subparagraph 1.g.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i.:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
  In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
