 
1 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 17-00218 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s longstanding U.S. ties, coupled with appropriate safeguards and 
conditions, mitigate security concerns raised by his familial relations in Russia. Clearance 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 14, 2018, the Department of Defense (DoD) sent Applicant a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under the foreign influence guideline. 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
 
 On May 9, 2018, I was assigned Applicant’s case and, after coordinating with the 
parties, scheduled the hearing for the following afternoon.1 Applicant waived his right to 
15-days advance written notice of the hearing.2 He testified and the exhibits offered by 
the parties were admitted into the record without objection.3 The transcript was received 
on May 21, 2018. 
 
  
                                                          
1 See Appellate Exhibit II (notice of hearing and other correspondence).  
 
2 Transcript (Tr.) at 4 -5.  
 
3 Government Exhibits 1 – 2 and Applicant’s Exhibits A – D.  
 
2 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant, 49, was born and raised in the United States. He earned a doctorate in 
1993 from a prestigious U.S. university and thereafter continued his studies, earning 
master’s degrees in 2002, 2007, and 2013. He was granted a security clearance in 1994, 
when he was 25 years old, and has held a clearance continuously to the present day. He 
has been employed as a federal contractor since 2008. He currently works for a federal 
law enforcement agency as a contractor and recently received an award from the agency 
for his efforts in support of the agency’s mission.4 
 
Applicant met his wife in 2005 and they married two years later. They have lived 
together in the United States since getting married and have resided at the same rental 
unit since 2002. Their savings and retirement accounts total approximately $650,000. 
They own no property or assets outside the United States. Applicant earns approximately 
$155,000 annually. His wife does not work outside the home, but has held jobs with 
different U.S. employers over the years. She has volunteered in the past with lobbying 
firms and the U.S. Congress.5  
 
Applicant’s wife’s mother, sister, and grandmother are citizens and residents of 
Russia. Applicant is not particularly close to his mother-in-law or sister-in-law. He has not 
visited Russia in over 20 years and they have not visited the United States. He speaks to 
them on rare occasions, usually during the holidays, birthdays, or on other special 
occasions.  
 
Applicant’s mother-in-law is a retired grade-school teacher. His sister-in-law works 
in low-pay retail jobs. They share a home in Russia. Neither have any known connection 
to the Russian government, military, or its intelligence services. Applicant suspects that 
his mother-in-law and sister-in-law partially support themselves through financial aid 
provided by the Russian government.  
 
Applicant described his wife’s relationship with her mother and sister as 
contentious. She last traveled to Russia about four years ago to visit them, but hardly got 
to see her sister while in Russia. She and her mother were speaking on a somewhat 
frequent basis (once every two weeks) about five years ago, but for the past two years 
Applicant’s wife has had no contact with her mother and sister. She became aware 
through her grandmother that her sister recently gave birth to a child, but does not know 
the child’s name. Applicant and his wife do not provide financial support to his mother-in-
law or sister-in-law, but they did pay for his sister-in-law’s education in Russia.6  
  
                                                          
4 Tr. at 14-20; Exhibit 1; Exhibit A; Exhibit D.  
 
5 Tr. at 21-22, 33-35; Exhibit 1; Exhibits A – C. 
 
6 Tr. at 22-33; Exhibit 1; Exhibit A. 
 
3 
Administrative Notice – The Russian Federation (Russia).7 
 
Russia has a highly centralized, authoritarian political system dominated by 
President Vladimir Putin. Although the United States has long sought a full and 
constructive relationship with Russia, current relations between the two old war allies 
appears to have again turned adversarial. Of note, in May 2017, the Director of National 
Intelligence (DNI) reported to Congress that: 
 
Russia is a full-scope cyber actor that will remain a major threat to U.S. 
Government, military, diplomatic, commercial, and critical infrastructure. 
Moscow has a highly advanced offensive cyber program, and in recent 
years, the Kremlin has assumed a more aggressive cyber posture. This 
aggressiveness was evidence in Russia’s efforts to influence the 2016 U.S. 
election, and we assess that only Russia's senior-most officials could have 
authorized the 2016 US election-focused data thefts and disclosures, based 
on the scope and sensitivity of the targets. Outside the United States, 
Russian actors have conducted damaging and disruptive cyber attacks, 
including on critical infrastructure networks. In some cases, Russian 
intelligence actors have masqueraded as third parties, hiding behind false 
online personas designed to cause the victim to misattribute the source of 
the attack. Russia has also leveraged cyberspace to seek to influence 
public opinion across Europe and Eurasia. We assess that Russian cyber 
operations will continue to target the United States and its allies to gather 
intelligence, support Russian decisionmaking, conduct influence operations 
to support Russian military and political objectives, and prepare the cyber 
environment for future contingencies.8 
 
The DNI went on to state that leading state intelligence threats to U.S. interests 
will continue to come from two main countries, one of which is Russia.9 And, that “Russia 
is likely to be more assertive in global affairs, more unpredictable in its approach to the 
United States, and more authoritarian in its approach to domestic politics.”10 A recent U.S. 
State Department human rights report on Russia reflects the commission of significant 
human rights abuses. 
 
Law, Policies, and Regulations 
 
This case is decided under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (AG), which 
became effective on June 8, 2017.  
                                                          
7 The information herein on Russia is generally taken from Exhibit 2.  
 
8 Exhibit 2, Item 1 at 1, Cyber Threat.  
 
9 Exhibit 2, Item 1 at 9, Counterintelligence.  
 
10 Exhibit 2, Item 1 at 18, Russia.  
 
4 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Instead, persons are only eligible for access to classified 
information “upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest” to 
authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an administrative 
judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions. The 
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human 
behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  commonsense manner, 
considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a fair and impartial 
decision. AG ¶ 2. 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting “witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or 
proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges must remain fair and impartial, and carefully balance the 
needs for the expedient resolution of a case with the demands of due process. Therefore, 
an administrative judge will ensure that an applicant: (a) receives fair notice of the issues, 
(b) has a reasonable opportunity to address those issues, and (c) is not subjected to unfair 
surprise. Directive, ¶ E3.1.10; ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
 
In evaluating the evidence, a judge applies a “substantial evidence” standard, 
which is something less than a preponderance of the evidence. Specifically, substantial 
evidence is defined as “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as 
adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.” 
Directive, ¶ E3.1.32.1. See also ISCR Case No. 16-03712 at 3 (App. Bd. May 17, 2018).11 
 
Any doubt raised by the evidence must be resolved in favor of the national security. 
AG ¶ 2(b). See also Security Executive Agent Directive 4 (SEAD 4), ¶ E.4. Additionally, 
the Supreme Court has held that responsible officials making “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain 
                                                          
11 However, a judge’s mere disbelief of an applicant’s testimony or statements, without actual evidence of 
disqualifying conduct or admission by an applicant to the disqualifying conduct, is not enough to sustain an 
unfavorable finding. ISCR Case No. 15-05565 (App. Bd. Aug. 2, 2017); ISCR Case No. 02-24452 (App. Bd. 
Aug. 4, 2004). Furthermore, an unfavorable decision cannot be based on non-alleged matters. ISCR Case 
No. 14-05986 (App. Bd. May 26, 2017). Unless an applicant is provided notice that an issue raises a security 
concern, such matters can only be used for specific limited purposes, such as assessing mitigation and 
credibility. ISCR Case No. 16-02877 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 2, 2017). 
 
5 
degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
 Foreign connections, contacts, and interests are a national security concern if they 
result in divided allegiance or could leave a person vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. However, a person is not per se disqualified from holding a security 
clearance because they have familial or other ties to a foreign country. Instead, in 
assessing a person’s potential vulnerability to foreign influence, a judge considers the 
foreign country involved, the country’s human rights record, and other pertinent factors.12  
 
 In assessing the security concerns at issue, I considered the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions listed under Guideline B, including:   
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact . . .  with a foreign family member, business or 
professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person . . . that create a potential 
conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to protect classified or 
sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to help a 
foreign person . . . by providing that information or technology; 
 
AG ¶ 7(e): shared living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed 
in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, or allegiance to the 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the 
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest;  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
                                                          
12 See generally AG ¶ 6. See also ISCR Case No. 05-03250 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2007) (setting forth 
factors an administrative judge must consider in foreign influence cases).  
 
6 
AG ¶ 8(e): the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
 An applicant with relatives, financial interests or other substantial connections to a 
foreign country faces a high, but not insurmountable hurdle, in mitigating security 
concerns raised by such foreign ties. An applicant is not required “to sever all ties with a 
foreign country before he or she can be granted access to classified information.”13 
However, what factor or combination of factors may mitigate security concerns raised by 
an applicant with relatives in a foreign country is not easily identifiable or quantifiable.14 
Moreover, an applicant with familial or other connections to a hostile foreign country faces 
a very heavy burden in mitigating security concerns raised by such foreign ties.15 
 
 Applicant’s contacts with his wife’s family in Russia is minimal. His wife’s present 
relationship with her mother and sister appears to be, at best, strained. However, familial 
relationships can be fluid and security adjudications require an assessment about the 
nature of a person’s relationship with his foreign relatives that is far more encompassing 
than a one-time view at any particular point in time. Instead, a careful examination of the 
nature of the familial relationships is required, especially when a close relative resides in 
a country that is considered a U.S. national security threat and has a less than ideal record 
when it comes to respecting the human rights of its citizens.  
 
Here, Applicant’s relationship to his wife’s family in Russia is far deeper and more 
complex than the presently strained situation would tend to indicate. Of note, Applicant 
and his wife paid for his sister-in-law’s education and, until relatively recently, Applicant’s 
wife and her mother were in frequent contact. After considering and weighing the 
evidence, I find that Applicant did not rebut the legal presumption of close familial bonds 
or ties to his mother-in-law and sister-in-law. This relationship leaves him vulnerable to 
foreign influence.16 AG ¶¶ 7(b) and 7(e) apply.  
 
 Once security concerns are raised, either through an applicant’s admissions or 
through evidence provided by the Government, it is the applicant’s responsibility to 
present evidence in mitigation.17 In this case, as noted above, Applicant bears a very 
heavy burden of proof and persuasion in mitigating security concerns and establishing 
his eligibility for continued access to classified information. Applicant’s strong and 
longstanding ties to the United States, including his work as a cleared federal contractor, 
raises favorable inferences regarding his suitability. Additionally, there is no evidence that 
                                                          
13 ISCR Case No. 07-13739 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 12, 2008). 
 
14 ISCR Case No. 11-12202 at 5 (App. Bd. June 23, 2014). 
 
15 ISCR Case No. 12-05092 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 22, 2017). 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 12-01295 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 20, 2015) (“In-laws represent a class of persons who are 
contemplated by the Directive as presenting a potential security risk. As a matter of common sense and 
human experience, there is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, 
the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.”) 
 
17 ISCR Case No. 14-00715 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 10, 2014). 
 
7 
Russia or other foreign power has tried to use Applicant’s family in Russia as a means to 
influence him. However, this favorable evidence is not sufficient to fully mitigate security 
concerns raised by Applicant’s familial connections to Russia, a hostile foreign power.18  
 
In rare cases, an administrative judge may grant initial or continued eligibility for a 
security clearance, despite the presence of an issue(s) that can be partially but not 
completely mitigated, with the provision that additional security measures shall be 
required to mitigate the issue(s). See SEAD 4, Appendix C (emphasis added).19 
Applicant’s unique qualifications, work as a federal contractor, honesty in self-reporting 
his foreign connections, and the candor he exhibited at hearing all favor granting a 
conditional clearance in this case. In exercising this discretionary authority, I have 
carefully considered and weighed the foreign influence security concern, as well as the 
facts and circumstances giving rise to said concern. After doing so, I find that the grant of 
a conditional clearance is consistent with the national security interests of the United 
States and will appropriately address any remaining issues. Specifically, Applicant’s 
continued eligibility for a security clearance is conditioned on the following: 
 
(1) Applicant will report to his facility security officer (FSO) his and his wife’s 
contacts with foreign family members, foreign nationals, and / or foreign 
entities within 48 hours of the contact or becoming aware of the contact; 
 
(2) Applicant will submit to and cooperate with any additional screening and 
monitoring requested by his employer or the U.S. Government, 
including, but not limited to, counterintelligence polygraph interviews 
and access to his social media account(s); and  
 
(3) Applicant will provide his FSO a copy of this decision, so his FSO can 
be aware of the above conditions.20 
 
  
                                                          
18 In reaching this conclusion, I also considered the whole-person concept. See generally AG ¶ 2. Although 
the favorable whole-person matters raised by the evidence were insufficient to fully mitigate the foreign 
influence security concern, they and the other favorable record evidence weigh in favor of granting a 
conditional clearance.  
 
19 See also Memorandum, Director for Defense Intelligence (Intelligence and Security), dated January 12, 
2018 (“Appendix C identifies authorized exceptions that are to be utilized when making adjudicative 
decisions to grant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information or to hold a sensitive 
position . . . Effective immediately, authority to grant clearance eligibility with one of the exceptions 
enumerated in Appendix C is granted to any adjudicative, hearing, or appeal official or entity now authorized 
to grant clearance eligibility when they have jurisdiction to render the eligibility determination.”)  
 
20 Although I do not have the authority to compel a third party, such as Applicant’s employer, to monitor 
Applicant’s compliance with the conditions set forth herein, an FSO has an independent obligation to report 
to the Government any information raising a security concern that comes to his or her attention.  
 
8 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):      FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:       For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence, it is clearly consistent with the interests of national 
security to grant Applicant initial or continued eligibility for access to classified information 
subject to the additional conditions and safeguards set forth herein.  
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
