 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 17-02368 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
                      For Government: Michelle Tillford, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
_____________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On July 14, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In a response signed on July 21, 
2017, he addressed the allegations and admitted four of the five allegations raised. 
Applicant also requested a determination based on the written record. On December 22, 
2017, the Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) with eight attachments 
(“Items”). The case was assigned to me on May 23, 2018. Based on my review of the 
record as a whole, I find Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old general manager who has worked for the same 
employer since 2008. He also has a part-time position as a furniture installation consultant 
within his company’s facility. Applicant served in the United States military on active duty 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the DOD on or after June 8, 2017.  
 
 
 
 
2 
from 1989 until receiving a honorable discharge in 1998. He has earned a high school 
diploma and taken some coursework at a community college. Applicant divorced in 
October 2005. He has three adult children and one preteen child.  There is no indication 
he has received financial counseling. 
 
As based on materials contained in the FORM, the SOR sets forth five allegations 
pertaining to finance-related issues: 
 
1.a – Admitted. Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in about 
December 2011. This bankruptcy was discharged in April 2012. Applicant wrote that he 
filed for bankruptcy as a result of his divorce and accumulated marital debt. At the time, 
he was barely earning sufficient income to cover his living expenses. (SOR Response) 
 
1.b – Admitted. Applicant is indebted to the federal government for a tax lien 
entered against him in about May 2015 for approximately $42,286. Applicant asserted 
that he is currently working with a firm to help him address this debt. He noted that he has 
paid them half of the money owed for its services and that the firm is working diligently on 
the matter. (SOR Response) He provided no documentary evidence, however, reflecting 
this arrangement. 
 
1.c – Admitted. Applicant failed to file state income tax returns for tax years (TY) 
2012, 2014, and 2015. By way of explanation, Applicant admitted that he did not handle 
his personal finances well in the past. He did not provide documentary evidence reflecting 
that those tax returns have been filed, or showing any arrangements with the state have 
been initiated. (SOR Response) 
 
1.d – Admitted. Applicant is indebted to that same state for delinquent taxes in the 
approximate amount of $7,000. He wrote that he is now making automatic payments to 
the state to address the issue, but he did not provide corroborative documentary evidence 
reflecting that arrangement or payments made. (SOR Response) 
 
1.e – Denied. Applicant was shown to be indebted to a second state for a tax lien 
entered against him in 2009 for approximately $3,843. Applicant denied this allegation, 
writing that he has not lived in this state since 1990-1994, when he was assigned to 
military housing. He noted, however, that his ex-wife moved to this state after their 2005 
divorce. Applicant further wrote that he has never been notified by this state regarding 
any debt owed. Applicant stressed that he “will work towards making contact with [this 
state and] hopefully get the details so this can be removed.” (SOR Response) No 
documentary evidence was introduced reflecting efforts to address this matter. 
 
Applicant stressed that he is a loyal American and former member of the U.S. 
armed services. He is committed to handling his financial situation properly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s adjudicative goal is 
a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. This process is a conscientious scrutiny of 
a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge 
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be 
resolved in favor of national security. In reaching this decision, I have only drawn 
conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence provided.  
 
Under the Directive, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting 
witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the ultimate burden of persuasion to 
obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours. Decisions include consideration of the possible risk the 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions shall be in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination 
as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned. 
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this guideline 
is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified or sensitive information.  
 
Here, Applicant admitted four of the five allegations raised in the SOR. Those 
admitted allegations include his 2011 Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition, a currently pending 
federal tax lien for over $42,000, a state income tax debt due of about $7,000, and his 
failure to timely file state tax returns for three tax years. Applicant denied without offering 
any corroborative documentary evidence, however, a state tax lien for approximately 
 
 
 
 
4 
$3,842 from 2009. These facts are sufficient to invoke financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(b): unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the inability to do 
so;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(f): failure to file or fraudulently filing annual Federal, state, or local 
income tax returns or failure to pay annual Federal, state, or local income 
tax as required. 
 
Five conditions could mitigate the finance related security concerns posed:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
While the debts at issue may have been acquired in the past, there is no 
documentary evidence reflecting attempts to address the debts or complete the unfiled 
tax returns at issue. This vexes assessment of Applicant’s present reliability and 
judgment. Moreover, issues regarding these finance-related concerns remain current. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
The only bases provided by Applicant for explaining the origin of the delinquent 
debts at issue are his October 2005 divorce and related marital debt. That divorce is also 
cited as the reason for his December 2011 filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy. Due to the 
scant information provided by Applicant, however, it is unclear as to what, if any, 
responsible action Applicant took to address those marital debts in the intervening six 
years. Such factors obviate application of AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
There is no evidence reflecting that Applicant has received financial counseling. 
The limited offering from Applicant fails to document that his financial problems have been 
brought under control or are being resolved. Similarly, his documentation does not 
demonstrate a good-faith effort to resolve his financial issues or provide a reasonable 
basis to dispute the financial issues raised. Indeed, even with regard to the state tax lien 
for which Applicant denies responsibility because he has not lived in that state since the 
1990s, he failed to offer any documentation showing efforts made to validate, disprove, 
or dispute the sum at issue. Taken together, there is insufficient documentation to raise 
any of the remaining mitigating conditions under this guideline. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed in the AG. Under AG ¶ 2(a), the need to utilize a “whole-
person” evaluation is set forth. I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated 
my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis.  
 
Applicant is a 46-year-old general manager and furniture installation consultant. 
Divorced in October 2005, he is the father of three adult children and one preteen child. 
He served on active duty in the U.S. military for many years, and has attended some post-
secondary courses.  
 
The finance-related issues set forth in the SOR reflect a certain degree of fiscal 
laxity on the part of Applicant. This is apparently the result of either simple neglect or a 
lack of knowledge as to his financial and tax responsibilities. While he credited his 
December 2011 bankruptcy petition to his 2005 divorce, he failed to explain how he 
juggled the delinquent debts at issue during the intervening six years.  
 
Also lacking is documentation corroborating Applicant’s statements regarding 
corrective action he has taken to address his late state tax returns, two tax-related liens 
amounting to about $46,000, and an outstanding state income tax liability of $7,000. This 
process depends on documentation to substantiate statements of action. This is 
especially true in cases where an applicant requests a determination based on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. Given Applicant’s deficient documentary offering, financial 
considerations security concerns remain unmitigated.    
 
 
 
 
 
6 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1e:   Against Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
