 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
-------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 17-00699 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
June 12, 2018 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge: 
 
On March 30, 2015, Applicant submitted his most recent Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). (Item 3.) On April 10, 2017, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DoD CAF) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant submitted his Answer to the SOR (Answer) with attachments (Applicant 
Exhibits A through H) on May 3, 2017, and requested his case be decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.) On May 24, 2017, Department Counsel submitted 
the Department=s written case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
consisting of Items 1 to 5, was provided to Applicant, who received the file on May 26, 
2017.  
 
 Applicant was given 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and 
submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted two packets of 
additional information in a timely fashion. Department Counsel had no objection to my 
considering the additional information, and the packets are admitted into evidence as 
Additional Exhibits 1 and 2. The case was assigned to me on October 1, 2017. Based 
upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
The SOR in this case was issued under the adjudicative guidelines that came 
into effect within the DoD on September 1, 2006. Security Executive Agent Directive 
(SEAD) 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), implements 
new adjudicative guidelines, effective June 8, 2017. All national security eligibility 
decisions1 issued on or after June 8, 2017, are to be decided using the new National 
Security Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified 
Information or Eligibility to Hold a Sensitive Position (AG), as implemented in Appendix 
A of SEAD 4. I considered the previous adjudicative guidelines, as well as the new AG, 
in adjudicating Applicant’s national security eligibility. My decision would be the same 
under either set of guidelines, although this decision is issued pursuant to the new AG 
promulgated in SEAD 4. 
 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 37 and single. His niece became his dependent starting in 2011. His 
mother was Applicant’s dependent for the year 2014. (Answer at 1; Applicant Exhibit A.) 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
 The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for 
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore potentially unreliable, 
untrustworthy, or at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 Applicant denied in his Answer all the allegations in the SOR, with explanations. 
He specifically denied the existence of the debt set forth in subparagraph 1.d, stating, 
“There are no collections on my credit report.” (Applicant Exhibit H.) As to the other 
three allegations, he argued in his Answer that the debts were old and uncollectible 
under his state’s statute of limitations. He also submitted additional information to 
support his request for national security eligibility. 
 
                                            
1 SEAD 4 ¶ D.7 defines “National Security Eligibility” as, “Eligibility for access to classified information or 
eligibility to hold a sensitive position, to include access to sensitive compartmented information, restricted 
data, and controlled or special access program information.” 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 The total amount of money Applicant allegedly owes on all SOR-listed debts is 
approximately $27,226. The existence and amount of the debts is supported by 
statements in Applicant’s e-QIP; and by credit reports dated January 15, 2015; and 
January 20, 2017. (Item 3 at Section 26, and Items 4 and 5.)  
 
 The status of the debts, based on record evidence including Applicant’s 
admissions, evidence, and explanations, is as follows: 
 
 1.a. Applicant denied owing a creditor $18,066 for a charged-off account. This 
debt appears in the most current complete credit report in the record, Item 4. In 
Applicant Exhibit 2, dated July 10, 2017, at page 2, Applicant states, “[This] bank 
account is currently under investigation to verify if this debt is valid. I should have an 
answer within 30 days.” In addition, the excerpts from a credit report in Applicant Exhibit 
E shows the existence of this debt.  No further information was provided. This debt is 
not resolved.  
 
 1.b. Applicant denied owing a creditor $6,141 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant submitted documentation showing that this debt was paid in full on or about 
June 2017. This debt is resolved. (Applicant Exhibit 2 at 5.) 
 
 1.c. Applicant admitted owing a creditor $2,910 for a charged-off account. 
Applicant submitted documentation showing that he had fulfilled a payment 
arrangement he made with the creditor. This debt is resolved. (Applicant Exhibit A at 1-
2, 16.) 
 
 1.d. Applicant denied owing a creditor $109 for a charged-off account. He further 
stated that there was no collection from that company on his credit report. Applicant 
Exhibit H confirms that statement. This debt does not appear on the Government’s most 
recent credit report, Item 4. Based on the available information, I find that the 
Government has not proven the existence of this debt as of the time the SOR was 
issued. This allegation is found for Applicant.  
 
 Applicant worked in real estate sales from 1997 to 2012. The financial crisis of 
2008 had a serious impact on his financial stability. His state was particularly hard hit. 
After several years of increasing financial strain, Applicant decided to go into a different 
career field in 2012. While progressing in his new field as a computer network engineer, 
Applicant continued to have financial difficulties resolving issues from his time in real 
estate. Finally, in 2015, he was able to resolve the all the remaining issues from his real 
estate career and become financially secure again. He submitted documentation 
showing that his current financial situation is stable. He has successfully established 
new credit lines, and is able to maintain payments on his monthly indebtedness. 
(Applicant Exhibits B and D; Additional Exhibit 1.)  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for national security eligibility. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that, AAny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on the evidence 
contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, “The 
applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information.  
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of EO 10865, “Any determination under this 
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations) 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personal security concern such as excessive gambling, mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had several past-due debts, which he had not resolved. Both of these 
conditions apply, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to mitigate the resulting 
security concerns. 
 
 The guideline includes three conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate the 
security concerns arising from Applicant’s alleged financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce, or 
separation, clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity 
theft), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s debt problems have been in existence for many years. However, 
there is evidence that they were the result of the financial crisis that hit Applicant’s state 
particularly hard. In addition, Applicant was in real estate, and therefore more 
susceptible to the problems of that time. 
 
 Applicant has been diligently working to resolve his debts for several years and 
improve his financial standing. This included Applicant going through the rigors of 
changing his entire career from real estate to computers. He submitted evidence 
showing that the debts in SOR 1.b, and 1.c, have been paid. Applicant presented 
sufficient evidence that the debt in SOR 1.d is in dispute. Those three allegations are 
found for Applicant. In addition, he submitted evidence that his current financial status is 
stable. 
 
 There is some question as to the current status of the debt in SOR 1.a. However, 
Applicant has shown by his exhibits that he is a diligent person who has worked hard to 
stabilize his financial affairs. Under the particular circumstances of this case that 
allegation is also found for Applicant.  
 
 The DOHA Appeal Board has said, “An applicant is not required to show that [he] 
has completely paid off [his] indebtedness, only that [he] has established a reasonable 
plan to resolve [his] debts and has taken significant actions to implement that plan.”2 It is 
Applicant’s burden to show with sufficient evidence that he has mitigated the security 
concerns of his financial situation. He has done so, for the reasons set forth in this 
decision. Paragraph 1 is found for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(d): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
                                            
2 ISCR Case No. 06-12930 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2008) (quoting ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 6, 2006.)) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant national security 
eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based 
upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant had financial issues in the 
past. His current conduct shows that he is now financially stable. Overall, the record 
evidence as described above leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant=s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for Financial 
Considerations. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
            Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:   For Applicant 
     
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant national security eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
                                                 
WILFORD H. ROSS 
Administrative Judge 
