 
1 
 
                                                              
                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )   ISCR Case No. 17-01510 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll Connelly, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jacob Ranish, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E. Applicant 
failed to introduce documentation to mitigate the doubt cast on her judgment by her 
falsifications. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 16, 2017, in accordance with DoD Directive 5220.6, as amended 
(Directive), the Department of Defense issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
alleging facts that raise security concerns under Guideline E. The SOR further informed 
Applicant that, based on information available to the government, DoD adjudicators 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security clearance. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 20, 2017, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. (Answer.) The case was assigned to me on March 15, 2018. 
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
April 11, 2018, scheduling the hearing for May 8, 2018. The hearing was convened as 
 
2 
 
scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 into the record. Applicant 
testified on her own behalf, and presented 12 documents, which I marked and admitted 
as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through L. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on May 16, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. She provided 
additional information with the denials. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 31-year-old software engineer of a defense contractor. (Tr. 13) She 
obtained her undergraduate degree in May 2008. (AE D)  Applicant obtained her 
graduate degree in December 2015. (AE E) She has been with her employer since July 
2008. She is single and has no children. Applicant has never held a security clearance 
(SCA). (GE 1) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant used the prescription medication Adderall 
without a prescription on various occasions in May 2011; that she falsified her March 
2016 SCA by answering “No” to Section 23 – Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity 
Misuse of Prescription Drugs in the last seven (7) years; and that she falsified material 
facts during a personal subject interview, on August 16, 2016, with an authorized 
investigator with the Department of Defense, when she denied that she used Adderall 
on various occasions in May 2011.  
 
 Applicant attended a party in May 2011. She had recently been involved in a 
relationship which ended, and she was stressed and anxious. (Tr. 16) She reported that 
she shared this information at the party and an acquaintance gave her a small number 
of pills. He told her that it would help her anxiety and her concentration. (Tr. 19) She 
believed the pills to be Adderall.  She stated that he told her they were Adderall. (Tr. 39) 
According to her, the pills were not helpful. She still felt scattered and unfocused. The 
pills were given to her and there was no exchange of money. At the hearing, Applicant 
stated that the person said the pills were Adderall and she believed him. (Tr. 21) 
 
 In 2012, during a NSA interview, Applicant admitted that she used Adderall, 
which was given to her by “friends” in May 2011 about five times. She added that this 
was a self-diagnosis of ADHD because she had trouble focusing. She admitted to trying 
marijuana once in 2004 while in college, but did not like it and has not used it since. 
During the 2012 interview, she stated that she has not used either drug since and has 
no intention to use them in the future. The substances were given to her by friends. She 
has never purchased or sold any illegal substances. Applicant elaborated that she used 
an over-the-counter medication, Benadryl, for the treatment of vertigo. (GE 3) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant stated that in later years, when she had allergies, she 
used Claritin which are small white pills. It is unclear why, but she googled Adderall and 
saw that the pills were bigger and pink and that was not what she recalls taking in 2011. 
She then decided that it was a placebo and not Adderall.  (Tr. 22) She in fact stated that 
 
3 
 
it was many years later that she made a connection and thought that the pills were a 
placebo. (Tr. 24) She no longer has any contact with the person who gave her the pills 
in 2011. (Tr.44) 
 
 When Applicant completed her March 2016 SCA, she answered “no” to Section 
23 and failed to disclose that she used Adderall as alleged in SOR 1.a. In her August 
2016 OPM interview, she confirmed her negative responses under the illegal drug 
section of the SCA as alleged in SOR 1.b. When she was confronted with the one-time 
use of marijuana and use of Adderall in 2011 about five times due to a self-diagnosis 
that she had ADHD, she disputed ever using Adderall five times in May 2011, and does 
not have any knowledge and/or recollection in regards to the aforementioned. She was 
unable to provide any other pertinent information regarding an alleged use of Adderall. 
She admitted that she experimented with marijuana one time. (GE 2) 
 
 Applicant claimed when she completed her SCA in 2016, that her focus was on 
her foreign travel and foreign contacts. She stated that she was so worried about getting 
travel dates correct that “when the drug thing came up” she was flummoxed by it. She 
testified that she did not want to omit the information about the 2011 incident. At one 
point Applicant stated that she did not read the drug section on the interrogatories 
carefully. (Tr. 33) She further explained that in the interview, she was caught off guard 
and, instead of doing what she realizes what she should have done – take a deep 
breath and explain the situation – she became nervous that the investigator would not 
believe her answer and simply offered a general denial of past misuse of Adderall. 
(Answer to SOR) Her rational was that she reported the use of Adderall in 2012 to the 
NSA interviewer- so she was not attempting to hide anything.  
 
 When questioned by Counsel, why her friend would give her a “placebo”, 
Applicant stated that he did not look like the kind of person who went to the doctor for 
drugs for himself. (Tr. 45) When questioned about the OPM interview in 2016, and her 
flat denial of any use of Adderall, she stated that she was perplexed. (Tr. 47) She 
admits that she should have said “yes” to the question about Adderall. She was given a 
copy of the NSA 2012 interview, but she stated that nothing was triggered in her 
memory. (Tr. 48) However, the 2012 report clearly reflects that she admitted to using 
Adderall in 2011. (GE 3)  She was shown a copy of the 2012 report. After viewing her 
demeanor, I do not find her testimony credible. She would not answer a question 
directly, but would rather elaborate on another point. 
 
 Applicant submitted a 2017 performance evaluation, which reflected that she 
consistently met expectations. (AE A) She received a merit increase for her work. (AE 
B) as well as a quarterly bonus. (AE C) Applicant submitted a Domestic Abuse 
Certificate for completing a course. (AE H) She is very active as a volunteer in the 
community. Applicant also assisted students in a technology institute in 2008. (AE G) 
 
 Applicant submitted letters of reference. Each attests to her character, patriotism, 
and trustworthiness. She is careful, conscientious and attentive with company 
information. She takes her work seriously. (AE I) 
  
 
4 
 
       Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for national security eligibility, the 
administrative judge must consider the pertinent AG. In addition to brief introductory 
explanations of the security concern, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s 
national security eligibility. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. The entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in the context of a number 
of variables known as the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must 
consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable 
and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I 
have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the 
evidence contained in the record. I have not drawn inferences based on mere 
speculation or conjecture.  
 
 Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
 A person applying for national security eligibility seeks to enter into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants national security eligibility. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified or 
sensitive information.  
 
 Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “[a]ny 
determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms 
of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information.) 
 
 
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. The following will normally result 
in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, security 
clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national security 
eligibility: 
 
(a) refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or 
cooperate with security processing, including but not limited to 
meeting with a security investigator for subject interview, 
completing security forms or releases, cooperation with medical or 
psychological evaluation, or polygraph examination, if authorized 
and required; and 
 
(b) refusal to provide full, frank, and truthful answers to lawful 
questions of investigators, security officials, or other official 
representatives in connection with a personnel security or 
trustworthiness determination. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 16.Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine national security 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and, 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information; or concealing or 
omitting information, concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical or mental health 
professional involved in making a recommendation relevant to a national 
security eligibility determination, or other official government 
representative. 
 
  The evidence is sufficient to raise these disqualifying conditions.  
 
 
6 
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered 
all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 including: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by advice of legal counsel or of a 
person with professional responsibilities for advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security processes. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that contributed to untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activities was unwitting, 
has ceased, or occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to 
comply with rules and regulations. 
 
Applicant used the prescription medication Adderall without a prescription when 
they were offered to her in May 2011 by a friend at a party. She admitted in 2012 that 
she was anxious and upset and agreed to take the pills. No money was exchanged. In 
2012, Applicant admitted using Adderall in a 2012 report. However, she claims years 
later that she decided that the pills were a placebo and not a prescription medication. 
For this reason, she did not list any misuse of a prescription medication in her SCA. 
Also, when speaking to an OPM investigator who confronted her about the Adderall, 
she disputed that she ever used Adderall in May 2011 and had no knowledge about that 
issue. Despite being shown the 2012 report, she denied any Adderall use. She lied to 
cover up a mistake that she made years ago. The story is not credible that years later 
she decided based on research that she had not used Adderall and had nothing to 
report on her SCA. She repeatedly stated at the hearing that her focus was on her 
 
7 
 
foreign travel and not anything else. She falsified information as alleged in the SOR. 
She has not mitigated the security concerns under the personal conduct guideline.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has a good history of working in the defense industry and is respected 
by her peers. She is highly educated and performs well at her job. She is active in the 
community and is well regarded for her work in domestic abuse.  
 
She was going through a difficult time in May 2011. She accepted pills from a 
friend at a party. The pills were Adderall according to the friend and Applicant. She has 
never used any since. Her lapse of judgment in 2011 by taking the pills was due to a 
combination of stress and anxiety. The incident occurred in 2011 and she has not used 
any illegal substances. Based on the passage of time and her maturity, SOR allegation 
1.a is found in her favor. 
 
 However, she disclosed the use of Adderall in detail in 2012 to NSA. But in her 
SCA years later, she answered “No” to Section 23. It was within the time frame. In 
addition, in her OPM interview she lied and stated she had no knowledge of use of 
Adderall when shown the 2012 report. She was not candid and created a story about 
the fact that the pills were really a placebo and so she had nothing to report. In the 
alternative, she claimed that she was just not thinking about it, and did not report the 
truth about the Adderall use in 2011. 
 
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Personal Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1c:  Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
NOREEN A LYNCH 
Administrative Judge 
