 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 17-03321 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, personal 
conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 22, 2017, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on 
June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 7, 2017, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on January 10, 2018. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on March 29, 
2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 18, 2018. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 9. There were no objections to the Government’s exhibits, and 
they were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified and did not offer any exhibits. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript on April 26, 2018.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 62 years old. He immigrated to the United States in 1977 and became 
a naturalized citizen in 1987. He married in 1979 and divorced in 1984. He remarried in 
1995 and divorced in 2013. He has one adult child from the marriage. He earned an 
associate’s degree in 1988. In the past, Applicant has worked for government contractors, 
and held a security clearance. Applicant has a job pending the determination of his 
security clearance eligibility.1 
 
In August 2014, Applicant was terminated from his job with a government 
contractor. Since then he has been self-employed or worked odd jobs. Applicant disputed 
that he did anything wrong to be terminated. He was working at a secure remote military 
site for a government contractor and was accused of making statements about consuming 
and smuggling cocaine. His statements were overheard by two soldiers. They also heard 
detailed information about the procedure Applicant allegedly used to smuggle the drugs 
onto the base. The soldiers reported the information to government officials who 
conducted an investigation. As part of the investigation, an undercover operation was 
conducted where a soldier attempted to purchase drugs from Applicant on three different 
occasions. No transactions took place. Applicant did not report to government officials 
that three times a soldier attempted to purchase drugs from him. He testified that he 
should have made a report.2  
 
Applicant denied he made the statements about using and smuggling drugs to the 
soldiers. He then said his statements were made jokingly. He said there were three 
soldiers who were witnesses to the conversation. Applicant did not provide investigators 
with the names of witnesses who could corroborate his statements that he was joking. 
His explanation for not providing investigators with the names of the people he was joking 
with was that he was never asked. He gave a handwritten statement to the investigators 
that says: “I was bragging and joking, something about white stuff and watching Scarface, 
joking and talking about cocaine and parties.”3 Applicant testified that he does not know 
                                                          
1 Tr. 9, 21-24. 
 
2 Tr. 24-25, 46-50; GE 7, 8. 
 
3 Tr. 38-40; 42-45; GE 7, 8. 
 
 
3 
 
 
what the word “bragging” means. He said he was told by the investigators what to write.4 
Applicant’s testimony was not credible.  
 
Applicant was interviewed as part of his background investigation by a government 
investigator in March 2017. He told the investigator that the allegations made against him 
were out of spite because he was not friendly with one of the people who heard him joking. 
He told the investigator that he could not recall the names of the persons involved. When 
asked by Department Counsel if he understood that joking about cocaine at the secure 
remote military site where he was working might be problematic, he answered “I did not 
know.” He had been working at the site for two and a half years.5  
 
 A letter from Applicant’s former employer from September 2014 states Applicant 
was an employee who worked and lived on an overseas military installation and was 
released for misconduct.6 An entry was made about Applicant in August 2014 in the Joint 
Personnel Adjudication System that reported an investigation was being conducted 
regarding alleged criminal activity, but regardless of the outcome Applicant’s conduct was 
unprofessional and inexcusable and not in accordance with the protection of classified 
information. It noted that Applicant had conversations with personnel about drug use, drug 
smuggling, and other intolerable and incompatible subjects. It was determined that 
Applicant was not suitable for work at the location or to have access to classified 
information.7 Applicant denied he did anything wrong. He testified he is a victim and a 
soldier who hated him because he believed Applicant was involved with his girlfriend was 
responsible for the investigation.8  
 
 Applicant testified he incurred the debts alleged in the SOR after he lost his job in 
2014. He made minimum payments until approximately August 2015. He used credit 
cards to supplement his income. He was unable to pay them and none of the debts 
alleged in the SOR are resolved. He testified if he gets a job, he intends to pay the 
delinquent debts. The debts total approximately $46,614. The debts are supported by 
Applicant’s admissions and credit reports from September 2016 and September 2017.9 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s national security eligibility, the administrative judge 
must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, 
the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
                                                          
4 Tr. 38-39. 
 
5 Tr. 38-40; GE 2, 7, 8. 
 
6 GE 9. 
 
7 GE 6.  
 
8 Tr. 25. 
 
9 TR. 29, 32-34; GE 4, 5.  
 
4 
 
 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for national security 
eligibility will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere 
speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.15 states an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F: Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set out 
in AG & 18:  
 
 
5 
 
 
Failure to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. Financial distress can also be 
caused or exacerbated by, and thus can be a possible indicator of, other 
issues of personnel security concern such as excessive gambling mental 
health conditions, substance misuse, or alcohol abuse or dependence. An 
individual who is financially overextended is at greater risk of having to 
engage in illegal or otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. 
Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a 
security concern insofar as it may result from criminal activity, including 
espionage. 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability to satisfy debts;  
 
 (b) unwillingness to satisfy debts regardless of the ability to do so; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts that he is unable or unwilling to pay since 
2015. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, clear 
victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling for the 
problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit credit 
counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 None of Applicant’s delinquent debts are resolved. Applicant was terminated from 
his job in 2014 for misconduct. After exhausting his savings, he used credit to supplement 
his income. He is unable to pay the delinquent debts. His debts are recent. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. Applicant attributed his financial problems to unemployment. His 
termination was caused by his misconduct, which was not beyond his control. He 
accumulated the debt knowing he did not have a reliable job and used credit to 
supplement his income. This was not beyond his control. None of the debts are being 
resolved. There is no evidence of financial counseling. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), 20(d) do not 
apply.   
  
Guideline E: Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. The following will 
normally result in an unfavorable national security eligibility determination, 
security clearance action, or cancellation of further processing for national 
security eligibility:  
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the individual 
may not properly safeguard classified or sensitive information. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence and conclude that Applicant was terminated 
from employment after an investigation, which determined he was discussing with 
soldiers his drug use and ability to smuggle drugs into a secure military base. Although, 
he claimed he was joking, he failed to provide investigators with the names of witnesses 
who would corroborate his claim. Applicant’s testimony was not credible. The above 
disqualifying condition applies. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable to the 
disqualifying security concerns based on the facts: 
 
 
7 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
Applicant denied any wrongdoing, yet failed to provide to investigators the names 
of witnesses he said could corroborate his version of what happened. His conduct while 
working on a secure military base is serious. A government investigation was conducted. 
Applicant first denied then admitted his statements, but said he was joking. None of the 
mitigating conditions apply.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(d):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation 
and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(d) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 62 years old. He was terminated from his employment because of 
statements he made while serving at a secure military base. His explanations were not 
credible. He used credit to supplement his income knowing he did not have a reliable job. 
He has not paid or made payment arrangements for any of the debts alleged in the SOR. 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
 
8 
 
 
mitigate the Guideline E, personal conduct, and Guideline F, financial considerations, 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.j:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
