1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ADP Case No. 17-02193 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves national security concerns raised under Guidelines F 
(Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for a public trust position 
or access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on September 17, 2015. On August 29, 2017, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
sent him a Statement of Reasons (SOR), citing trustworthiness concerns under 
Guidelines F and E. DOD acted under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated in Security Executive 
Agent Directive 4, National Security Adjudicative Guidelines (December 10, 2016), for 
all adjudicative decisions on or after June 8, 2017. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 20, 2017; and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 
30, 2017, and the case was assigned to me on April 13, 2018. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent Applicant a notice of hearing on April 19, 2018, 
scheduling the hearing for May 16, 2018. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
2 
 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through E, which were 
admitted without objection. I kept the record open to enable him to submit additional 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX F through P, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 5, 2018. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.q 
and denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old aircraft mechanic employed by a defense contractor 
since February 2015.1 He left this job for about a year to resolve a divorce and his child-
support obligations in another state, and he returned to his current job in 2016. (Tr. 19.) 
While he was away, his pay was about half what he earned in 2015 and what he now 
earns. (Tr. 33-34.)  
 
Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from April 2008 to April 2012, 
and he worked for non-government employers from April 2012 to February 2015. He 
married in August 2009 and divorced in September 2015. (GX 4 at 4.). He has a six-
year-old daughter for whom he pays child support. He is currently engaged to a woman 
with four children. Applicant does not have a current security clearance or public trust 
eligibility. He is unsure whether he held a clearance while in the Navy. (Tr. 10.) 
 
 Applicant completed his four-year enlistment in the Navy and received an 
honorable discharge, but he was not allowed to reenlist because he had not been 
promoted above pay grade E-3. (Tr. 39-40.) He had only a week’s notice that he would 
not be allowed to reenlist. He was then unemployed for almost six months. When he 
found work, it was at low-paying temporary jobs. (Tr. 67-69 
 
 When Applicant and his ex-wife first separated, he was paying about $1,200 per 
month in child support for their daughter. That amount was reduced in 2016 to about 
$600 and is automatically deducted from his pay. (Tr. 31; AX H-M.) 
 
 In August 2015, Applicant hired a credit-repair company to update and correct his 
credit reports and negotiate settlements of valid debts reflected in the credit reports. 
(GX 4 at 6.) He terminated his contract with the company when he temporarily left his 
job in 2015. In September 2017, Applicant hired his current credit-repair company to 
assist him. (AX A.) 
 
                                                          
1 The SOR captioned this case as an ADP case rather than an ISCR, even though Applicant’s job does 
not appear to involve ADP duties. The parties were unable to determine whether the case was properly 
captioned. (Tr. 19-21.) However, since the adjudicative guidelines are the same for both ADP and ISCR 
cases, any incorrect captioning of the case did not affect my decision. 
3 
 
 The SOR alleges 17 delinquent debts that are reflected in credit reports from 
October 2015 and June 2017. The evidence concerning these debts is summarized 
below. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.d: a car loan charged off for $5,201 in August 2013; a 
credit-card account charged off for $2,603 in July 2013; and a credit-card account 
charged off for $1,164 in March 2013. The same credit union was the creditor for all 
three debts. A report from Applicant’s credit-repair company reflects that the disputes of 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d were resolved in Applicant’s favor. The dispute 
of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was resolved against him, and the debt is not yet 
resolved.  (AX C.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c: debt to Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) placed for collection 
of $1,820 in November 2014. This debt was incurred when Applicant dropped out of a 
college course, paid for by the VA, without completing it. (GX 6 at 6-7.) He enrolled in 
college while taking care of his domestic issues in another state, and he dropped out to 
return to his current job. (Tr. 44.) The debt was paid in full in January 2017. (AX N.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: unsecured loan placed for collection of $702 in June 2012. This 
debt is unresolved. Applicant testified that this was a payday loan, and he thought it had 
been paid by allotment. He also thought his credit-repair company had disputed it, but it 
is not reflected on the credit-repair documents he submitted at the hearing. (Tr. 45-47.) 
It is unresolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: unpaid college book bill placed for collection of $795 in August 
2014. Applicant was required to repay a book stipend when he dropped out of college. 
Applicant testified that he was scheduled to begin paying $50 per two-week pay period, 
starting with the pay period after the hearing. (Tr. 48-49.) No payments had yet been 
made when the record closed.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, 1.i: utility bills placed for collection of $619 in May 2016, 
$446 in May 2013, and $586 in June 2012. Applicant’s credit-repair company is 
handling the $446 bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h, but none of these debts are resolved. (AX D 
at 3; Tr. 48-53.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j: cable-service bill placed for collection of $453 in June 2012. This 
debt is unresolved. (Tr. 52-53.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k: medical bill placed for collection of $381 in August 2012. This 
debt was successfully disputed by the credit-repair company. (AX E at 1.) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.l, 1.m, and 1.n: medical bills placed for collection of $315 in 
January 2011, placed for collection of $245 in July 2013, and placed for collection 
of $180 in September 2010. These debts are unresolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.o: telecommunications bill placed for collection of $81 in April 
2014. This debt was paid in full in May 2018. (AX O.) 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.p: internet bill placed for collection of $71 in November 2016. This 
debt has been paid in full. (AX P.)  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.q: judgment filed in October 2012 for $531. This debt was incurred 
when Applicant and his wife were evicted from an apartment. (GX 4 at 6.) It was 
satisfied by garnishment of Applicant’s pay. (AX G; AX M.) 
 
 Applicant’s take-home pay is about $1,200 per month. It is reduced by a $300 
garnishment for a debt not alleged in the SOR and by his child-support payments. (Tr. 
34-35.) He, his fiancée, and his fiancée’s four children live together. His fiancée is 
medically unable to work outside the home. She receives about $288 per month in child 
support. (Tr. 35-36.) Applicant intends to return to school in June 2018, and his income 
while in school will increase by about $1,900, due to the stipend he will receive from the 
VA. (Tr. 38.)  
 
 Applicant answered “No” to all the financial questions in Section 26 of his e-QIP. 
However, at the end of the section, he commented, “I have companies I owe money to 
on my credit report due to not having a stable income, but now I can arrange to make 
my payments and clear my report.” (GX 1 at 41.) When he was interviewed by a 
security investigator in October 2015, he told the investigator that he did not list his 
debts because he did not know what they were. (GX 4 at 5.)  
 
At the hearing, Applicant testified that he was aware of his debts when he 
submitted his e-QIP, because he had been working with a credit-repair company. He 
testified that he was being helped by a member of his employer’s security department to 
make sure that his e-QIP was correctly completed, and he was not sure whether he 
overlooked the question or accidentally clicked on the wrong button and accidentally 
answered “No” to the financial questions when he meant to answer “Yes.” (Tr. 65-66.)  
 
Policies 
 
The Under Secretary of Defense’s Memorandum of November 19, 2004, treats 
ADP positions as sensitive positions, and it entitles applicants for ADP positions to the 
procedural protections in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made. The standard set out in the Manual and the adjudicative 
guidelines for assignment to sensitive duties is that the person’s loyalty, reliability, and 
trustworthiness are such that assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly 
consistent with the interests of national security. Manual ¶ 7.1a(2); AG ¶ 2.b.   
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive information.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
5 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. Under AG 
¶ 2(b), “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to [sensitive] 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” The Government must present 
substantial evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14. Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). An applicant has the ultimate burden of 
demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue 
eligibility for access to sensitive information.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified or sensitive information. . . . An individual who is 
financially overextended is at greater risk of having to engage in illegal or 
otherwise questionable acts to generate funds. . . . 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly 
compromise sensitive or classified information to raise money. It encompasses 
concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to 
protecting sensitive or classified information. A person who is financially irresponsible 
may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding 
sensitive or classified information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 
2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing 
establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). The 
relevant mitigating conditions are: 
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, a death, divorce or separation, 
clear victimization by predatory lending practices, or identity theft), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the individual has received or is receiving financial counseling 
for the problem from a legitimate and credible source, such as a non-profit 
credit counseling service, and there are clear indications that the problem 
is being resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated and is adhering to a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Applicant’s inability to reenlist in the Navy, his periods 
of unemployment and underemployment, and his marital break-up were conditions 
largely beyond his control. He has acted responsibly by hiring professional assistance, 
successfully disputing some of his debts, and resolving the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 
1.c, 1.d, 1.k, 1.o, and 1.p. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant’s credit-repair company does not provide 
the type of financial counseling contemplated by this mitigating condition. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.o, and 1.p, which 
have been paid in full. It is not fully established for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, but 
Applicant has not submitted any evidence of payments. It is not established for the 
judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.q, because payment by involuntary garnishment does not 
constitute “good faith,” within the meaning of this mitigating condition. See ISCR Case 
No. 09-05700 (App. Bd. Feb. 24, 2011). Although several of Applicant’s delinquent 
debts are not yet resolved, the adjudicative guidelines do not require that an individual 
make payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, pay the debts alleged in the 
SOR first, or establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need only 
establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement 
the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant has 
7 
 
engaged a credit-repair company that has systematically challenged the debts reflected 
on his credit reports and has just begun the next phase of negotiating settlements on 
debts that are determined to be valid. Applicant has a plan, and he has taken significant 
actions to implement it. He now has a stable job and sufficient income to pay his current 
obligations and implement payment plans for his unresolved debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.k. It is 
not established for the other debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified or sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
cooperate or provide truthful and candid answers during national security 
investigative or adjudicative processes. . . .  
 
 The relevant disqualifying condition under this guideline is AG ¶ 16(a): 
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel 
security questionnaire . . . .” When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this 
case, the Government has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does 
not prove falsification. An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a 
whole to determine an applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR 
Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s experience and level 
of education are relevant to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant 
information on a security clearance application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-
05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
Applicant was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing. He admitted knowing 
that he had numerous delinquent debts when he submitted his e-QIP and was not sure 
why all the questions were answered in the negative. However, he included a comment 
at the end of Section 26 disclosing that he had numerous delinquent debts and was 
working to resolve them. His disclosure negates intentional falsification of his e-QIP. AG 
¶ 16(a) is not established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
public trust position or access to classified information must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept. In applying the whole-person concept, an administrative judge 
must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position or a security clearance 
by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances and 
8 
 
applying the adjudicative factors in AG ¶ 2(d).2 I have incorporated my comments under 
Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis, and I have considered the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(d).  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has refuted the allegation that he falsified his SCA and mitigated the national 
security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude he has carried 
his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with national security to grant him 
eligibility for a public trust position or access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.q:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position or access to classified information. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive or classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
 
                                                          
2 The factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
