1 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive), and adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of Defense
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 07-01097
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
On February 5, 1998, Applicant, an Army staff sergeant, was sentenced to be
discharged with a Bad Conduct Discharge. He was convicted of several charges based on
him having sexual relations with two female recruits under his command. Applicant’s overall
conduct and reputation, both before and after those offenses, is exemplary. Clearance is
granted.
On December 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges a single security concern under Guideline E (personal conduct). On
January 13, 2011, Applicant submitted a response to the SOR in which he denied the SOR
allegation and requested a hearing.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
The case was assigned to me on February 22, 2011. A notice of hearing was issued
on April 5, 2011, scheduling the hearing for April 26, 2011. The hearing was conducted as
scheduled. The government submitted six documentary exhibits that were marked as
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-6 and admitted into the record without objection. Applicant
testified, called three character witnesses, and submitted one documentary exhibit
containing 24 tabs, that was marked as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) 1. Department Counsel’s
objection to the admission of the psychological evaluation contained in AE 1, tab B, was
overruled except to the opinion contained in that evaluation concerning Applicant’s
qualification to hold a security clearance. The transcript was received on May 4, 2011.   
Findings of Fact
After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the following
findings of fact:
Applicant is a 46-year-old man who has been employed by a succession of defense
contractors to train soldiers at an Army Reserve Center since June 1998. He served on
active duty in the Army from September 1983, until he was sentenced to be discharged
with a Bad Conduct Discharge in February 1998, and placed on appellate leave. Applicant
was awarded a bachelor of arts degree in business administration in December 2003.
Applicant possessed a security clearance from about 1983 until issuance of the SOR in this
case. No prior action was ever instituted to revoke or downgrade Applicant’s clearance for
adverse reasons, and there has been no allegation ever made that he compromised or
risked the compromise of classified information.
Applicant was first married in November 1986. That marriage ended in divorce in
June 1994. He remarried in May 1997, and that marriage ended in divorce in June 2001.
He has been married a third time since March 2005. Applicant has three adult children and
one infant child. 
Applicant’s military career from 1983 until 1998 included assignments with airborne
units, chemical companies, an infantry battalion, and as an instructor at several schools.
His personal awards include three Army Commendation Medals, two Army Achievement
Medals, four Good Conduct Medals, a Parachutist Badge, a Belgian Armed Forces
Parachutist Badge, and the Kuwait Liberation Medal. The many certificates of achievement
and course completion he submitted indicate Applicant was an excellent soldier until he
committed the offenses that resulted in his court-martial. He was a staff sergeant at the
time of the court-martial. The only prior blemish in his record was nonjudicial punishment
he received in June 1985, for missing a formation, for which he was awarded a suspended
reduction in rank.  
On February 5, 1998, Applicant was convicted by members at a special court-martial
of two specifications of adultery, one specification of sodomy, three specifications of
violating a lawful general order, and one specification of making a false official statement.
All of these charges, except the charge of violating a lawful general order, arose from
Applicant’s engaging in consensual sexual relations with two female recruits under his
command when he was assigned as their drill instructor. The violation of a lawful general
order arose from a lewd statement Applicant made to a third recruit under his command.
3
The only sentence imposed by the court-martial was to award Applicant a Bad
Conduct Discharge. The sentence was approved by the Convening Authority on July 7,
1998, but was not executed pending appellate review. The Army Court of Criminal Appeals
affirmed the findings and sentence on March 29, 2001. The United States Court of Appeals
for the Armed Forces affirmed the decision of the Army Court of Criminal Appeals on July
23, 2002, and its mandate was issued on August 22, 2002. The Army ordered the Bad
Conduct Discharge executed on September 25, 2003. However, and inexplicably, Applicant
was not actually issued the Bad Conduct Discharge until July 28, 2010. Applicant was
issued a Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty (DD 214) on July 28, 2010,
which records his date of entry on active duty as September 30, 1983, his separation date
as July 28, 2010, and his net active service as 26 years, 9 months, and 29 days. 
Applicant submitted letters of recommendation providing the following information,
opinions, and recommendations:
- AE 1, tab G: An Army lieutenant colonel (promotable) who has known
Applicant since 1998, and observed his work performance almost daily since
2004, considers him to be an exemplary person of the highest caliber. She
opines that Applicant is trustworthy, mature, and possesses excellent
judgment. She wrote that he is “smart, articulate, and well-grounded.” She
strongly recommends that Applicant be granted a security clearance.        
- AE 1, tab H: An individual who worked with Applicant as a Battle Simulation
Instructor from 1998 to 2002, and who has maintained a friendship with him
since, considers Applicant to be professional and inspirational Christian who
provides motivation and encouragement to others.
- AE 1, tab I: An Army major who has known Applicant for 11 years considers
Applicant a trustworthy person who can be counted on to do what is right. He
wrote that Applicant “is known as the Subject Matter Expert (SME) on the
Army Battle Command Systems (ABCS)”, and that Applicant’s opinion is
always sought on how to use, train, or employ the ABCS.
- AE 1, tab J: An individual who has known Applicant since 2004, wrote that
Applicant “always did what was right and there was never a case of
indiscretion, moral turpitude or lack of trustworthiness.” He personally trusts
Applicant’s “judgment, honesty, and integrity emphatically.”
- AE 1, tab K: A police officer who has known Applicant for 24 years opines
that Applicant is trustworthy, honest, and loyal. He recommends that
Applicant be granted a security clearance.
- AE 1, tab L: A retired Army lieutenant colonel who has known Applicant for
11 years, and who has had almost daily contact with him in the workplace,
has found Applicant to be an excellent, hardworking, and dependable worker.
He opines that Applicant is honest and trustworthy, and he highly
recommends that Applicant be granted a security clearance.
4
- AE 1, tab M: The Deputy Brigade Commander from 1999-2003 for the
command where Applicant works had frequent contact with him during that
time period and has maintained contact with him since. He found Applicant
to be the type of employee who embraced “the Army core values of loyalty,
duty, respect, selfless service, honor, integrity, and personal courage.” He
vouches that Applicant “earned the highest respect and admiration from the
commanding general and other senior principals throughout the organization
and units supported throughout the command’s area of responsibility.”  
The individuals who authored the letters of recommendation identified as AE 1, tabs I, L,
and M, also testified at the hearing that they were aware of the reason why Applicant was
court-martialed and discharged from the Army. 
Applicant submitted performance appraisals from his employer that establish he
routinely meets or exceeds all job requirements. The certificates of training he submitted
demonstrate that Applicant continuously seeks to improve himself and enhance his value
to his employer. 
In 2003, Applicant helped establish the church of which he is a member. He was
elected to serve in a leadership position as a Ruling Elder of the church in 2009. Applicant’s
wife submitted a letter in which she wrote about his work with the church that has included
volunteering as the church administrator, developing computer graphics and sound for
worship services, setting up ministry teams, and teaching Sunday school and small group
classes.  
Applicant provided Affidavits on November 9, 2007, and June 9, 2010, to
investigators from the Office of Personnel Management in which he denied committing the
offenses of which he was convicted at the court-martial. He testified he did not want to
provide a statement to those investigators because it was his understanding the appellate
proceedings of his court-martial were still pending. However, he was told by the investigator
that he had to provide a statement as part of the process for him to obtain a security
clearance. He admitted providing the false statements at the hearing and admitted,
somewhat begrudgingly, that he committed the offenses for which he was convicted.
Applicant testified that he obtained counseling from an Army chaplain before and
after his court-martial and from a civilian counselor in about 2007. He obtained a
psychological evaluation for presentation at the hearing that included a range of
psychological testing. Overall, the testing revealed that Applicant is a normally adjusted and
healthy individual devoid of any at-risk sexual behaviors. His self-reported history, clinical
presentation, and test results did not suggest any form of mental illness. He was found to
be psychologically healthy and stable. There was no Axis I or Axis II diagnosis.    
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Clearance decisions
must be fair and impartial decisions that are based upon relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6
2 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at 2.
3 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 
4 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
5 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at 3 (citations omitted).
6 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at 2.
7 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.
8 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.
9 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.
10 Id. at 531.
11 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.
5
of the Directive. While the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or
against clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be
followed whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Guideline E
(personal conduct), with its disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this
case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.2 The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.3 The burden of
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,4
although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.5 “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the
evidence.”6 Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.7 Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable
clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance9 and “the clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”10  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to
classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.11     
Analysis
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest
6
is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process
or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. (AG 15)
In February 1998, Applicant was convicted by members at a special court-martial
of various offenses and sentenced to be discharged with a Bad Conduct Discharge. His
offenses consisted of engaging in consensual sexual conduct with two female recruits
under his command, and making lewd remarks to a third female recruit. His convictions and
sentence were affirmed by the Army Court of Criminal Appeals in 2001, and the United
States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces in 2002. Appellant was finally issued the Bad
Conduct Discharge in July 2010. Applicant’s offenses, committed while he was serving as
a drill instructor, were a serious violation of the trust that was placed in him by the Army.
Applicant’s criminal conduct, at the time it was committed, warranted application of
Disqualifying Condition (DC) 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment or information about
one’s conduct, that creates vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as
(1) engaging in activities which, if known may affect the person’s personal, professional,
or community standing. . . . However, his conviction at a court-martial of those offenses,
and his disclosure of the underlying conduct to at least some of his coworkers negates its
present applicability.
Applicant’s 1998 criminal conduct, combined with the false statements he provided
in 2007 and 2010, warrants application of DC 16(d): credible adverse information that is not
explicitly covered under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available information supports
a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack
of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics
indicating that the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of: (2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior
in the workplace.  
Applicant has worked at the same Army Reserve Center for a succession of defense
contractors since June 1998. He has earned a reputation for being a hardworking employee
and a subject matter expert. People who know him well and have worked with him for many
years, including senior Army officers, vouch for his honesty, reliability, trustworthiness, and
overall integrity. Many of them specifically recommend that Applicant be granted a security
clearance.
Applicant had a very successful Army career before he committed the offenses that
resulted in the court-martial. His only prior offense was a relatively minor charge for missing
a formation that was adjudicated at a nonjudicial punishment at which he was awarded a
suspended reduction in rank. The awards he received and the certificates he submitted
establish that he was a professional and dedicated soldier.
Applicant sought counseling from an Army chaplain at the time of his court-martial
and from a civilian therapist a number of years later. He obtained a psychological
evaluation for submission at the hearing that indicates he is a mentally healthy and stable
person who is devoid of any mental disease of defect. Applicant has been happily married
7
since 2005, and he and his wife have an infant child. Applicant is active in his church where
he was elected to a leadership position in 2009.  
The following mitigating conditions apply: MC 17(c): . . . so much time has passed,
or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment; MC 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained
counseling to change the behavior or taken positive steps to alleviate the stressors,
circumstances, or factors that caused the untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and MC 17(e): the individual has taken
positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
The false information Applicant provided in the affidavits he submitted in 2007 and
2010 is of concern. However, it is understandable how he would not want to admit he
committed criminal conduct while he reasonably believed the appellate process was
continuing from his court-martial. Having most certainly been instructed by his military
attorney to not discuss the case with anyone, Applicant found himself placed between the
proverbial “rock and a hard-place” when he was told he had to provide a statement that,
if he admitted he committed the criminal conduct, could be used against him in a retrial if
one were ordered. On balance, and considering these unique circumstance and the whole-
person concept, Applicant’s falsifications are not sufficient to negate the effect of the
mitigating conditions that exist.  
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole-person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant mitigated the personal
conduct security concern. He has overcome the case against him and satisfied his ultimate
burden of persuasion. It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a
security clearance. Guideline E is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is granted.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

