KEYWORD: Guideline H
DIGEST: The Judge’s denial of Applicant’s request for the testimony of two witnesses was not
arbitrary capricious, or contrary to law. His conclusion that the witnesses’ testimony would have
been merely cumulative was supported by the record.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 09-02839
DATE: 06/22/2011
DATE: June 22, 2011
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-02839
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Gina Marine, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Alan V. Edmunds, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On September 15, 2009, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant
of the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On February 23, 2010, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Mary E. Henry
granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel appealed pursuant to
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  The Appeal Board issued a remand decision, dated May 17, 2010,
instructing the Judge to issue a new decision correcting certain identified errors.  On July 30, 2010,
the Judge issued a Decision on Remand, again granting Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Department Counsel appealed again pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.  The Appeal
Board issued a second remand decision, dated October 29, 2010, wherein the Board identified errors
and then determined that the case should be remanded to a new Judge.  The Board’s remand order
authorized the holding of a new hearing upon the request of either party.  Applicant requested a
hearing.  On March 31, 2011, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Paul J. Mason issued a
decision denying Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed, pursuant to ¶¶
E3.1.28 and E3.1.30. 
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal:  (1) whether the Judge’s decision to not
allow two of Applicant’s witnesses to testify at the hearing was error; and (2) whether the Judge’s
adverse security decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons,
the Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable decision. 
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is 50 years old and has
two adult children.  She worked in a facility as an electrician in 1985 with a Q clearance received
through the Department of Energy.  She understood the importance of not using drugs while working
at the facility.  Applicant sporadically used marijuana since she was 14 years old.  She engaged in
limited marijuana use during her marriage from September 1982 to December 1999.  In a security
clearance application she filled out in 1985 to work as an electrician, she admitted using marijuana.
In a security clearance application she filled out in February 2009, Applicant indicated that from
January 2001 to February 2009, she used marijuana once or twice a year.  In an interview with an
OPM investigator in March 2009, Applicant indicated she took one or two “tokes” on a marijuana
cigarette when she attended parties at the home of a girlfriend, generally during the holidays.  She
also stated that under similar circumstances, she would take a toke in the future if she desired.  On
June 30, 2009, Applicant notified DOHA in interrogatory answers that she agreed with the
investigator’s summary of her March 2009 interview and made no additions or modifications to the
interview summary.  During the hearing on December 7, 2009, Applicant testified the investigator
asked the future drug use question vaguely, and she responded in a similar fashion, stating that she
didn’t know, or she didn’t think so.  In her September 2009 answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that
she intended to abstain from all future drug use.  She signed a separate letter of intent expressing an
intent to never use marijuana and illegal drugs in the future, and consenting to a revocation of her
security clearance for an infraction.  Applicant also provided an affidavit indicating she does not use
drugs.  She took five random drug tests between September 24, 2009 and November 16, 2010.  All
tests produced negative results.  Applicant told three co-workers about her past drug use.
Collectively, the three witnesses had little knowledge of Applicant’s marijuana use.  They still
recommended her for a security clearance based on her professionalism and honesty.  These
coworkers also have character statements in the record.  Nine additional individuals submitted
character statements praising Applicant’s professionalism and honesty. None of the statements
provided any indication that the authors were aware of Applicant’s past marijuana use.  A licensed
clinical health counselor evaluated Applicant in October 2009 and concluded Applicant had no
mental health issues and did not have current or past drug-abuse problems.     
 The Judge reached the following conclusions:  Applicant claims she stopped using
marijuana in 2008 after a one-time use between Thanksgiving and Christmas 2008.  However,
Applicant did not fully express that claim until December 2009, after she had stated contradictory
positions in February 2009,  March 2009, and June 2009 about her drug use and future drug use.
Applicant’s conflicting positions undermine her overall credibility and prevent a finding that she
1The Board notes that its direction on remand on May 17, 2010 did not imply that the Judge needed to obtain
additional evidence to determine the character witnesses’ state of knowledge about Applicant’s marijuana use.  Rather,
the direction to the Judge was to consider properly the evidence of the witnesses’ state of knowledge that was already
part of the record.
terminated her drug use in 2008.  Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s future intent to
use drugs in certain situations continues to raise doubt regarding her current reliability and good
judgment.  Applicant’s statement in March 2009, and verification of that statement in June 2009 that
she would continue to use drugs in certain future circumstances substantially diminishes the
mitigation available to her.  The October 2009 medical report has questionable probative value
because the report does not indicate whether the counselor was aware of the information Applicant
furnished to the Government in February, March and June 2009 about her marijuana use.  The
record is unclear about whether Applicant has changed her environment where drugs are used.  Had
there been no evidence in March and June 2009 of an intention to use drugs in the future, then
Applicant may have established an appropriate period of abstinence.  Because her SOR answer and
intent not to use affidavit were executed shortly after she received the SOR, it appears that Applicant
changed her mind because she wanted to improve her chances of getting a security clearance, not
because her drug use involved illegal conduct.  Though the nine written references provide glowing
appraisals of her professionalism and honesty, they furnish no probative value into the nature, scope,
and frequency of Applicant’s drug use.  While the testimony of the three witnesses indicated they
were aware of Applicant’s drug use, their corresponding references do not discuss Applicant’s drug
use.  In light of Applicant’s infrequent marijuana use since she was 14 years old, her marijuana use
after holding a security clearance in 1985, and her recent conditional statements about future
marijuana use, the more recent affidavit in June 2010 and negative drug test reports are insufficient
to carry Applicant’s ultimate burden of persuasion under the drug involvement guideline.
Applicant argues that the Judge’s decision was “inequitable” in that he did not consider all
the relevant evidence available to him.  This is because the Judge did not allow two witnesses for
Applicant to testify at the hearing.  Applicant quotes from the Board’s first remand decision in the
case, dated May 17, 2010, wherein the Board directed the Judge “to evaluate the effect of the
character witnesses’ lack of knowledge about Applicant’s marijuana use when weighing the relative
importance of the character witness statements to the overall case.”1  Applicant asserts that the Judge
cannot properly evaluate the effect of the character witnesses’ knowledge of the drug use unless the
Judge allows the witnesses to testify to their knowledge of said drug use.  
The Board will overturn a Judge’s evidentiary ruling if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary
to law.  See, ISCR Case No. 08-04604 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Feb. 17, 2010).  In his decision, the Judge
indicated that he denied Applicant the opportunity to present the testimony of the two witnesses
because of the anticipated cumulation of testimony and the fact that written character statements of
the two witnesses had been entered into the record at the previous hearing on December 7, 2009.
Perhaps even more significant for the resolution of this issue, the Board notes that the same two
character witnesses gave live testimony at the initial December 7, 2009 hearing (albeit with a
different Judge).  At that time they provided evidence of their knowledge of Applicant’s marijuana
use during both direct examination and on cross examination.  Applicant’s proffer of expected
testimony at the most recent hearing included only the statement that Applicant had two questions
each for these witnesses and their testimony was to speak to the issue of whether they had
2Transcript of December 7, 2010 hearing at 7. 
3“[T]he behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment[.]”
4“[A] demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using
associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of
abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation[.]”
knowledge of Applicant’s use of marijuana.2  Given this proffer, and the evidence of record from
the earlier December 7, 2009 hearing wherein the same two witnesses testified that Applicant had
informed them of her marijuana use prior to asking them to furnish character reference letters, it is
unclear to the Board what significant additional evidence would have been provided by these
witnesses in the second hearing.  Under these circumstances, the Judge did not err when he
concluded that the witnesses’ testimony would be cumulative, and the Judge’s ruling that he would
not receive their testimony was not arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.       
Applicant argues that the Judge erred by not concluding that Applicant had mitigated the
case against her under ¶ 26(a)3 and ¶ 26(b)4 of the Adjudicative Guidelines.  She also claims that the
Judge ignored evidence that was favorable to her and did not properly engage in a whole-person
analysis.  Applicant’s assertions do not establish error on the part of the Judge.
Once the government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the
applicant to mitigate those concerns.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The presence of some mitigating
evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a favorable security clearance decision.  As the
trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at
2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or
an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the
Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).  In this case, the
Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the seriousness of the
disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant conditions and factors.
The Judge discussed the mitigating conditions and provided reasonable explanations for his ultimate
conclusion that Applicant had not mitigated the Government’s case, foremost of which were his
conclusions that (a) Applicant’s overall credibility was undermined by her conflicting positions
concerning future drug use, and (b) Applicant’s statement in March 2009 and verification of that
statement in June 2009 that she would continue to use drugs in certain future circumstances
substantially diminished the weight of the mitigating conditions applicable in the case.  
A Judge is presumed to have considered all the evidence in the record unless he specifically
states otherwise.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-00196 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2009).  Applicant fails
to overcome that presumption in this case.  The Judge gave detailed descriptions of the evidence he
considered, including the transcript and exhibits from the earlier hearing.  He made numerous
references to individual exhibits in the case, and there is no indication that he did not consider the
many favorable character references and favorable job performance of Applicant.  The Board also
concludes that the Judge properly applied a whole-person analysis to the case.
 
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
                                                Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin             
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
