 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 09-02630 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding personal conduct, foreign 
influence, and foreign preference.  Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 24, 2008, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On July 15, 2009, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) furnished him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on October 1, 2009.2 On November 6, 2009, DOHA issued a Statement 
of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department 
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86, dated November 24, 2008). 
 
2 Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated October 1, 2009). 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and Adjudicative 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (effective 
within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006) (AG) for all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive. The SOR alleged security concerns 
under Guideline E (Personal Conduct), Guideline B (Foreign Influence), and Guideline 
C (Foreign Preference), and detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on December 12, 2009. In a sworn 
statement, dated December 30, 2009, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was prepared to proceed on November 30, 2010, and the case was 
assigned to me on February 1, 2011.3 A Notice of Hearing was issued on April 4, 2011, 
and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on April 12, 2011. 
 
During the hearing, 2 Government exhibits (GE 1-2) and 12 Applicant exhibits 
(AE A-D, and F-N) were admitted into evidence, without objection or over objection.4 
There was no AE J. Applicant and one other witness testified. The hearing transcript 
(Tr.) was received on April 27, 2011. The record was kept open to enable Applicant to 
supplement it. Applicant submitted nine additional exhibits (AE O-W) which were 
admitted into evidence, without objection or over objection.5 The parties submitted 
written closing arguments. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel requested that I take 
administrative notice of certain enumerated facts pertaining to the Syrian Arab Republic 
(Syria) and the State of Kuwait (Kuwait), appearing in 20 written submissions (13 
pertaining to Syria and 5 pertaining to Kuwait).6 Facts are proper for administrative 
notice when they are easily verifiable by an authorized source and relevant and material 
to the case. In this instance, the Government relied on source information regarding 
3 During the period between the issuance of the SOR and the assignment of the case to me, Applicant has 
been working in Kuwait and Afghanistan. 
 
4 Department Counsel objected to Applicant Exhibits E (Drug test result) and I (Statement of intent) for 
identification on the grounds of relevance. Upon the Department Counsel’s expression of disinterest in Applicant’s 
past drug involvement, Applicant withdrew AE E for identification, and it was returned to him. I overruled the objection 
to AE I for identification, and it was admitted as AE I. See Tr. at 26-30. 
 
5 Department Counsel objected to Applicant Exhibits S (State identification card), T (Registered purchase of 
real estate), and U (Certificate of birth) for identification on the grounds that they were in Portuguese and had not 
been translated into English. I overruled the objections. 
 
6 Amended Administrative Notice (Syria), dated April 4, 2011; Amended Administrative Notice (Kuwait), 
dated April 5, 2011. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
it subsections.  
                                                          
Syria and Kuwait in publications of The White House,7 and the U.S. Department of 
State.8  
 
Department Counsel objected to my taking administrative notice of any facts 
other than those specifically enumerated by her in the two amended administrative 
notices.9 She indicated that if I refused to limit the scope of the administrative notice to 
those enumerated facts, she would reserve the right to offer the documents as 
government exhibits.10 I initially withheld my ruling until Applicant made his 
presentation, and was prepared to rule until Applicant’s attorney objected based on the 
fact that he had not had an opportunity to review the documents. The documents had 
been shipped to the attorney’s out-of-state office earlier in the week, had been 
redirected to him at the hearing location, and had not yet arrived. I withheld my ruling 
pending receipt of written final arguments. After weighing the reliability of the source 
documentation and assessing the relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the 
Government, pursuant to Rule 201, Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative 
notice of certain facts,11 as set forth below under the Syria and Kuwa
 
7 The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Press Release, Statement by the Press Secretary on 
Violence in Syria, dated March 24, 2011; Exec. Or. 13338, Blocking Property of Certain Persons and Prohibiting the 
Export of Certain Goods to Syria, dated May 11, 2004; Exec. Or. 13399, Blocking Property of Additional Persons in 
Connection With the National Emergency With Respect to Syria, dated April 25, 2006; Exec. Or. 13460, Blocking 
Property of Additional Persons in Connection With the National Emergency With Respect to Syria, dated February 
13, 2008; Exec. Notice, Continuation of the National Emergency Blocking Property of Certain Persons and Prohibiting 
the Export of Certain Goods to Syria, dated May 7, 2008; Exec. Notice, Continuation of the National Emergency with 
Respect to the Actions of the Government of Syria, dated May 7, 2009; and Exec. Notice, Continuation of the 
National Emergency With Respect To the Actions of the Government of Syria, dated May 3, 2010. 
 
 
8 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, Background Note: Syria, dated March 18, 2011; 
U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs, Background Note: Kuwait, dated March 7, 2011; U.S. 
Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, 2009 Country Reports on Human Rights 
Practices: Syria, dated March 11, 2010; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, 
2009 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Kuwait, dated March 11, 2010; U.S. Department of State, Bureau 
of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, International Religious Freedom Report 2010, dated November 17, 2010; 
U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism, Country Reports: Middle East and North 
Africa Overview, Country Reports on Terrorism 2009, dated August 5, 2010; U.S. Department of State, Office of the 
Coordinator for Counterterrorism, State Sponsors of Terrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 2009, dated August 5, 
2010; U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism, State Sponsors of Terrorism, 
undated; U.S. Department of State, Country Specific Information: Syria, dated September 9, 2010; U.S. Department 
of State, Country Specific Information: Kuwait, dated June 10, 2010;  and U.S. Department of State, Bureau of 
Consular Affairs, Travel Warning: Syria, dated April 3, 2011. 
 
9 Tr. at 12-13, 124-126. 
 
10 Id. at 12-14. 
 
11 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice 
facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & 
Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may utilize 
authoritative information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006) (citing 
internet sources for numerous documents). Tr. at 36-37. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
              
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted nearly all of the factual allegations 
(¶¶ 1.a.(1) through 1.a.(7), 2.a. through 2(f), and 6.a. through 6(c) of the SOR.12 Those 
admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. He denied the remaining allegations (¶¶ 
1.a., 1.b., and 6(d)). After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, 
and upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and he is seeking to 
obtain a secret security clearance.  He has held an interim security clearance since 
2004.13 A May 1976 high school graduate, Applicant attended college for 18 months, 
and after four years of marine training with the U.S. Coast Guard, was certified as a 
chief engineer.14 He has been an active reserve member of the U.S. Merchant Marine 
since December 1989.15 Over the years, Applicant has held several different positions 
with various employers. He served as a chief engineer aboard an offshore supply vessel 
from 1982 until 1989; an oiler aboard a fabrication barge and lay barge from 1989 until 
1993; a chief engineer from 1993 until 1995; a chief engineer, port engineer, and vessel 
manager from 1998 until 1999; operations and vessel manager, as well as port engineer 
from 1999 until 2002; operations and maintenance supervisor of power production 
distribution from 2002 until 2003; and power generation fielding manager with his 
current employer since November 2004.16 During his professional career, Applicant has 
seen extensive service, totaling about 25 years, in a variety of overseas locations, 
including South America, West Africa, and the Middle East.17  
 
Applicant has been married three times. He married his first wife in 1990 and 
they were divorced in 1995.18 He married his second wife in 1997, and they were 
divorced in 2003.19 He married his current wife, a citizen of Syria, in 2007.20 Applicant 
has three daughters. His oldest daughter, from his first wife, was born in the United 
States in 1990, is married, and resides in the United States. His middle daughter, from a 
previous relationship, was born in Brazil in 1999, and resides with her mother in 
                                            
12 Although the SOR contained three alleged Guidelines, the third such Guideline was erroneously 
numbere 6 rather than 3. 
 Government averred that Applicant had received his interim clearance in 2008; 
Applicant believed it was in 2004. 
 Id. at 112-114. 
 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 23-24. 
ant Exhibit K (Resume, undated); Id. at 11-15. 
 Applicant Exhibit K at 1; Tr. at 115. 
 Government Exhibit 2 (Subject Interview, dated June 5, 2008 and June 29, 2008), at 11. 
 Government Exhibit1, supra note 1, at 17-18. 
 Id. at 16-17. 
d 
  
13 Tr. at 43, 67, 112. The
 
14
 
15
 
16 Applic
 
17
 
18
 
19
 
20
 
5 
                                      
 
wait.   
 the incidents referred to above.  
              
Brazil.21 His youngest daughter, with his current wife, was born in Kuwait in 2008, and 
resides with Applicant and his wife in Ku 22
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Over a 20-year period, between 1982 and 2002, Applicant was arrested and 
charged with various alcohol-related and drug-related offenses on a number of 
occasions. In December 1982, it was for driving under the influence (DUI) and improper 
lane change; in December 1984, it was for DUI and driving on a suspended or revoked 
driver’s license; in August 1987, it was for DUI; in July 1991, it was for public 
drunkenness, intimidation of a police officer, resisting arrest, and disorderly conduct; in 
November 1993, it was for possession of marijuana and domestic argument; in July 
1997, it was for DUI and reckless driving; and in September 2002, it was for DUI.23  
 
On November 24, 2008, when Applicant submitted his SF 86, he was required to 
respond to certain questions.24 The SOR alleges Applicant deliberately failed to 
disclose several aspects of his police record in Section 23 thereof. The SOR ¶ 1.a. 
refers to question 23.d. (Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any 
offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?). Applicant answered “yes” to the question and 
listed three such incidents: a July 2004 (estimated) failure to stop for accident 
conviction, a January 1989 (estimated) DUI conviction, and a September 1982 
(estimated) possession of marijuana conviction.25 Applicant certified that his responses 
were “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge and belief.26 They were 
not, for he had omitted five of
 
The Government alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his response by 
omitting the majority of the incidents. Applicant denies he deliberately falsified his 
response and contends he answered the question to the best of his ability,27 and 
attributes his failure to list every incident required by the question to an inability to recall 
each of the incidents because he did not have the information with him. The responses 
he provided were based on information he either had with him or based on what his 
                                            
 
21 Applicant Exhibit Q (Certificate of Birth, dated July 14, 2004); Applicant Exhibit U (Certificate of Birth, 
dated De
 Applicant Exhibit O (Consular Report of Birth Abroad, dated February 2, 2009); Applicant Exhibit P (U.S. 
Passpor
 Government Exhibit 2 (Subject Interview), supra note 18, at 11-24; Answer to the SOR, dated December 
30, 2009
Exhibit 1, supra note 1. 
32. 
cember 13, 2001; Applicant Exhibit R (Brazilian Passport, issued January 10, 2007); Tr. at 40-41. 
 
22
t, dated February 3, 2009). 
 
23
. 
 
24 Government 
 
25 Id. at 31-
 
26 Id. at 1. 
 
27 Tr. at 41. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
re other incidents that were over 20 years earlier, he could not 
recall the specifics.31 
stion as to the dates of first and 
last use, he responded “unknown first, 30 yrs – last.”34  
 of those tests.38 It remains unclear as to when the 
andom drug tests commenced.  
 
                                                          
mother found when searching his records at her home in the United States.28 He had 
the paid ticket for the 2004 traffic violation for failure to stop with him in Kuwait.29 He 
called his mother to ask her to search his records in an effort to locate any other paid 
fines or tickets, and she responded with the information he eventually reported.30 While 
he believed there we
 
One of the questions in the interrogatories issued to Applicant in June 2009 
referred to drug use: (Have you ever used any narcotic, stimulant, hallucinogen (to 
include LSD or PCP) and/or any Cannabis (to include marijuana and hashish), except 
prescribed by a licensed physician?)32 On October 1, 2009, Applicant answered “yes, 
pot” to the question.33 In response to a secondary que
 
The Government alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his response by 
concealing his most recent use of marijuana which purportedly occurred in 1999 or 
2000. Applicant denies he deliberately falsified his response and contends he answered 
the question to the best of his ability,35 and he did not recall any more recent marijuana 
use.36 He had previously estimated to an investigator of the U.S. Department of State, 
Bureau of Diplomatic Security (BDS), that he had used marijuana from the time he was 
15 years old until he reached 41 or 42 years of age.37 If his calculations were accurate, 
he had been using marijuana until about 1999 or 2000, as alleged. It should be noted 
that Applicant’s employer administers random drug tests and there is no evidence that 
he ever came up positive in any
r
28 Id. at 74. 
 
29 Id. 
 
30 Id. 74-76. 
 
31 Id. at 75-79. 
 
32 Question 1, Interrogatory Concerning Drug Use, Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2, at 8. 
 
33 Id. 
 
34 Id. The number “30” appears to have been a correction of the number “20” as it has been written over. 
 
35 Tr. at 41. 
 
36 Id. at 42. 
 
37 Government Exhibit 2 (Subject Interview), supra note 18, at 19. 
 
38 Question 4, Interrogatory concerning Lifestyle Changes, Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2, at 10. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
Foreign Influence39 
 
Applicant’s parents are native-born U.S. citizens residing in the United States.40 
His brother and two sisters are native-born U.S. citizens residing in the United States.41 
His mother-in-law, a homemaker, and his father-in-law, a retired school teacher, are 
native-born citizen-residents of Syria.42 Neither of them speaks English.43 Applicant’s 
wife also has one brother and five sisters. They are all Syrian citizens. Four sisters 
reside in Syria. The remaining sister and the brother reside in Kuwait.44 The brother and 
three sisters are teachers, one sister is a civil engineer, and the youngest sister is a 
student.45 Applicant’s wife’s family is well known in their home town.46 While neither 
parent nor any sibling has ever had any “affiliation” with the Syrian government, armed 
forces, security service, police, ministry of foreign affairs, or intelligence service,47 
considering the nature of the society, as teachers, the siblings have “worked” for the 
government.48 When Applicant applied for his initial visa to visit Syria, his father-in-law 
was visited one time by Syrian authorities, but no other follow-up visits occurred, and 
Applicant was never contacted by them.49 
 
The frequency of Applicant’s on-going contacts with the members of his wife’s 
family is varied. He generally speaks with his wife’s sisters who still reside in Syria 
about once each month.50 He speaks with the two siblings who reside in Kuwait on a 
more frequent basis, estimated to be up to three times per week.51  
 
Syria 
 
 Syria is ruled by a ruthless authoritarian regime whose security forces continue to 
brutally repress, monitor internal dissent, arbitrarily arrest, torture, physically abuse, and 
39 Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is 
available in the cited exhibits.   
 
40 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 19-20. 
 
41 Id.20-22. 
 
42 Id. at 22-23; Government Exhibit 2 (Subject Interview), supra note 18, at 12. 
 
43 Tr. at 45-46. 
 
44 Government Exhibit 2 (Subject Interview), supra note 18, at 12; Tr. at 46. 
 
45 Government Exhibit 2, at 12. 
 
46 Id.  
 
47 Id. at 14. 
 
48 Tr. at 89-90, 95. 
 
49 Government Exhibit 2 (Subject Interview), supra note 18, at 14. 
 
50 Tr. at 47-48. 
 
51 Id. at 46. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
kill its own citizens. The Syrian Government conducts intense physical and electronic 
surveillance of both Syrian citizens and foreign visitors. There is an increase in anti-
foreigner sentiment, and a travel warning urging U.S. citizens to defer non-essential 
travel to Syria was issued by the U.S. Department of State as recently as April 3, 2011. 
 
Syria has been designated by the U.S. Department of State as a State Sponsor 
of Terrorism since 1979. Syria provides safe-haven as well as political and other 
support to a number of Palestinian terrorist groups, including Hezbollah, Hamas, and 
Palestinian Islamic Jihad, who are headquartered or sheltered in Syria. Syria permits 
these terrorist groups to trans-ship foreign fighters and weapons in and out of the 
country for use in neighboring countries, including Israel, Lebanon, and Iraq. Syria 
maintains close ties with Iran, its strategic ally and fellow state sponsor of terrorism. 
President Bush determined that Syria’s actions constituted an unusual and 
extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United 
States, and in 2004, declared a national emergency to deal with the threat. The national 
emergency currently remains in effect, and executive orders have been promulgated to 
prohibit the exportation of certain goods to Syria and block the shipment of property of 
certain persons to Syria. Department Counsel has not argued, and there is no evidence, 
that Syria is an active participant in economic espionage, industrial espionage or trade 
secret theft, or violations of export-control regulations. 
 
Kuwait 
 
Kuwait is a small oil-rich constitutional hereditary emirate which gained 
independence from the United Kingdom in 1961. The government has sponsored many 
social welfare, public works, and development plans for Kuwaiti citizens financed with oil 
and investment revenues. Among the benefits are retirement income, marriage 
bonuses, housing loans, virtually guaranteed employment, free medical services, and 
education at all levels. While there are some limits on various freedoms, including 
speech, press, religion, etc., there have been no reports that the government or its 
agents have committed arbitrary or unlawful killings, and there have been no reports of 
politically motivated arrests or disappearances. There are laws against blasphemy, 
apostasy, and proselytizing, which are actively enforced.  
 
In 1990, after the invasion and occupation of Kuwait by Iraq, the United States, 
along with a multinational coalition under United Nations auspices, liberated Kuwait. 
Since the Gulf War, Kuwait publicly announced the abandonment of various aspects of 
the Arab boycott of Israel. The United States is currently the largest supplier of goods 
and services to Kuwait. Kuwait is an important partner in U.S. counterterrorism efforts, 
providing assistance in the military, diplomatic, and intelligence arenas and also 
supporting efforts to block financing of terrorist groups.  
 
There is no evidence of a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion on Applicant because of his presence or the 
presence of his wife and her siblings in Kuwait. While the risk of a terrorist attack in 
Kuwait remains high, the U.S. Department of State has advised U.S. citizens in Kuwait 
to take the same security precautions in Kuwait that one would practice in the United 
 
9 
                                      
 
ertaining to Brazil.  
                                                          
States or any other large city abroad. There is no evidence that Kuwait is an active 
participant in economic espionage, industrial espionage or trade secret theft, or 
violations of export-control regulations. 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
 Applicant’s employment as a contractor with a U.S. company operating in Brazil 
initially took him to Brazil where he remained for eight years until he transferred to Iraq 
in May 2004.52 While residing in Brazil, Applicant established a romantic relationship 
with a Brazilian woman and she eventually gave birth to Applicant’s daughter in 1999.53 
He subsequently purchased a residence in Brazil for the child and her mother, putting 
the mother’s name on the title.54 He maintains a legal rental agreement with the mother 
to enable him to claim Brazilian residency.55 He also claims that Brazilian residency on 
his U.S. federal income tax returns.56 Applicant sends the mother approximately $500 
each month for child support,57 and he maintains a friendly, but platonic, relationship 
with her.58 
 
 Applicant initially obtained permanent resident status in Brazil because he was 
working there as a contractor.59 After the birth of his daughter, he retained that status 
for his convenience so he could visit his daughter without the necessity of obtaining a 
visa each time he visited her.60 He generally visits his daughter in Brazil two times per 
year, and has done so for at least four years.61 In June 2008, Applicant indicated he 
intended to retain his permanent resident status in Brazil in order to purchase a farm 
there as an investment and retirement property.62 He intends to renew his Brazilian 
residency status in 2012 to maintain his relationship with his daughter.63 In April 2011, 
as circumstances have changed with his marriage and the birth of his youngest 
daughter, Applicant modified his intentions p
 
52 Id. at 51; Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 13-15. 
 
53 Applicant Exhibit Q, supra note 21; Applicant Exhibit U, supra note 21; Applicant Exhibit R, supra note 21. 
 
54 Government Exhibit 2 (Subject Interview), supra note 18, at 13; Applicant Exhibit T, supra note 5. 
 
55 Government Exhibit 2, at 14. But see Tr. at 88, wherein Applicant denied that was the reason and stated 
that his position as his daughter’s father enabled him to claim residency. 
 
56 Government Exhibit 2 (Subject Interview), at 14. 
 
57 Id. at 13. 
 
58 Id. 
 
59 Id. 
 
60 Id. 
 
61 Id. at 14. 
 
62 Id. 
 
63 Tr. at 48-49, 52-53. 
 
10 
                                      
 
                                                          
 When his current contract in Kuwait expires, or if his application for a security 
clearance is denied, Applicant intends to move back to the United States with his wife 
and youngest daughter.64 Although he has no intentions of removing his middle 
daughter from her present Brazilian residence with her mother, he does intend to 
complete the process to secure U.S. citizenship for her.65 His daughter has indicated a 
desire to attend college in the United States, and if she does, Applicant intends to 
relinquish his Brazilian residency status.66 The mother and sister of the daughter’s 
mother already reside in the United States.67 
 
Applicant has no interest in acquiring Brazilian citizenship.68 In order to become 
a Brazilian citizen, he would have to relinquish his U.S. citizenship and he is not willing 
to do so.69 He has no financial interests, such as real estate or bank accounts, in Brazil, 
although he had previously indicated that he did in response to an interrogatory 
question.70 He maintains two bank accounts in the United States, and pays his bills 
from one of those accounts.71 Applicant has about $2,000 to $3,000 in one of those 
accounts, and about $500 in an account in Kuwait.72 He does not hold any citizenship 
other than his U.S. citizenship,73 and votes in the United States by absentee ballot.74  
 
Department Counsel has not argued, and there is no evidence, that Brazil is an 
active participant in economic espionage, industrial espionage or trade secret theft, or 
violations of export-control regulations. 
 
Work Performance and Character References 
 
Applicant’s performance evaluation for the year 2008 has his overall performance 
rated as “exceptional performance or excellent performance,” the two highest of five 
categories.75 The performance evaluation for the following year was “satisfactory 
 
64 Id. at 63, 86. 
 
65 Id. at 116; Government Exhibit 2 (Subject Interview), supra note 18, at 13. 
 
66 Tr. at 49, 117. 
 
67 Id. at 117; Government Exhibit 2 (Subject Interview), supra note 18, at 13. 
 
68 Government Exhibit 2 (Subject Interview), at 13. 
 
69 Id. 
 
70 Tr. at 53; Id. at 15; Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2, at 26 (Question 32.c.). 
 
71 Tr. at 118-120. 
 
72 Id. at 119. 
 
73 Government Exhibit 2 (Subject Interview), supra note 18, at 15. 
 
74 Tr. at 120-121. 
 
75 Applicant Exhibit F (Performance Document, undated).  
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
performance,” but noted that Applicant had been on long term disability since July 26, 
2009.76 Applicant explained that he had colon cancer and underwent surgery and 18 
months of chemotherapy.77 As a result of his experience, Applicant no longer consumes 
alcohol.78 His supervisors, managers, coworkers, and friends are very supportive of 
Applicant’s application for a security clearance. Applicant has been characterized in the 
following terms: self-starter, most productive, versatile, very highly competent, sincere, 
reliable, dependable, disciplined, responsible, honest, and trustworthy, and possessing 
integrity.79 One life-long friend and periodic coworker characterized Applicant as very 
honest and trustworthy, and noted that he would trust Applicant with his life.80 In 
recognition of his efforts and performance in support of the various missions in the 
Southwest Asia Theater of Operations, Applicant has been presented with numerous 
certificates of appreciation and certificates of achievement,81 as well as several 
challenge coins by senior officers.82   
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”83 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”84   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
 
 
76 Applicant Exhibit G (Performance Document, undated).  
 
77 Tr. at 56. 
 
78 Id. 
 
79 Applicant Exhibits A through D, M, and N (Character References, various dates). 
 
80 Tr. at 37-39. 
 
81 Applicant Exhibits L and V (Certificates, various dates). 
 
82 Applicant Exhibit W (Challenge Coins, undated). 
 
83 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
84 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
12 
                                      
 
                                                          
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”85 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and it has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.86  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”87 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”88 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record.  
85 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
86 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
87 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
88 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 15:  
      
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), a “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used 
to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or 
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary 
responsibilities,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 16(b), “deliberately 
providing false or misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, 
investigator, security official, competent medical authority, or other official government 
representative,” may raise security concerns. The Government has argued that 
Applicant’s omissions of critical information in his SF 86 pertaining to his police record 
and in his answers to the interrogatories pertaining to his substance abuse provide 
sufficient evidence of deliberate falsifications. One possible alternative which must be 
examined is that his actions were the result of simple oversight or negligence on his 
part. Pending further comments below, AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) tentatively apply. 
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. Under AG ¶ 17(a), evidence that “the individual 
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification 
before being confronted with the facts” is potentially mitigating.  Similarly, AG ¶ 17(c) 
may apply where “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” Also, when “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress,” AG ¶ 17(e) may apply. 
 
As noted above, the Government alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his 
SF 86 response by omitting the majority of his alcohol-related and drug-related 
incidents. Applicant denies he deliberately falsified his response and contends he 
answered the question to the best of his ability, and attributes his failure to list every 
incident required by the question to an inability to recall each of the incidents because 
he did not have the information with him. His responses were based on the information 
he either had with him in Kuwait or based on what his mother found when searching his 
records in the United States. While he believed there were other incidents that were 
 
14 
                                      
 
over 20 years earlier, he could not recall the specifics. Department Counsel rebutted his 
assertions by claiming Applicant had been apprised of the details of the incidents during 
his June 2008 interviews, and Applicant’s assertions were not plausible. 
 
The Government also alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his response to 
the interrogatory by concealing his most recent use of marijuana which purportedly 
occurred in 1999 or 2000. Applicant denies he deliberately falsified his response and 
contends he answered the question to the best of his ability, and he did not recall any 
more recent marijuana use. He had previously estimated to an investigator of the BDS 
that he had used marijuana until he reached 41 or 42 years of age. Applicant contends 
his response was in error. 
 
Applicant has worked overseas about 25 years, in a variety of overseas 
locations, including South America, West Africa, and the Middle East, and his records 
from the 1980s and 1990s have been stored in his mother’s home in the United States. 
As to the alleged falsification pertaining to the SF 86, his reliance on his mother’s efforts 
to locate relevant information covering that period is significant. While Applicant did not 
list each and every incident that was alcohol-related or drug-related, he did list two of 
the most serious offenses, a DUI and the possession of marijuana. The inclusion of the 
information regarding the sentence for drug possession signaled the seriousness of the 
offense: $10,000 fine and three years probation, an indication of significant punishment. 
The incidents all occurred between 6 and 26 years before the date he completed the SF 
86. His poor memory, without supporting documentation, in that amount of time, 
supports his contentions.  
 
Department Counsel’s rebuttal that Applicant’s memory should have been 
refreshed by the review of all his prior police incidents is not dispositive for several 
reasons. First, the primary focus during the interviews were on Applicant’s relationships 
in Syria, Kuwait, and Brazil; second, there were many other non-alcohol-related and 
non-drug-related incidents discussed during the June 2008 interviews; and third, there 
is no evidence that Applicant was ever furnished a copy of his statements or police 
record (“rap sheet’) before he received the statement along with the interrogatory in July 
2009. The evidence leads to the conclusion that clearly contradicts the Government’s 
contentions that Applicant’s SF 86 omission was a deliberate falsification or 
concealment of the facts pertaining to his police record.  
 
As to Applicant’s response to the interrogatory, he had previously estimated to 
the BDS investigator that he had used marijuana until he reached 41 or 42 years of age. 
Applicant contends his response was in error. Other than Applicant’s purported 
misstatement to the investigator, there is no evidence to support the conclusion that his 
response to the interrogatory was deliberate. There is, however, evidence that 
Applicant’s response was uncertain because he apparently changed the number on the 
document from 20 years to 30 years. The evidence leads to the conclusion that clearly 
contradicts the Government’s contentions that Applicant’s interrogatory response was a 
deliberate falsification or concealment of the facts pertaining to his drug use. 
 
15 
                                      
 
                                                          
Furthermore, I find Applicant’s explanations are credible in his denial of deliberate 
falsification.89 AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(c), and 17(e) apply.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.90 Applicant’s relationship with his wife, her 
parents, and siblings, are current security concerns for the Government. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 7(b), “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information” may raise security concerns. In addition, under AG ¶ 7(d), “sharing living 
89 The Appeal Board has explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of proving 
falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an 
applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must consider 
the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence 
concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the omission occurred. 
[Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude Department Counsel had 
established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the burden of persuasion had shifted to 
the applicant to present evidence to explain the omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).   
90 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
16 
                                      
 
                                                          
quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship 
creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” 
may raise security concerns. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply in this case. 
However, the security significance of these identified conditions requires further 
examination of Applicant’s respective relationships with those family members and 
extended family members who are either Syrian citizen-residents or Syrian citizen-
Kuwaiti residents, to determine the degree of “heightened risk” or potential conflict of 
interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.” Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may 
apply where the evidence shows “there is no conflict of interest, either because the 
individual's sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where “contact or 
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little 
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” In this instance, 
Applicant’s relationship with his wife, her parents and her siblings is neither casual nor 
infrequent. Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply.  
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances, in light of any 
realistic potential for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the 
foreign power in question, including the government and entities controlled by the 
government within the relevant foreign country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is 
limited to countries that are hostile to the United States.91 In fact, the Appeal Board has 
cautioned against “reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations 
and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”92 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States may be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it 
controls is likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the 
United States. It is reasonable to presume that although a friendly relationship, or the 
existence of a democratic government, is not determinative, it may make it less likely 
91 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
92 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
17 
                                      
 
that a foreign government would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or 
associates in that foreign country. 
 
As noted above, Syria, designated a state sponsor of terrorism, is ruled by a 
ruthless authoritarian regime whose security forces continue to brutally repress, monitor 
internal dissent, arbitrarily arrest, torture, physically abuse, and kill its own citizens. The 
Syrian Government conducts intense physical and electronic surveillance of both Syrian 
citizens and foreign visitors. There is an increase in anti-foreigner sentiment, and a 
travel warning urging U.S. citizens to defer non-essential travel to Syria was issued by 
the U.S. Department of State as recently as April 3, 2011. Syria’s involvement in 
terrorism internationally and repression of its citizens internally have been deemed to 
constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, 
and economy of the United States.  
 
While Applicant’s wife’s parents and some siblings still reside in Syria, there may 
be speculation as to “some risk,” but that speculation, in the abstract, does not, without 
more, establish sufficient evidence of a “heightened risk” of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion to disqualify Applicant from holding a 
security clearance. There is no evidence that his wife’s parents or siblings are, or have 
been, political activists, challenging the policies of the Syrian government; that terrorists 
have approached or threatened Applicant or her parents or siblings for any reason; that 
the Syrian government has approached Applicant; that his wife’s parents or siblings 
currently engage in activities that would bring attention to themselves; or that they are 
even aware of Applicant’s work. As such, there is a reduced possibility that they would 
be targets for coercion or exploitation by the Syrian government, which may seek to 
quiet those who speak out against it. It is true that one Syrian authority checked with 
Applicant’s father-in-law when Applicant initially applied for a visa to enter Syria, but 
since that initial inquiry, neither Applicant nor his father-in-law have been revisited.  
 
As to Applicant’s wife and her siblings who reside in Kuwait, there is even less of 
a risk. The Kuwaiti government has sponsored many social welfare, public works, and 
development plans for Kuwaiti citizens, including retirement income, marriage bonuses, 
housing loans, virtually guaranteed employment, free medical services, and education 
at all levels. There have been no reports that the government or its agents have 
committed arbitrary or unlawful killings, and there have been no reports of politically 
motivated arrests or disappearances. Kuwait is an important partner in U.S. 
counterterrorism efforts, and supports efforts to block financing of terrorist groups. While 
the risk of a terrorist attack in Kuwait remains high, the U.S. Department of State has 
advised U.S. citizens in Kuwait to take the same security precautions in Kuwait that one 
would practice in the United States or any other large city abroad. Nevertheless, there is 
no evidence of a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion on Applicant because of his presence or the presence of his wife 
and her siblings in Kuwait. Furthermore, there is no evidence that Kuwait is an active 
participant in economic espionage, industrial espionage or trade secret theft, or 
violations of export-control regulations. 
 
 
18 
                                      
 
Applicant is a native-born citizen of the United States who has worked overseas 
for U.S. contractors for 25 years, including periods of time in the combat zones in the 
Middle East. His parents, siblings, and one daughter reside in the United States. His 
wife and the youngest of his three children, a U.S. citizen, reside with him in Kuwait. 
One child resides in Brazil. Despite Department Counsel’s position that Applicant’s wife 
remains beholden to Syria, she remains the wife of an American citizen and resides in 
Kuwait, not in Syria.  
 
Applicant has met his burden of showing there is little likelihood that those 
relationships could create a risk for foreign influence of exploitation. Applicant is fully 
involved in his children’s lives and activities. He has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the United States that he can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. 
  
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9:       
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
The foreign preference guideline notes several conditions that could raise 
security concerns. Under AG ¶ 10(a), “exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of 
foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a 
family member” is potentially disqualifying. This includes but is not limited to: AG ¶ 
10(a)(4), “residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements;” and AG ¶ 
10(a)(5), “using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another 
country.” Similarly, under AG ¶ 10(b) “action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign 
citizenship by an American citizen” may raise security concerns. Also, “any statement or 
action that shows allegiance to a country other than the United States: for example, 
declaration of intent to renounce United States citizenship; renunciation of United States 
citizenship,” is potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 10(d).  
Department Counsel has argued the applicability of AG ¶¶ 10(a), 10(a)(4) and 
10(a)(5), but the evidence fails to support her contentions. Applicant has no interest in 
acquiring Brazilian citizenship, for in order to become a Brazilian citizen, he would have 
to relinquish his U.S. citizenship, and he is not willing to do so. He has no financial 
interests, such as real estate or bank accounts, in Brazil, although he had previously 
erroneously indicated that he did when he responded to an interrogatory question. He 
maintains two bank accounts in the United States and one account in Kuwait. He does 
not hold any citizenship other than his U.S. citizenship. Furthermore, acquiring 
permanent resident status is not to be equated with acquiring a foreign citizenship. 
Additionally, simply working as a contractor outside of the United States, especially 
while serving with the U.S. Merchant Marine, in support of U.S. missions, regardless of 
 
19 
                                      
 
the length of time involved, is not an indication of a desire to renounce U.S. citizenship 
or acquire a foreign citizenship. AG ¶¶ 10(a), 10(a)(4), 10(a)(5), and 10(d) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
There is some disqualifying evidence regarding Applicant’s situation. His wife’s 
parents and some of her siblings are citizen-residents of Syria, a state sponsor of 
terrorism, ruled by a ruthless authoritarian regime that brutally represses, monitors 
internal dissent, arbitrarily arrests, tortures, physically abuses, and kills its own citizens. 
Because of their status, there is some concern of a “heightened risk” of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Applicant’s wife is a 
Syrian citizen residing in Kuwait. One daughter is a U.S. citizen residing in Kuwait and 
another daughter is a Brazilian citizen residing in Brazil. Applicant has held Brazilian 
permanent resident status for a number of years. 
 
The mitigating evidence is more substantial. Applicant is a native-born citizen of 
the United States who has parents, siblings, and one child in the United States; a Syrian 
wife and one child – a U.S. citizen – residing with him in Kuwait, where he works as a 
government contractor; and a child – currently a Brazilian citizen, but soon to be a U.S. 
citizen – residing in Brazil. He works in support of U.S. government missions in a 
volatile area of the Middle East. He does not pine for “the old country” because his 
country has always been the United States and his allegiance has always been to the 
United States.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Syria and Kuwait must take into consideration 
the geopolitical situation in those countries, as well as the potential dangers existing 
there. Kuwait and the United States have both been victims of Islamic terrorists. It is in 
Kuwait’s interests to maintain friendship with the U.S. to counterbalance international 
terrorism. It is very unlikely Kuwait would forcefully attempt to coerce Applicant through 
 
20 
                                      
 
his wife or her siblings residing in Kuwait. Furthermore, there is no evidence that Kuwait 
is an active participant in economic espionage, industrial espionage or trade secret 
theft, or violations of export-control regulations, there is no evidence that Applicant has 
been targeted. Syria is different, for it is a ruthless authoritarian regime. Nevertheless, 
there is no evidence that Applicant’s wife’s parents or siblings are, or have been, 
political activists, challenging the policies of the Syrian government; that terrorists have 
approached or threatened Applicant or her parents or siblings for any reason; that the 
Syrian government has approached Applicant; that his wife’s parents or siblings 
currently engage in activities that would bring attention to themselves; or that they are 
even aware of Applicant’s work. As such, there is a reduced possibility that they would 
be targets for coercion or exploitation by the Syrian government.  
 
Applicant has turned his life around and no longer consumes alcohol or uses 
marijuana. His devotion to his country, employer, and children is laudable. He is well 
respected by his friends and colleagues for his loyalty, honesty, integrity, and 
truthfulness. That he has chosen to serve his country overseas for over 25 years should 
not be considered a negative factor. (See AG && 2(a)(1) through 2(a)(9).) 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his personal conduct, 
foreign influence, and foreign preference concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a(1):   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a(2):   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a(3):   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a(4):   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a(5):   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.a(6):   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a(7):   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.f:    For Applicant 
 
21 
                                      
 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 3.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 3.d:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
