1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-08672
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Phillip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 14, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On February 16, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
D and E  for Applicant. (Item 1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
On March 9, 2011, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 4.)
On April 13, 2011, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the
FORM, Department Counsel offered eight documentary exhibits. (Items 1-8.) Applicant
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on June 7, 2011. Applicant submitted a
2
three page response to the FORM, dated May 8, 2011, which has been identified and
entered into evidence without objection as Item A. The case was assigned to this
Administrative Judge on May 19, 2011.
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations, 1.a. through 1.c., and
2.a. through 2.c. The admitted allegations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's Answer to the SOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of
Applicant, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of
fact: 
Applicant is 51 years old. He is married, and he has two children. He has
received a Master’s degree and a Doctorate degree. Applicant is employed by a
defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with his
employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline D - Sexual Conduct) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has engaged in sexual behavior that is either criminal, indicates a
personality or emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgement or discretion, or which may
subject an individual to undue influence or coercion.  
1.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant downloaded sexually explicit images of
underage females, to include both video and photographs, to his home computer, from
approximately 1998 to about September 2008.  Applicant admitted this allegation in his
RSOR. (Item 4.)
1.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant downloaded sexually explicit images of
underage females, to include both video and photographs, to his work computer, from
approximately 1997 to about October 2000. Applicant admitted this allegation in his
RSOR. (Item 4.)
1.c. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant masturbated after viewing sexually
explicit material, to include sexually explicit material of underage females, on his home
computer. Applicant admitted this allegation in his RSOR. (Item 4.)
3
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct) 
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he engaged in conduct that exhibited questionable judgement,
unreliability, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and untrustworthiness.  
2.a. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant's conduct, reviewed above in
Paragraph 1, above, constitutes the kind of behavior that is of concern to the
Government, as it exhibits questionable judgement, unwillingness to comply with rules
and regulations, and untrustworthiness.  As stated, Applicant admitted SOR allegations
1.a., 1.b., and 1.c., above, and he admitted this allegation in his RSOR. (Item 4.)
        2.b. It is alleged in the SOR that Applicant’s Special Compartmented Information
(SCI) access was revoked by another Government agency in about February 2009, due
to that information set forth under paragraph 1., above. Applicant admitted this
allegation in his RSOR. (Item 4.)
2.c. It is alleged in the SOR Applicant's spouse is unaware of his actions, as set
forth under paragraph 1., above, and he does not want her to know. Applicant admitted
this allegation in his RSOR. (Item 4.)
In Item 7, Applicant wrote a 13 page letter, dated January 22, 2010, in which,
among other things, he explained, in great detail, the reasons for his fascination with
images of underage females in child pornography; they stemmed largely from the love
he felt for a childhood female friend.  He also expressed his intent not to engage in this
conduct in the future because of the potential severe consequences.  He wrote, “The
thought of being apprehended for this type of crime, the loss of respect of my friends
and family, the loss of my career and livelihood and everything I have worked for my
whole life would be too much for me to bear. There is absolutely no chance that I will
ever download another illegal image again.”
While it appears that Applicant’s expressed intention to abstain from this conduct
in the future is sincere, since this case is an Administrative Determination, I have not
had the opportunity to assess the credibility of the Applicant in person, nor has any
independent evidence concerning Applicant’s character been submitted, so it is difficult
to find his stated intention controlling. Additionally, Applicant’s grave concern over
having this information become public has the great potential to make him subject to
coercion and undue influence. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
4
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline D, Sexual Conduct
It has been established by substantial evidence that Applicant engaged in the
kind of sexual behavior that is of concern to the Government, as it is criminal conduct,
and it exhibits a lack of discretion and good judgement.  Applicant engaged in the
downloading on his home computer of sexually explicit images of underage females for
a ten year period from 1998 to 2008. Viewing images of underage females for sexual
5
gratification is criminal conduct. He also downloaded sexually explicit images of
underage females on his work computer from 1997 to October 2000. While Applicant
has stated that he intends to abstain from this conduct in the future, and the conduct
has stopped in the last two years, when I consider the frequency and longevity of his
sexual history and the fact that he continued to engage in the conduct at home, after he
was discovered to be engaged in this conduct at his place of employment. I cannot
conclude that he has established a pattern of significant sexual abstinence. Additionally,
and most significantly, I find that Applicant is vulnerable to coercion because his wife is
unaware of his conduct, and he has indicated his great concern that this conduct not
become known by the public.  
Under AG ¶  13 (a) “sexual behavior that is of criminal nature, whether or not the
individual has been prosecuted” applies to the facts of this case. AG ¶ 13 (d) also
applies because Applicant has admitted that his spouse is unaware of his actions that
are the subject of this case, and he does not want her to become aware. That certainly
has the potential to make Applicant “vulnerable to coercion, exploitation or duress.”
Finally, AG ¶ 13 (d) applies because Applicant “engaged in sexual behavior that reflects
lack of discretion or judgement.”  
Regarding mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 14, I cannot find that Applicant’s
“behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence,” or that “the sexual behavior
happened so long ago or under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur,”
and since it is illegal, I do not find it “consensual or discreet.” Finally, since Applicant’s
wife is still unaware of his conduct, it is not applicable that “the behavior no longer
serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress.” Therefore, no mitigating
condition under AG ¶ 14 can be found to apply here.  Paragraph 1, Guideline D is found
against Applicant. 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant engaged in
conduct, which considered as a whole exhibits questionable judgement, unreliability,
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations and a lack of candor. I resolve
Paragraph 2, Guideline E, against Applicant.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
6
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, including all of the reasons cited
above as to why the Disqualifying Conditions apply and no Mitigating Condition is
applicable. Also, as reviewed above, because this case is an Administrative
Determination, I have not had the opportunity to assess the credibility of the Applicant in
person, nor has any independent evidence concerning Applicant’s character been
submitted. Therefore, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant
questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance
under the whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not
mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline D: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
