1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-08261
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 14, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On August 25, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines J and
E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG) effective after September 1, 2006. 
 
On September 7, 2010, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to this
Administrative Judge on March 4, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 4,
2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on March 30, 2011. The Government
offered Exhibits 1 through 3, which were received without objection. Applicant testified
on his own behalf and submitted no exhibits. DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing (Tr) on April 7, 2011. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until
April 13, 2011, to submit additional documents, but no additional documents were
received.  Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of
Applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR, Applicant admitted both SOR allegations, 1.a. under Guideline J,
and 2.a., under Guideline E. The admitted allegations are incorporated herein as
findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 23 years old. He is not married, and he has no children. Applicant is
employed by a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in
connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct) 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has engaged in criminal acts.
1.a.  The SOR alleges that Applicant was arrested in 2007, and charged with
Grand Theft/Exceeds $400, a Felony. Applicant plead guilty to a reduced charge and
was sentenced to three years of probation, ordered to serve 120 days in jail to be
served on consecutive weekends and ordered to pay restitution and probation
revocation restitution. Applicant was scheduled to be on probation until April 2010.  
Applicant testified that in approximately 2004, when he was 16 years of age, he
began working as a volunteer for a county fire department. He went through a six month
training program, meeting on Tuesdays and Sundays, and he became qualified to do
everything a full-time firefighter could do. He received certificates indicating that he
passed the training at the academy, and he testified that he was planning to become a
full-time firefighter. (Tr at 23-25.)
During a month period in 2007 when Applicant was 19, he stole money on three
occasions from a volunteers cash box that was for general use at the fire station.
Applicant had access to the cash box because he was the president of the volunteers.
The authorities accused him of taking $1,200, and Applicant stated that he did not
believe he took that much, but he did not know the total amount that was actually taken.
It was discovered because Applicant felt bad about taking the money, and he confessed
to another volunteer who was the treasurer. He took the money because he was having
car problems and other issues where he needed money. (Tr at 25-29.) Applicant
conceded that each of the three times that he stole money from the cash box, he knew
it was illegal and dishonest, and that he was stealing form his fellow volunteers. (Tr at
37-39.)
After Applicant was caught, he was ultimately placed on probation until April
2010, and he testified that his probation is now over. Applicant averred that he has now
met all of his sentencing requirements, including community service of picking up trash
for 120 consecutive weekend days. However, Applicant conceded that he has not
completely paid the fine. He believed that he still owes $800 for the fine. He had initially
been on a payment plan, where he paid $100 a month, on a fine of what he estimated to
be $2,000. After he missed a payment, he was ordered to pay the full amount in
3
restitution at once, but he convinced the authorities to give him more time to finish
paying off the fine. (Tr at 29-32.) Exhibit 2 establishes that Applicant’s total fine was
$2,200
At the time of the hearing, it was almost one year past the date when the fine
was required to be paid in full. At the hearing, Applicant testified that he planned to
make the final payment shortly. (Tr at 32.) He conceded that he has been working
continuously for the last four years, but he still had not paid the fine in full. (Tr at 50-51.)
The record was kept open until April 13, 2011, for Applicant to submit evidence as to the
status of the fine, and whether he had paid it off. Also, Applicant was given the
opportunity to submit evidence about his character from people who know and work
with him.  Applicant submitted no post hearing evidence. 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The SOR alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for clearance
because he exhibited conduct involving questionable judgement, lack of candor,
dishonesty or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations.
2.a.  The SOR alleges that Applicant was charged, as set forth under paragraph
1.a., above, of taking cash from the State Department of Forestry while serving as a
volunteer and president of a County Fire Department volunteer program.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
4
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct)
The Government has established that Applicant engaged in criminal conduct, by
his theft of money totaling $1,200 on three occasions from the cash box of an
organization of which Applicant was the president.
I find that ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” applies in
this case. ¶ 31(c), “allegations or admissions of criminal conduct, regardless of whether
the person was formally charged,” is also applicable to this case. Because Applicant
has failed to fulfill his requirement of paying his fine in full, several years after it was
imposed and almost one year after it was ordered to be paid in full, I do not find any
Mitigating Condition under ¶ 32 is applicable. Paragraph 1, Guideline J is found against
Applicant.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
With respect to Guideline E, I find that Applicant’s conduct supports Disqualifying
Condition ¶ 16(d) “a whole-person assessment of questionable judgement,
untrustworthiness, unreliability” under this guideline. I do not find any Mitigating
Condition under ¶ 17 is applicable.  I therefore, resolve Guideline E against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
5
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the Disqualifying Conditions apply and the Mitigating Conditions do not
apply, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST  APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
