KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel a favorable
decision..  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 09-03696.a1
DATE: 06/15/2011
DATE: June 15, 2011
In Re:
-------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-03696
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
1 To the extent that this information was not in the record below, the Board cannot consider it, since it
constitutes new evidence.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29. 
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On July 8, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On March 29, 2011, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following
discussion, the Board affirms the Judge’s decision. 
The Judge made the following relevant factual findings: Applicant enlisted in the Army in
1996 after he graduated from high school.  Applicant’s girl friend had a son while Applicant was
stationed overseas.  Since Applicant wanted to spend time with the child, he began asking to be
released from his military enlistment.  In an isolated incident, Applicant became drunk in April
1997.  While inebriated, Applicant become disorderly and threatened to commit suicide.  In May
1997, Applicant received an honorable discharge for “other designated physical or mental
conditions, not a disability.”  Decision at 2-3.  In January 2010, Applicant stated in response to
DOHA interrogatories that he had voluntarily separated from the military to be with his child.
Applicant worked as an asset protection officer at a department store between May 1999 and
February 2000.  During that time, Applicant stole a comforter and a pair of clippers estimated to
amount to $300 to $400 in value.  Applicant is now married and has four children.  He volunteers
at church, coaches a local youth league, and helps his mother with the upkeep of her home.  He is
valued at work and receives superior job performance ratings.  
The SOR alleges 26 debts, most dating from 2000-2005.  At that time, Applicant’s income
was $30,000 to $40,000, not enough to cover his living expenses and child support obligations; and
his wife’s employment was sporadic during that period.  Between 2005 and 2007, Applicant worked
two jobs to settle some of his debts.  Applicant now earns $82,000, and he has improved his
financial situation significantly.  Applicant has paid, or is making payments toward, 19 of the 26
debts.  He has disputed some of the delinquencies, and he has demonstrated that four of the debts
belong to his father, who has the same name.  Applicant has received financial counseling and is
enrolled in a credit restoration program.  The Judge found in Applicant’s favor with regard to all of
the debts.  
Applicant argues that the Judge’s adverse decision is arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to
law.  In his appeal brief, Applicant presents information regarding his high level of responsibility
and his accomplishments at work.1  Applicant argues that the Judge did not give adequate weight
to the evidence he presented in mitigation.  Applicant has not demonstrated error on the part of the
Judge, since the presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a
3
favorable security clearance determination.  As the trier of fact, the Judge must weigh the evidence
as a whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice
versa.  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for
a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate that the Judge weighed the
evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-11983 at 2 (App. Bd. Jan. 28, 2011).  
In this case, the Judge found in Applicant’s favor with regard Guideline F and one allegation
under Guideline E.  The Judge found against Applicant under four allegations under Guideline E.
The Judge discussed the possible application of the relevant mitigating conditions. Decision at 9-12.
The Judge reasonably explained the mitigating evidence under Guideline E was insufficient to
satisfy the government’s security concerns.  The Board does not review a case de novo.  After
reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168
(1962)).  Therefore, the Judge’s adverse decision under Guideline E is sustainable on this record.
See also Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).
Order
The Judge’s decision denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                   
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                   
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
