1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-01747
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 14, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On October 20, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1,
2006. 
 
On November 16, 2010, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
initially requested a hearing based on the written record. Department Counsel thereafter
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
March 7, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 7, 2011, and I convened the
hearing as scheduled on March 31, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 6,
which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and
submitted Exhibits A through E at the time of hearing, which were also admitted without
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr) on April 8, 2011. I granted
2
Applicant’s request to keep the record open until April 15, 2011, to submit additional
documents, and one additional document that was received, has been identified and
entered into evidence without objection as Exhibit F. Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR, Applicant admitted both SOR allegations 1.a. and 1.b. The
admitted allegations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 48 years old. He is currently unmarried, although he was married
from 1985 to 1991, and again from 1993 to 2005, and he has one son. He served in the
United States Air force from 1980 through 1984, and he received an Honorable
Discharge. Applicant has held a security clearance for 29 years. He has been employed
by the same defense contractor for 22 years, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in
connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists two allegations (1.a. and 1.b.) regarding overdue debts under
Adjudicative Guideline F. As reviewed above, Applicant admitted both allegations in his
RSOR.  The allegations will be discussed below as they were listed on the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for real estate mortgage that was
foreclosed for a delinquent account in the approximate amount of $296,000. (Tr at 54-
57.)
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR for an account that is past due in the
amount of $74,205.
Applicant testified that these debts are for a home that he purchased as his
primary residence on December 12, 2005, for $371,000. He continued making his
monthly payments until May 1, 2008. Applicant stated that his house was in an area of
the country that was very severely affected by the housing crisis, and his house
depreciated by $200,000. The loan he used to purchase his home was 3/1 ARM, so that
the amount of the monthly payments for the loans would be fixed for three years, and
then the monthly payments would go up significantly after the three years. Applicant
used two loans to purchase the house. The first loan was for 80% of the value of the
house, and that is the basis for 1.a.  The second loan was for 20% of the value of the
house, and that was to be considered for the down payment.  That loan is 1.b. on the
SOR.
3
Applicant testified that he had been paying approximately $1,900 for the two
loans, but the amount he was going to have to pay was significantly more, although at
the hearing he did not know what the amount of the payments was going to be. He also
had the financial problem of his fuel prices rising, since he lived far from his
employment, so that he was paying about $400 a month for fuel. Applicant could not sell
his house in a normal real estate transaction since it was valued at $200,000 less than
he paid for it. He considered renting out the house, but he learned that the rental market
was so weak that he would have received approximately $500 or $600 less each month
than what he would have to pay for the mortgage loans, which he could not afford with
he would have had to pay for rent for his living accommodations. He examined the
possibility of a short sale, but he was informed  that if he was successful with a short
sale, he would still be liable to pay taxes for what he failed to pay on the loan as taxable
income. (Tr at 28-31.)
Since Applicant believed it was the most advantageous move he could make, he
simply stopped making payments on his loan on May 1, 2008. He immediately informed
his company’s security department of his financial situation. He also immediately
vacated the house on May 1, 2008, and rented an apartment closer to his employment
site. (Tr at 31-32.) Applicant testified that the house was sold at auction in February
2009, and at least once more after that. He averred that he did not believe the creditors
were going to pursue him for any additional money, because he was informed that as
long as the loans in question were received at the time of purchase and never exceeded
the initial value of the home, then he would not be responsible for any additional money
to the creditor if the home was foreclosed. The creditors have not made any further
attempt to collect for any money owed. (Tr at 31-35.)
Applicant averred that, with the exception of the two loans for the home
purchase, he has been current on all of his other debts, both before and after the
purchase and subsequent foreclosure of his home. He testified that he has never had a
debt in collection or charged off, never defaulted on any other loan, nor had a lien
placed against him or failed to file and pay his taxes. (Tr at 42-43.) Applicant’s current
gross income is  $108,000 a year, and his monthly expenditure for rent is $1,700 a
month, which, he testified, he has no difficulty in paying. (Tr at 35-38.)  
Mitigation
Applicant submitted two positive character letters. The first was from the Director
of Security for Applicant’s employer, who indicated that he has worked on and off with
Applicant for more than 20 years. He wrote, “Along with my colleagues, I can attest that
[Applicant] possesses the highest degree of integrity and follows the highest standards
of professionalism. With the skill and commitment I witness from [Applicant] he has my
full and complete trust.” The second letter was from his supervisor who has known
Applicant for many years. He described Applicant as “honest, reliable, and dedicated.”
(Exhibit A.) 
Applicant submitted documents showing that he received three company awards
and commendations for his good work. (Exhibits B, C, D.) He also submitted his DD
4
Form 214, confirming that Applicant served in the United States Air Force from 1980 to
1984 and received an Honorable Discharge. It also shows that he earned the Air Force
Training Ribbon, the Air Force Good Conduct Medal, the Air Force Longevity Service
Award, and the Air Force Outstanding Unit Award.  (Exhibit E.)   
Finally, in his post hearing submissions, Applicant forwarded his Performance
Evaluation from his employer for 2010. His overall performance as to his objectives was
rated, “All Achieved.” He was described as “diligent and productive.”  He also included a
letter from a Contractor Special Security Officer of his employer, who wrote that
Applicant’s security records were reviewed as far back as they were available, and from
1999 to the present, Applicant has had no security violations or incidents. (Exhibit F.)   
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
5
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19 (a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19 (c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant had accumulated significant delinquent debt. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties: Under AG ¶  20 (b), it may be mitigating where “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As noted
above, Applicant testified that his financial problems resulted from the financial
downturn that made his house worth $200,000 less than when he purchased it, and the
significant increase in the amount he would be required to pay on his home loans.
Because of the decrease in value of the home, it could not be sold in a regular sale, nor
would renting the house allow Applicant to pay the mortgage loans and to pay for rent. If
Applicant had made a short sale, he believed, based on information he received, that he
would still be liable to pay taxes for what he failed to pay on the loan as taxable income.
 
6
I find that Applicant has acted responsibly, since as soon as Applicant stopped
making his monthly mortgage payments, he vacated the house, so that the bank could
take possession of  it and ultimately resell it, and  with the exception of the two loans for
the home purchase, he has been current on all of his other debts, both before and after
the purchase and subsequent foreclosure of his home. Applicant also informed his
employer’s security officer of his financial difficulties. Therefore, I find that this mitigating
condition is a factor for consideration in this case. 
I conclude that Applicant acted reasonably and responsibly when faced with a
difficult, and unfortunately not uncommon, financial challenge. In all other financial
areas, Applicant has and continues to maintain economic stability. Therefore, he has
mitigated the financial concerns of the Government.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
  
I considered the potentially Disqualifying and Mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, including all of the reasons cited
above as to why the Mitigating Conditions apply. I then reviewed the positive character
letters on behalf of Applicant, his excellent military and civilian employment history,
including 22 years with his current employer, and no security violations noted in a
career of holding a security clearance for almost 30 years. I find that the record
evidence leaves me with no significant questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility
and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
