 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
   )    ISCR Case No. 09-03175 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O‟Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant abused marijuana to as recently as mid-January 2011, despite holding a 
security clearance. He concealed his marijuana involvement when he applied for his 
clearance in July 2000. Since about 1987 Applicant has also abused alcohol at times to 
intoxication, including after his 2008 drunk-driving conviction. Clearance denied. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On September 20, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline H (Drug Involvement), Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption), and Guideline E 
(Personal Conduct), which provided the basis for its preliminary decision to revoke his 
security clearance. DOHA took action under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 2 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on October 7, 2010, and he requested 
a hearing.  The case was assigned to me on December 21, 2010, to consider whether it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. On January 6, 2011, I scheduled a hearing for January 25, 2011. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Seven Government exhibits (Ex. 1-7) were 
admitted without objection. Applicant testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on 
February 2, 2011. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
The SOR alleged under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) that Applicant used 
marijuana with varying frequency from around the late 1980s to at least March 2009 (SOR 
1.a), including after he had been granted a Department of Defense security clearance in 
about November 2001 (SOR 1.b); that Applicant had been arrested, in part, for possession 
of a Class D controlled substance in 2008, which was dismissed (SOR 1.c); that he had 
been fined for possession of marijuana in 2004 (SOR 1.d); and that he had been charged, 
in part, with two counts of violation of the controlled drug act in 2001, which were dismissed 
(SOR 1.e). Under Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption) Applicant was alleged to have 
consumed alcohol, at times to intoxication, from about 1984 to at least March 2009 (SOR 
2.a); to have been convicted of operating under the influence (OUI) of liquor in 2008 (SOR 
2.b); and to have been fined $600 for transporting alcoholic beverages in 2001 (SOR 2.c). 
The SOR alleged under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) that Applicant deliberately falsified 
a July 2000 security clearance application by responding negatively to whether he had 
illegally used any controlled substances since the age of 16 or in the last seven years 
(SOR 3.a). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant denied that he had used any marijuana from 1991 to 1999, 
and that he had deliberately falsified his security clearance application. He admitted that he 
continued to use marijuana while he held a security clearance, that he abused alcohol as 
alleged, and that he had been arrested and convicted of the alcohol and drug charges as 
alleged. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After considering the 
pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 42 years old, and he has been employed as a test technician by a 
defense contractor since November 1998. (Ex. 2.) He has never been married. (Tr. 23.) He 
seeks to retain the secret-level security clearance that he has held since about November 
2001. (Ex. 1.) 
 
Applicant began drinking alcohol at age 15. He had a part-time job in construction 
after school and on infrequent occasions, less than once a month, he drank two beers with 
his older coworkers. In high school, he drank two beers on a monthly basis. During his two 
years in college from 1987 to 1989 (Tr. 24.), his alcohol consumption increased to six 
 
 3 
beers on average every other weekend at parties. On one occasion, after drinking a half 
liter of vodka to intoxication, he suffered a hangover that led him to abstain for one month 
only to return to his previous drinking level. Around 1987 he also began smoking marijuana 
occasionally. (Tr. 27.) He liked the drug‟s effects, and in 1988 or 1989 his abuse increased 
to “most days.” (Ex. 3; Tr. 27-28.) 
 
 For two or three years after leaving college, Applicant drank at least six beers after 
work on a daily basis. On the weekends, he consumed up to 12 beers to intoxication. (Ex. 
3; Tr. 45.) He also continued to smoke marijuana. In August 1991 he entered on active 
duty in the United States military. (Ex. 2; Tr. 24.) He held a confidential-level security 
clearance for his duties as an electronics technician. (Tr. 23-24.) He limited his drinking to 
off-duty hours, but he engaged in binge drinking at keg parties, clubs, and while in port, 
whenever he had the opportunity. (Ex. 3; Tr. 45.) In 1996 Applicant realized that he could 
not continue his binge drinking. In August 1997, he was granted an honorable discharge 
from the military. His drinking gradually decreased over the years, although it was still to 
abusive levels on occasion. (Ex. 3.) 
 
 The evidence is conflicting as to the extent of Applicant‟s marijuana use while he 
was in the military. In March 2009 he told an authorized investigator for the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) that he abused marijuana regularly, on a daily basis, since 
the late 1980s.
1
 (Ex. 3.) Applicant now denies that he used any marijuana from 1991 to 
1999, which includes the years of his active duty service. (Tr. 28-31.) Had Applicant 
smoked marijuana with such regularity while he was in the service, it is likely that his use 
would have been discovered. There is no evidence that he faced any disciplinary action. 
Nonetheless, it is also difficult to believe that he would completely give up a drug that he 
had enjoyed on a daily basis. It is more likely that he engaged in limited marijuana use. But 
even if he abstained for several years, the evidence shows that by July 1999 he was again 
abusing marijuana. (Ex. 1; Tr. 32-33.) Before long, he was smoking marijuana, at times 
daily. (Ex. 3; Tr. 32.) 
 
 After a year working as a test technician in the civilian sector, Applicant began his 
present employment in November 1998. (Ex. 2; Tr. 24.) On July 13, 2000, Applicant 
executed a security clearance application (SF 86) on which he responded “No” to question 
27, “Since the age of 16 or in the last seven years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally 
used any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, 
narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), amphetamines, depressants 
(barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or 
prescription drugs?” (Ex. 2.)  Applicant was granted a secret-level security clearance 
around November 2001. (Ex. 1.) Applicant continued to smoke marijuana despite knowing 
that it was illegal and inconsistent with his security clearance responsibilities. (Tr. 33-34.) 
He felt marijuana did not affect him as negatively as alcohol did. (Tr. 34.) 
 
                                                 
1 
In August 2009, Applicant was given the opportunity to review the investigator‟s report of his March 2009 
interview, which included his admission to daily use of marijuana from the late 1980s. He made no changes 
other than to indicate that marijuana caused him no breathing difficulties and he did not need the drug to relax. 
(Ex. 4.) Nonetheless, it is difficult to believe that he could have hidden daily use of marijuana from the military. 
 
 4 
 In mid-July 2001 he smoked some marijuana and consumed about three shots of 
rum and “many” beers while socializing at a campground. (Tr. 37.) En route home, he 
pulled over into a parking lot because he felt too intoxicated to safely operate his vehicle. 
(Tr. 37-38.) A local police officer investigated because he had left his lights on. An open 
beer and a marijuana pipe with residue were found in his vehicle. Applicant was charged 
with two counts of violating the controlled drug act and with transporting alcoholic 
beverages. He was convicted of the alcohol charge and fined $600. The drug charges were 
filed without a finding. (Ex. 3, 6.) 
 
 In November 2004 Applicant was stopped for speeding. The officer smelled 
marijuana, and Applicant was arrested after a check of his license revealed that his right to 
operate a motor vehicle in the state had been suspended for failure to pay a ticket. About a 
quarter-ounce bag of marijuana was found in the vehicle, and Applicant was charged with 
possession of a Class D substance. He pleaded guilty and was fined $300. (Ex. 1, 3; Tr. 
40-41.) 
 
 In early September 2008 Applicant drank about a half pint of liquor and three beers 
at his home. He then drove over to a friend‟s home, where he bought a quarter ounce of 
marijuana before proceeding on to a veterans‟ hall. Once there, he drank more beer to 
intoxication. He left just before “last call.” He drove off the highway and rolled his truck. (Ex. 
3; Tr. 41-43.) Responding police noted a strong odor of alcohol from inside his vehicle, and 
Applicant‟s speech was slurred. The police found marijuana in Applicant‟s pocket, and at 
the hospital, his blood alcohol level registered at .264%. Applicant was charged with OUI 
liquor, possession of a class D substance, and marked lanes violation. (Ex. 3, 5.) In 
December 2008 he admitted to sufficient facts to sustain a conviction for OUI. He was 
sentenced to an alcohol safety action program (ASAP), to 45 days loss of license, to one 
year of probation, and court costs and fines totaling $600 plus the costs of probation and 
the ASAP program. The drug offense was dismissed, although Applicant admits that he 
had marijuana in his possession. (Tr. 36.) He was found not responsible of the marked 
lanes violation. (Ex. 1, 3, 5, 7.) Applicant reported his arrest and conviction to his employer 
in a timely manner. (Ex. 7.) 
 
 On October 16, 2008, Applicant executed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). He listed his recent arrest for OUI and possession of 
marijuana as well as the November 2004 marijuana possession and July 2001 open 
container offenses. In response to question 24 concerning any illegal drug use in the last 
seven years, Applicant indicated that he had used marijuana on an occasional basis, 
“several times” from about July 1999 to September 2008. (Ex. 1.) 
 
 On March 18, 2009, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator for the 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) about his alcohol consumption, his illegal drug 
abuse, and his related arrests. By then, he had completed three weeks of the court-
mandated 16 week drug and alcohol program, but he had yet to attend the two Alcoholics 
Anonymous (AA) meetings required. He was still drinking, about two or three beers one 
night a week and 12 beers over the weekends. He consumed two shots of liquor and “more 
than a handful” of beers to intoxication in February 2009. While he was making an effort to 
 
 5 
avoid drinking bourbon, and he had not driven while intoxicated since September 2008, he 
did not intend to abstain completely from alcohol. As for his marijuana use, Applicant 
generalized that he has smoked marijuana for the most part daily since the late 1980s in a 
variety of settings, including at parties, with friends, or alone. Over the past two or three 
years, he had reduced his marijuana abuse to two or three days a week due to its expense. 
Applicant did not intend to reduce his marijuana use any further. During his interview, 
Applicant was asked why he had indicated on his e-QIP that he used marijuana only since 
July 1999. He explained that the directions on the form required him to only go back ten 
years. (Ex. 3.) 
 
 Applicant continued to smoke marijuana on a regular basis, up to daily at times, to 
as recently as January 14, 2011. He smokes marijuana while playing cards with friends. In 
2010 he smoked marijuana every other weekend to every weekend. (Tr. 53-54.) He 
purchased marijuana to as recently as November 2010. (Tr. 55.) Applicant is subject to 
being called for a random drug screen by his employer although he has never taken a drug 
test for his employer. (Tr. 35.) Applicant does not see marijuana use as “that big of a 
problem as long as [he‟s] not hurting somebody else or endangering someone else.” (Tr. 
34.) Concerning his future intent, Applicant does not want to use marijuana regularly like he 
did in the past, but he cannot promise that he will not abuse marijuana in the future (“I‟m 
not going to sit here and say that I probably will never smoke again.”). (Tr. 36.) He is “sure” 
that he would smoke marijuana if offered some by his friends while playing cards. He is 
personally more concerned about alcohol. He has blacked out from drinking in the past, 
most recently on the occasion of his accident in September 2008. (Tr. 57.)  
 
 As of January 2011 Applicant had completed the requirements for his September 
2008 OUI. (Tr. 47.) Applicant consumed alcohol “over the limit” (i.e., above .08% blood 
alcohol content) more than twice since his accident (Tr. 44.), although he did not drive on 
those occasions. At a bowling banquet in the spring of 2009, he consumed more than six 
mixed drinks. (Tr. 51-52.) On December 31, 2010, Applicant drank to intoxication at home. 
(Tr. 52-53.) He believes he can control his drinking and avoids putting himself in situations 
where he might drive drunk. (Tr. 46.) Applicant consumes two beers on Wednesday nights 
while bowling in his league. On Friday and Saturday nights and sometimes on Sundays, he 
drinks “maybe four to six” beers. (Tr. 48-49.) He has never been diagnosed as having an 
alcohol problem. (Tr. 47.)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a „right‟ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant‟s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant‟s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
 
 6 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge‟s overall adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. 
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, 
rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of Executive 
Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: “Use of an illegal 
drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual‟s reliability 
and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person‟s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.” 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” 
and include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens),
2
 and 
                                                 
2
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
 
 7 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” Several 
disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25 are implicated. 
 
AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” applies because of Applicant‟s long history of 
marijuana abuse since 1987. Even if I accept that he abstained from marijuana use while 
he was on active duty from August 1991 to August 1997, he admitted on his October 2008 
e-QIP that he was abusing marijuana as of July 1999. His abuse of marijuana continued, at 
times daily, to as recently as January 14, 2011. AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug possession, 
including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or 
possession of drug paraphernalia,” is established by Applicant‟s years of purchasing the 
drug. He bought marijuana for his own consumption as recently as November 2010. AG ¶ 
25(g), “any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance,” is also implicated 
because Applicant continued to abuse marijuana while he held a security clearance, 
knowing that it was inconsistent with his obligations of that clearance. Furthermore, AG ¶ 
25(h), “expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and convincingly 
commit to discontinue drug use,” also applies. He admitted at his hearing that he was 
“sure” that he would smoke marijuana if it was offered to him by his friends. 
 
Applicant satisfies none of the mitigating conditions under Guideline H AG ¶ 26. His 
abuse of marijuana as recent as January 14, 2011, certainly did not happen “so long ago.” 
Nor was his use infrequent. AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual‟s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” does 
not apply. In addition, he has not demonstrated the intent not to abuse any drugs in the 
future. See AG ¶ 26(b). To the contrary, not only does he continue to socialize with the 
friends with whom he smoked marijuana in January 2011, but he also admits that he will 
smoke the drug again if it is offered to him. Moreover, under 50 U.S.C. § 435c, “the head of 
a Federal agency may not grant or renew a security clearance for a covered person who is 
an unlawful user of a controlled substance or an addict.” This statute is applicable only if 
the person is currently an unlawful user or addict. (See ISCR Case No. 03-25009 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 28, 2005)). Absent a clinical diagnosis, I do not conclude Applicant is addicted to 
marijuana. However, the evidence establishes that he is a current user of marijuana. 
Although he had not smoked marijuana in the week preceding his security clearance 
hearing, he did not intend to stop using it. Applicant is statutorily prohibited from having his 
security clearance renewed. 
                                                                                                                                                             
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance. 
 
 8 
Alcohol Consumption 
 
The concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21: “Excessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control 
impulses, and can raise questions about an individual‟s reliability and trustworthiness.” 
Applicant‟s underage drinking is clearly an abusive use of the substance, although there is 
no indication that he drank in excessive amounts before college. During the late 1980s he 
drank on average six beers on a daily basis to as many as 12 beers on the weekends. 
Also, while in the military, he engaged in binge drinking to high levels of intoxication 
whenever he had the opportunity. Around 1996 he realized that his drinking was becoming 
a problem, so he made an effort to reduce his consumption. Yet at times he continued to 
drink to intoxication, including in mid-July 2001 when he was fined for transporting an open 
container of alcohol. In September 2008, he blacked out from drinking and rolled his truck. 
His blood alcohol content on the occasion of his OUI tested at .264%. Two disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 22 are established:  AG ¶ 22(a), “alcohol-related incidents away 
from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, 
disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent,” and AG ¶ 22(c), “habitual or binge 
consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.” 
 
Even though the September 2008 incident scared Applicant so that he no longer 
drives a vehicle when he is intoxicated, he continues to engage in binge drinking on 
occasion. At a bowling banquet in the spring of 2009, he consumed more than six mixed 
drinks. On December 31, 2010, Applicant drank to intoxication in his home. By then, he 
had completed the alcohol counseling program required by the court for his OUI. Given the 
his many years of heavy drinking, and his high blood alcohol content on the occasion of his 
OUI in September 2008, I cannot apply AG ¶ 23(a), “so much time has passed, or the 
behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual‟s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.” He has also failed to establish a sufficient pattern of 
modified consumption to implicate AG ¶ 23(b), “the individual acknowledges his or her 
alcoholism or issues of abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or responsible 
use (if an alcohol abuser),” or AG ¶ 23(d), which provides as follows: 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization 
and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a 
recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 
 9 
He has made a commitment not to drink and drive but not to avoid episodes of intoxication. 
The Alcohol Consumption concerns are not sufficiently mitigated. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in Guideline E, AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual‟s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant did not disclose that he had abused marijuana when he completed his SF 
86 on July 13, 2000. The Government alleged that Applicant should have indicated that he 
used marijuana from 1993 to 2000, apparently based on his admission to the OPM 
investigator in March 2009 that he had smoked marijuana on a daily basis since the late 
1980s. (Ex. 3.) Applicant denies any intentional falsification, so the burden is on the 
Government establishing the applicability of AG ¶ 16(a): 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
A finding of intentional falsification can be inferred from omission of information that 
on its face should have been reported. In his Answer to the SOR and at his hearing, 
Applicant asserted that he did not use any marijuana between 1991 and 1999. He testified 
that to the best of his knowledge, he was in the military during that time and did not smoke 
marijuana. (Tr. 22.) His recall about the dates of his military service has been inaccurate in 
that he served from August 1991 to August 1997. He now claims to remember that he did 
not resume his marijuana use before he completed his July 2000 SF 86, although when 
initially asked about the date, Applicant indicated he “can‟t say for sure if it was ‟99 or 
2000.” (Tr. 33.) Applicant previously indicated on his e-QIP completed in October 2008 that 
he smoked marijuana from about July 1999 to September 2008. (Ex. 1) He told the OPM 
investigator in March 2009 that he had smoked marijuana regularly since the late 1980s. 
Even assuming he abstained from marijuana use while he was in the military and that July 
1999 was an estimated date, he has not given me a good reason why I should believe that 
he did not resume his marijuana use before his SF 86 in light of his e-QIP and interview 
disclosures. AG ¶ 16(a) applies. 
 
 Applicant‟s October 2008 admission of marijuana abuse is too belated to consider 
mitigating condition AG ¶ 17(a), “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct 
the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts.” AG ¶ 
 
 10 
17(c), “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual‟s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” 
applies in that the false response to the drug inquiry on his July 2000 SF 86 is more than 
ten years in the past. However, it is difficult to fully mitigate the Personal Conduct concerns 
in light of the inconsistencies in the record concerning the duration and frequency of his 
marijuana abuse. It was not until Applicant answered the SOR that he denied any 
marijuana abuse while he was in the military. If Applicant had abstained for several years, 
as he now claims, it is likely that he would have told the OPM investigator that he had not 
used marijuana during those years, and that he would have at least taken the opportunity 
to correct the investigator‟s report that he has “smoked marijuana regularly since the late 
1980‟s, smoking daily,” if it was indeed inaccurate. Applicant made only the following 
changes:  “I didn‟t have trouble breathing from smoking marijuana, but I can breathe better 
without it. I don‟t need marijuana to relax, it is only one of the side effects.” (Ex. 4.) So, 
while Applicant‟s October 2008 and March 2009 disclosures of his marijuana use and 
arrest record implicate AG ¶ 17(e), “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or 
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress,” reform considerations 
addressed in AG ¶ 17(d), “the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur,” are not firmly established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant‟s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual‟s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
Applicant has a long history of abusive drinking which has not stopped even after a 
very serious OUI offense. For many of those years, he also abused marijuana, in knowing 
disregard of his security responsibilities and of the laws prohibiting such involvement. 
Applicant candidly acknowledged that if he is offered marijuana in the future, he will use it. 
 
 11 
Given his unwillingness to conform his behavior to DoD requirements, I cannot conclude 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to renew his security clearance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.e:  Against Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:  Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:  Against Applicant 
 
 Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
