 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05638   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: David P. Price, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 5, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 5, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another administrative judge 
on January 18, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 24, 2011, scheduling 
the hearing for February 16, 2011. Applicant requested a continuance, and it was 
 
2 
 
granted. The case was reassigned to me on March 18, 2011. DOHA issued another 
notice of hearing on April 8, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on May 
3, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 10, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A through J, which 
were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 27, 
2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He seeks to retain a 
security clearance he has held since the 1970s. He served on active duty in the United 
States military from his graduation from a military service academy in 1981 until he 
retired with an honorable discharge in the pay grade 0-5 in 2001. He has a master’s 
degree and is attending school for a Ph.D. He is divorced and has two adult children.1 
 
 Applicant spent much of his military career in special operations and deployed on 
multiple occasions. He also deployed as a government employee after his retirement. 
He was hired as a vice president for a prominent defense contractor upon his 
retirement. He later formed his own business using the knowledge, experience, and 
technical expertise he had obtained in the military and thereafter. Applicant intended 
that his company be incorporated as a Subchapter S corporation.2 Through a 
paperwork error, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) did not receive tax form 2553, 
Election by a Small Business Corporation, electing that the company be treated as an S 
corporation. Applicant also formed a non-profit company that would be used to benefit 
emergency first responders.3  
 
 Applicant’s company required him to work outdoors and under sometimes 
rigorous conditions. In February 2006, he was involved in a life-threatening accident that 
broke his leg. There was significant trauma to the leg, and it nearly had to be 
amputated. He required five operations over the next few years and multiple 
transplants. The company never recovered from Applicant’s injury, and it was dissolved 
in 2009.4 
  
 Applicant was not as sophisticated in the business end of his company as he was 
in the field work. His office manager charged personal expenses to the company. His 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 21, 33, 87-88, 98-99; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1; AE A. 
2 S corporations are corporations that elect to pass corporate income, losses, deductions and credit 
through to their shareholders for federal tax purposes. Shareholders of S corporations report the flow-
through of income and losses on their personal tax returns and are assessed tax at their individual 
income tax rates. This allows S corporations to avoid double taxation on the corporate income. S 
corporations are responsible for tax on certain built-in gains and passive income. See 
www.irs.gov/businesses/small/article/0,,id=98263,00.html. 
3 Tr. at 22-40, 56, 58, 69-73, 88; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 6; AE J. 
 
4 Tr. at 40-52, 66, 82, 89-92; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 6; AE B, D, J. 
 
3 
 
state and local taxes were not paid. He stated that he thought he may have been 
subjected to double tax because his company may have paid corporate taxes. He did 
not file his 2005, 2006, and 2007 federal income returns until October 2008.5  
 
 In October 2009, the IRS determined that with interest and penalties, Applicant 
owed $149,877 in taxes for tax years 2005, 2006, and 2007. Applicant’s state of 
residence also determined that he owed in excess of $25,000 for tax years 2006 and 
2007.6 
 
 The IRS received payments by levy from Applicant of $3,519 and $358 in August 
2009, and $618 and $96 in October 2009. Applicant wrote several letters to the IRS 
noting the factors leading to his unpaid taxes and seeking an offer in compromise. In 
October 2009, the IRS wrote to Applicant noting they received his letter and were 
“looking into the matter.” In December 2009, the IRS filed a federal tax lien of $137,000 
against him for taxes owed from tax years 2005, 2006, and 2007. IRS documents note 
that Applicant was pending an installment agreement since September 2009. An 
installment agreement was established in July 2010, in which Applicant would pay $100 
per month. By that time, Applicant’s company had been dissolved, he had liquidated 
most of his assets and used the proceeds to pay his other creditors, and his home had 
lost all its equity because of the real estate collapse. Applicant was attending school for 
his Ph.D. His plan was to pay the IRS $100 per month until he completed school, at 
which time he would be working at a salary high enough to increase the payments. He 
paid his state $500 in July 2010.7 
 
 Applicant recently received a substantial inheritance. He used the money to 
completely pay his tax debts to the IRS and his state.8 
 
 Applicant was highly decorated during his military career. He submitted 
numerous letters and other documents attesting to his outstanding performance of 
duties, patriotism, loyalty, honesty, trustworthiness, honor, and integrity.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 52-56, 66-82; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 6; AE C, G. 
 
6 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 9; AE G. 
 
7 Tr. at 57-65, 82-86, 90; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5-10; AE E, G, J. 
 
8 Tr. at 60-65; Applicant’s response to SOR; AE F, G, I, J. 
 
9 AE A, H. 
 
4 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant owed state and federal taxes for several years. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
  Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
  Applicant just recently paid his delinquent state and federal income taxes. AG ¶ 
20(a) is not yet applicable. Applicant had a traumatic leg injury requiring numerous 
surgeries over several years. That had a direct impact on his company’s viability and 
eventual dissolution. It also was a distraction when it came to resolving his tax liability. 
However, his tax debts were not a direct result of the injury, and they were not beyond 
his control. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant started steps to resolve his taxes in 2009. He entered into an 
installment agreement with the IRS in July 2010 to pay $100 per month. He inherited a 
substantial sum and used the money to completely pay his tax debts to the IRS and his 
state. I find that Applicant’s financial problems have been resolved and are under 
control. I further find that he made a good-faith effort to repay his debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) 
and 20(d) are applicable.  
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence. Applicant’s decades of 
honorable service to this country outweigh the concerns raised by his now-resolved tax 
issues. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a;   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
