 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08043 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Duffy James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 6, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline C, 
Foreign Preference, and Guideline B, Foreign Influence. DOHA acted under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 18, 2010, and requested a hearing if it 
was necessary. Department Counsel submitted a notification that the Government was 
ready to proceed on November 30, 2010. The case was originally assigned to another 
judge and was reassigned to me on March 28, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
 
2 
 
on April 13, 2011, and the hearing convened as scheduled on April 27, 2011. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The Government also requested that administrative notice be taken of 
Hearing Exhibits (HE) I through VI. Applicant had no objection to the administrative 
notice request and it was granted. Applicant testified and offered no exhibits. The record 
was held open until May 11, 2011, for Applicant to submit additional information. On 
Applicant’s behalf, his Facility Security Officer timely submitted exhibits (AE) A through 
D, which were admitted into evidence without objection. HE VII is an email showing that 
Applicant adopted AE A through D. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 
9, 2011.  
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement imposed by ¶ 
E3.1.8 of the Directive. Based on Applicant’s testimony, Department Counsel moved to 
amend Paragraph 1 (Guideline C) of the SOR by adding the following allegation:  
 
c. You obtained an Ecuadorian passport in April 2011 and currently 
possess that passport. 
 
Applicant had no objection to the motion to amend the SOR, and it was granted.1 
 
Findings of Facts 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the original SOR 
allegations. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant’s background 
 
Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
working for his current employer since June 2009. He is a high school graduate. He is 
married and has two children, ages nine and four. This is the first time that he has 
applied for a security clearance.2 
 
Applicant was born in Ecuador. He is a dual citizen of Ecuador and the United 
States and currently resides in Ecuador. Except for a period of approximately two years 
(1999-2000) when he resided in the United States, he has always resided in Ecuador. 
His mother and father are missionaries who reside in Ecuador. His mother was born in 
the United States and is only a U.S. citizen. His father was born in Ecuador and is a 
dual citizen of Ecuador and the United States. His father served in the U.S. military and 
is a Vietnam War veteran. Applicant acquired his U.S. citizenship by birth and his 
                                                          
1 Tr. 12-14, 48-52, 58-60, 63-65. 
 
2 Tr. 5, 27-28, 40-41, 55; GE 1 through 3. 
 
3 
 
parents documented his birth by filing a Consular Report of Birth Abroad at the U.S. 
Embassy in Ecuador in July 1980.3 
 
Applicant’s wife and two daughters are citizens and residents of Ecuador. His 
daughters are not currently eligible for U.S. citizenship because he fails to meet the U.S. 
residency requirements (six years) for them to acquire U.S. citizenship through him. His 
daughters may become eligible by residing in the United States for a period of time. He 
indicated that he and his family will reside permanently in the United States when he is 
in a better financial situation.4 
 
Applicant’s brother and three sisters were born in Ecuador, and they are dual 
citizens of Ecuador and the United States. None of them have served in the military. His 
brother resides in the United States. Each of his sisters resides in Ecuador. One of his 
brothers-in-law is a U.S. citizen; the other two are Ecuadorian citizens. His mother-in-
law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of Ecuador. He also has nieces and 
nephews who are citizens and residents of Ecuador. His grandfathers have passed 
away, and his grandmothers reside in the United States. None of Applicant’s relatives 
are connected, currently or in the past, with any foreign government.5 
 
Applicant inherited land in Ecuador from his grandfather. He and other family 
members reside on that property. The value of the property is approximately $45,000 to 
$65,000. He has a bank account with a balance of about $300 to $800 in Ecuador. He 
also has a bank account with about $1,000 in the United States. Except for that latter 
bank account, he owns no other property in the United States.6 
 
Applicant voted in a general election held in Ecuador in 2009. He has never 
voted in a U.S. election. He was issued an Ecuadorian passport in June 2005 that was 
due to expire in June 2011. His company submitted a letter dated November 16, 2009, 
documenting Applicant’s destruction of that passport. He signed that letter. At the 
hearing, he testified that he acquired another Ecuadorian passport on April 19, 2011, 
that is due to expire on April 19, 2016. He used this Ecuadorian passport to travel from 
Ecuador to the hearing and was planning to use it to return to Ecuador. He has always 
used an Ecuadorian passport to enter or depart Ecuador. He testified that Ecuadorian 
custom officials require that he use his Ecuador passport. He also indicated that, in 
order to use only his U.S. passport to enter and exit Ecuador, he would have to 
renounce his Ecuadorian citizenship. During an interview with a Department of State 
investigator in October 2010, he stated that, if requested, he would be willing to give up 
his Ecuadorian citizenship as he holds his U.S. nationality in higher regards over his 
Ecuadorian nationality. At the hearing, he did not indicate that he intends to renounce 
                                                          
3 Tr. 28-34, 38-41, 44-46, 59-60. 
4 Tr. 40-41, 52, 57. 
5 Tr. 31-32, 37-44, 46-47; GE 3. 
6 Tr. 34-36, 38-40, 43-44, 47-48, 52-53, 55-58. 
 
4 
 
his Ecuadorian citizenship. On May 11, 2011, Applicant surrendered his new 
Ecuadorian passport to his company’s facility security officer who indicated a Joint 
Personnel Adjudication System (JPAS) incident report would be submitted in the event 
the passport is returned to Applicant. A U.S. State Department publication reflects that a 
child born in Ecuador must depart that country for the first time using an Ecuadorian 
passport, but a dual national may re-enter Ecuador either as an Ecuadorian citizen or as 
a U.S. citizen with visa or as a tourist.7 
 
Applicant provided character reference letters in his post-hearing submission. 
One coworker indicated that Applicant displays the highest moral character, 
professionalism, and patriotism. The coworker describes him as a valuable asset to any 
organization. Other coworkers wrote letters attesting to his dedication, commitment to 
excellence, and integrity.8 
 
Ecuador 
 
Ecuador is a constitutional republic with a population of 14.6 million. The 
government is democratically elected and consists of a president with a cabinet, 
unicameral legislature, and court system including a national court of justice and 
provincial courts. In the past, Ecuador has been caught in cycles of political instability. 
Ecuador’s political parties have historically been small, loose organizations that depend 
more on populist, often charismatic, leaders to retain support on programs and ideology. 
Frequent splits have produced great factionalism. The last three popularly elected 
presidents did not complete their terms. Ecuador’s current president was first installed in 
January 2007 after an election process that election observers considered free, fair, and 
transparent. However, in March 2007, 57 members of Congress were dismissed for 
violations of campaign laws. This resulted in a largely deadlocked Congress that was 
replaced by a constituent assembly in September 2007. This assembly drafted a new 
constitution that voters approved in a referendum on September 28, 2008. The 
president was re-elected in April 2009.9  
 
The Ecuadorian Government generally respects the human rights of its citizens. 
However, the country continues to experience serious human rights problems including 
isolated unlawful killings and use of excessive force by security forces, sometimes with 
impunity; arbitrary arrests and detentions; corruption and other abuses by security 
forces; and corruption and denial of due process within the judicial system.10 
 
The United States and Ecuador have maintained close ties based on mutual 
interests in combating narco-trafficking and cooperating in fostering Ecuador’s 
                                                          
7 Tr. 48-53, 58-66; AE A; HE III. 
8. AE B through D. 
9 HE I, II, V, VI. 
10 HE I, V. 
 
5 
 
economic development. Ecuador uses the U.S. dollar as its official currency. Ecuador 
has always placed great emphasis on multilateral approaches to international problems 
and is a member of the United Nations and the Organization of American States. 
Ecuador is also a member of many regional groups, yet it has experienced border 
disputes with its neighbors Peru and Columbia. A major crisis erupted in March 2008, 
when Columbian forces raided a Revolutionary Armed Forces of Columbia (FARC) 
terrorist camp in Ecuador. The ongoing rift between Columbia and Ecuador has caused 
Ecuador to reinforce its ties with President Chavez and Venezuela.11 
 
Recent events have strained bilateral relations between the United States and 
Ecuador. U.S. officials have expressed concern about President Correa’s ties with 
President Chavez of Venezuela. In addition, President Correa’s refusal to extend the 
U.S. lease of Manta – an Air Force Base along the Pacific Coast used for U.S. aerial 
counter-drug detection and monitoring operations – beyond 2009, which jeopardized 
future U.S.-Ecuadorian counter-narcotics cooperation. Crime is a serious problem in 
Ecuador, and in late 2009 and early 2010, the Government declared a state of 
emergency in several areas of the country. During these emergencies certain 
constitutional rights are suspended, detention powers are expanded, and military forces 
worked with police forces on anti-crime initiatives. Due to the spread of organized crime, 
drug trafficking, small arms trafficking, and incursions by various Columbian terrorist 
organizations, the U.S. Embassy advises caution when traveling in certain parts of the 
country. U.S. Government personnel are under strict limitations with respect to traveling 
alone or overnight in certain areas, including Guayaquil. Eleven U.S. citizens including 
one in October 2009, have been kidnapped over the past decade.12 
 
Ecuador’s greatest counter-terrorism and security challenge is the presence of 
narcotics, criminal, and terrorists groups along its northern border. “[The FARC] 
regularly used Ecuadorian territory for recuperation, medical aid, weapons and 
explosives procurement, and coca processing. These activities involved Ecuadorian and 
Columbians refugees in northern Ecuador in direct and indirect ways.” While the current 
administration has publicly expressed a desire to eliminate the FARC’s presence in 
Ecuador, insufficient resources and a porous 450 mile boarder have made that 
presence difficult to thwart.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
11 HE I, II, III, IV, VI. 
12 HE III, VI. 
13 HE IV. 
 
6 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference is as follows:  
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.  
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; (2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a 
foreign country; (3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social 
welfare, or other such benefits from a foreign country; (4) residence in a 
foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; (5) using foreign 
citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another country; and  
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen.  
 
 As a U.S. citizen, Applicant obtained Ecuadorian passports in June 2005 and 
April 2011. He has used the Ecuadorian passports to exit and enter Ecuador, most 
recently in April 2011. He voted in the Ecuadorian general election in 2009. For most of 
his life, he has resided in Ecuador, along with his immediate family. His actions indicate 
a preference for Ecuador over the United States. The evidence establishes AG ¶¶ 10(a) 
and 10(b). 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate foreign preference security 
concerns: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; 
 
(d) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated; and 
 
(e) the vote in a foreign election was encouraged by the United States 
Government. 
 
Applicant’s Ecuadorian citizenship was based on his birth in that country, but 
since becoming an adult he has exercised rights and privileges of Ecuadorian 
citizenship, e.g., voting in the general election and using an Ecuadorian passport to 
travel. During an interview with a Department of State investigator, he has indicated that 
he would renounce his Ecuadorian citizenship if he was ever requested to do so. In 
 
8 
 
making the renunciation contingent upon a request, he has not demonstrated that he is 
unequivocally willing to renounce his foreign citizenship.14 No evidence was presented 
that the U.S. Government encouraged him to vote in the 2009 Ecuadorian general 
election. I find that AG ¶ 11(b) partially applies, but does not mitigate the security 
concerns under Guideline C. AG ¶¶ 11(a), 11(c), and 11(e) do not apply. 
 
 Applicant obtained an Ecuadorian passport in 2005 that was destroyed in 2009. 
He signed the letter documenting the destruction of that passport and, in doing so, 
should have been aware that possession of a foreign passport created security 
concerns and impacted his security clearance eligibility. Nevertheless, he recently 
renewed his Ecuadorian passport in April 2011, while his security clearance application 
was pending. He used that new passport to travel from Ecuador to the hearing and 
stated he would use it to return there. Since returning, he surrendered his Ecuadorian 
passport to his facility security officer. I find that AG ¶ 11(d) applies, but does not 
mitigate the Guideline C security concerns. Specifically, he has indicated he is required 
to use his Ecuadorian passport to travel to or from Ecuador. U.S. State Department 
information, however, reflects that dual citizens of Ecuador and the United States may 
enter Ecuador as a U.S. citizen with a visa. No evidence was presented that he 
obtained a visa to reside in Ecuador and, thereby, enable him to use his U.S. passport 
to enter or exit Ecuador. At the hearing, he said that he would have to renounce his 
Ecuadorian citizenship in order to travel only on a U.S. passport. No evidence was 
presented that he renounced his Ecuadorian citizenship. In short, he has failed to 
establish that he has taken whatever action may be necessary for him to no longer need 
his foreign passport for international travel. Under these circumstances, I find that his 
most recent surrender of his Ecuadorian passport to his facility security officer does not 
mitigate the Guideline C security concerns arising under SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Four are potentially applicable here: 
 
                                                          
14 See ISCR Case No. 09-07072 at (App. Bd. Dec. 14, 2010). 
 
9 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(d), and 7(e) require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” 
The “heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a 
relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk of greater than the normal risk 
inherent in having a family member living under a foreign government or owning 
property in a foreign country. The totality of Applicant’s family ties to a foreign country 
as well as each individual family tie must be considered.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”15 
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.”16 Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the 
United States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, 
the nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerability to coercion from the government, terrorist organizations, or other groups.17 
 
                                                          
15 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
17 See generally, ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) (reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activity in area where family members resided.  
 
10 
 
 Applicant’s numerous and close family ties in Ecuador are a concern. His wife 
and children are citizens and residents of Ecuador. He resides there with them. His 
father and sisters are dual citizens of Ecuador and the United States and reside in 
Ecuador. Although his mother is solely a U.S. citizen, she resides in Ecuador. A number 
of his extended family members are citizens and residents of Ecuador. Most of his 
property and financial interests are located in Ecuador. Although the United States and 
Ecuador maintain close ties, Ecuador has significant security challenges arising from 
narco-terrorism and criminal groups. A terrorist organization, the FARC, operates inside 
its borders. While Ecuador generally respects the rights of its citizens, it has 
experienced isolated unlawful killings and use of excessive force by security forces, 
arbitrary arrests and detentions, and corruption and denial of due process within the 
judicial system. Eleven U.S. citizens have been kidnapped there in the past decade. 
Given Applicant’s extensive contacts and interests in Ecuador, the narco-terrorism 
concerns and human rights abuses in Ecuador create heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. Additionally, considering 
those security concerns in Ecuador, his extensive family contacts in Ecuador could also 
create a potential conflict of interest with his obligations to protect sensitive information. 
I find that AG ¶¶ 9(a), 9(b), 9(d), and 9(e) apply. 
 
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns. Four are potentially applicable in this case. 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
 The nature of Applicant’s contacts and interests in Ecuador are not minimal, 
infrequent, or casual. On the contrary, he lives there and his contacts and interests in 
that foreign country are extensive. Most of his immediate family members are citizens 
and residents of Ecuador. Most of his property and financial interests are located there. 
 
11 
 
While it is unlikely that Applicant would be put in a position of having to choose between 
his contacts and interests in Ecuador and that of the United States, Ecuador’s terrorism 
and human rights problems remain a security concern. I find that AG ¶ 8(a) and 8(f) 
marginally apply and that AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply. 
 
Applicant has resided in Ecuador for about 30 years and in the U.S. for about 2 
years. He voted in an Ecuadorian election and has never voted in a U.S. election. The 
vast majority of his family members as well as his financial interests are in Ecuador. He 
recently obtained and used an Ecuadorian passport. When considering his relationship 
to the United States and his relationship to Ecuador, I am not convinced his sense of 
loyalty to Ecuador is so minimal that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest. I find AG¶ 8(b) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. I considered Applicant’s character references. One reference letter indicated 
that he displays the highest moral character, professionalism, and patriotism. Others 
attest to his dedication, commitment to excellence, and integrity. Applicant stated that 
he intends to relocate his family to the United States when he is in a better financial 
situation. Nevertheless, his actions indicate a preference for Ecuador over the United 
States. In particular, he has shown such a preference by voting in the 2009 Ecuadorian 
general election and by recently obtaining and using an Ecuadorian passport. Although 
he surrendered his foreign passport to his facility security officer since the hearing, he 
has failed to persuasively demonstrate that he will not use the foreign passport while 
holding a security clearance. 
 
12 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Considering all the 
evidence, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
guidelines for Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.k:  Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
