 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07203 
                                                                      )                                                  
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esquire, Department  Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under the 
criminal conduct, sexual behavior, and personal conduct adjudicative guidelines. His 
eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                      Statement of Case 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on March 6, 2009. On October 18, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct; Guideline D, Sexual Behavior; and 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
                                           
  
 Applicant received the SOR on October 26, 2010. In an Answer to the SOR 
which was undated and unsigned, Applicant answered each of the allegations in the 
SOR and requested that his case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. On 
December 7, 2010, Applicant filed a signed, sworn affidavit which provided additional 
information and requested that he be granted a security clearance. On March 4, 2011, 
the Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM). The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 10.1 By letter dated March 11, 2011, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the FORM on 
March 18, 2011. His response was due on April 17, 2011. Applicant filed additional 
information within the required time period. On April 27, 2011, DOHA assigned the case 
to me for a decision. 
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Pursuant to Additional Procedural Guidance ¶¶ E3.1.2, E3.1.3, E3.1.7, and 
E3.1.13 of the Directive, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR issued to 
Applicant as follows: 
 
1. Delete SOR subparagraph 1.a. and replace with a new subparagraph 1.a. to 
read as follows: 
 
 “a. In about March 2005, while stationed in Korea, you were accused of 
raping an enlisted member of the United States Army.” 
 
2. Add SOR subparagraph 1.b. to read as follows: 
 
 “b. In about April 2005, while stationed in Korea, you knowingly made 
false statements under oath during the course of an investigation into allegations that 
you engaged in an inappropriate relationship/fraternization with an enlisted member of 
the United States Army.” 
 
3. Add SOR subparagraph 1.c. to read as follows: 
 
 “c. In about June 2006, you voluntarily resigned your commission as a 
Chief Warrant Two in the United States Army, and you were administratively separated 
with a general discharge under honorable conditions in lieu of trial by court-martial.” 
 
Department Counsel submitted that the proposed amendments were supported 
by evidence included in the FORM. The FORM was sent to Applicant, thereby providing 
 
1Items 8, 9, and 10 are accepted for administrative notice. Item 8 consists of selected sections of 
Appendix 2, Uniform Code of Military Justice. Item 9 consists of sections 4-14, 4-15, and 4-16 of Army 
Regulation 600-20 (Army Command Policy), dated May 13, 2002. Item 10 consists of sections 4-14, 4-15, 
and 4-16 of Army Regulation 600-20 (Army Command Policy), dated July 15, 1999. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
him with notice of the amendments and the supporting evidence. Department Counsel 
requested that Applicant file any objection to the amendments within 30 days of 
receiving the FORM. If Applicant did not object to the amendments, he was requested 
to respond by admitting or denying the allegations in SOR subparagraphs 1.a. through 
1.c., as amended, and SOR subparagraphs 2.a and 3.a. 
 
Applicant timely filed a response to the FORM in which he requested a decision 
without a hearing and answered each paragraph and subparagraph in the amended 
SOR. I marked Applicant’s answer to the amended SOR as Item A and admitted it to 
the record. Without objection, Department Counsel’s motion to amend the SOR as 
specified above is granted.       
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The amended SOR contains three allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG 
J, Criminal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., and 1.c.); one allegation of disqualifying conduct 
under AG D, Sexual Behavior (SOR ¶ 2.a.); and one aIlegation of disqualifying conduct 
under AG E, Personal Conduct. In his Answer to the amended SOR, Applicant admitted 
all allegations under AG J, AG D, and AG E.2  Applicant’s admissions are admitted as   
findings of fact. (FORM; Item 1; Item A.) 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old and is employed as a test and evaluation engineer by a 
government contractor. He has been married and divorced twice. He is currently living 
in a spouse-like relationship with a woman and is the father of a young child. (Item 4, 
Exhibit A; Item 5.) 
 
 In March 2009, Applicant earned a Bachelor of Arts degree in business 
administration. He is currently enrolled in a Master of Science in Project Management 
program. When he completes this program in 2011, he plans to seek a Master in 
Business Administration degree. (Item 4, Item A; Item 5.) 
 
 In March of 1995, Applicant enlisted in a military reserve unit, where he served 
as an active reservist until January 1997. He was granted access to classified 
information in 1997. Beginning in January 1997, he served on active duty until March 
2001, when he received an honorable discharge at the rank of sergeant. In January 
2001, Applicant attended warrant officer candidate school. He was appointed as a 
warrant officer (WO) 1 and served on active duty in that rank until August 2002, when 
he was promoted to WO 2. From May 2003 until June 2006, he was deployed overseas 
as a helicopter pilot. (Item 5; Item 7 at 24-25.) 
 
 
2 In his unsigned and undated answer to the October 18, 2010 SOR, Applicant denied all allegations. 
(Item 4.)  
 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
 In 2005, while serving overseas as a warrant officer in the U.S. military, Applicant 
was accused of raping a junior enlisted member of the U.S. military.3 The rape allegedly 
took place on the night of March 26, 2005, after Applicant and his accuser met at an off-
post bar. Applicant and his accuser were aware of their respective ranks because he 
had filed training papers in an office where the accuser served as a clerk. Their contacts 
before the night of March 26, 2005 were in a business setting.4 (Item 7 at 96, 114-115.) 
 
 The accuser told a friend and fellow service member of the alleged rape on 
March 27, 2005, but she did not report it to authorities. The friend, however, reported 
the alleged rape to a sergeant, who notified criminal investigation authorities of the 
allegation on April 5, 2005. On April 6, 2005, when the accuser was interviewed by a 
criminal investigator, she confirmed verbally that Applicant had raped her, but she 
refused to provide a written statement and she declined to cooperate in the 
investigation. On April 11, 2005, the accuser told a physician at an urgent care facility 
on the post that she had been raped. The initial criminal investigation of the alleged 
rape was then terminated because the accuser refused to cooperate and, consequently, 
there was insufficient evidence to prosecute the case. (Item 7 at 93, 96, 101, 102, 208, 
114, 178.) 
 
 The command convened an informal investigation focusing on an inappropriate 
relationship (fraternization) between Applicant and the accuser. The accuser met with 
an investigator on April 19, 2005 and provided a verbal statement, consistent with her 
earlier verbal statement, but she was reluctant to provide a written statement. On May 
10, 2005, she provided a sworn statement to the investigator. In her sworn statement, 
the accuser reported that on the night of March 26, 2005, she had gone bar-hopping 
and drinking with a group of enlisted personnel. During the course of the evening, she 
became separated from her friends. When curfew approached, she began to walk back 
to the post gate. She stated that Applicant drove up in his car and offered her a ride 
back to the gate. She accepted his offer. However, instead of taking her to the gate, 
Applicant drove the accuser to his apartment, where he raped her on his living room 
floor. (Item 7 at 101,106, 111.) 
 
 In a sworn statement he provided to military investigators on April 19, 2005, 
Applicant stated that the accuser had never been in his apartment, and he denied 
having sexual intercourse with her. He further stated that he walked alone back to his 
apartment after leaving the bar, and his girlfriend came over and spent the night with 
him. (Item 7 at 108, 136-138.) 
 
 
3 Applicant’s rank was Warrant Officer 2; the accuser’s rank was Private First Class. (Item 7 at 92.) 
 
4 An enlisted service member who was a former co-worker of Applicant’s stated that Applicant spoke of 
the accuser and young female coworker of the accuser’s in a personal way. He reported that in about 
2004 Applicant referred to the accuser as “a hottie.” Two young female coworkers of the accuser’s were 
also interviewed. They reported that Applicant stared at them for long periods of time, and it made them 
feel uncomfortable. However, it was their job to assist him when he came to their office. They did not 
report their uneasiness around Applicant to their chain of command. (Item 7, 140-147.)    
 
5 
 
 
                                           
 On May 6, 2005, Applicant provided a second sworn statement to a military 
investigator. In this statement, he reported that he, the accuser, and another warrant 
officer left the bar together and went to the other warrant officer’s home, where they 
spent about two hours conversing with the warrant officer’s wife. Then, according to 
Applicant’s statement, he and the accuser left the warrant officer’s home, walked to his 
apartment, and engaged in consensual sexual intercourse. (Item 7 at 104-105.) 
 
 The following colloquy occurs in Applicant’s sworn statement of May 6, 2005: 
 
Q [Investigator]: “When you made a previous statement denying [the 
accuser] was in your apartment or that you had sex with her, did you know 
that statement was not true when you made it?” 
 
 A [Applicant]: “Yeah.” 
 
(Item 7 at 104.)  
 
 In a report dated May 25, 2005, a military officer appointed to conduct the 
informal investigation into the matter concluded:  
 
I find that based on all the evidence that was presented during the 
investigation . . . that [Applicant] had an inappropriate relationship with [his 
accuser] in violation of the Army fraternization [p]olicy. I find that 
[Applicant] provided a false official statement to me during the 
investigation. I find that [Applicant] more than likely had sexual intercourse 
with [the accuser] without her consent. 
   
(Item 7 at 115.) 
 
 Additionally, the final supplemental report of the military criminal investigation unit 
concluded that its subsequent investigation disclosed probable cause to believe 
Applicant committed the crime of rape when he had sexual intercourse with this accuser 
without her consent.  The investigating officer recommended that charges be preferred 
against Applicant for the following violations of the Uniform Code of Military Justice 
(UCMJ)5: Article 20, Rape; Article 107, False Official Statement, and Article 134, 
Fraternization.6 Approximately one year later, a pretrial investigation was held, pursuant 
 
5 Persons subject to the UCMJ include “[m]embers of a regular component of the armed forces, including 
those awaiting discharge after expiration of their terms of enlistment; volunteers from the time of their 
muster or acceptance into the armed forces; inductees from the time of their actual induction into the 
armed forces; and other persons lawfully called or ordered into, or to duty in or for training in, the armed 
forces, from the dates when they are required by the terms of the call or order to obey it.” See UCMJ § 
802, Article 2. 
 
6 Article 134 is identified as “General Article” and reads: “Though not specifically mentioned in this 
chapter, all disorders and neglects to the prejudice of good order and discipline in the armed forces, all 
conduct of a nature to bring discredit upon the armed forces, and crimes and offenses not capital, of 
which persons subject to this chapter may be guilty, shall be taken cognizance of a general, special, or 
 
6 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
to Article 32, UCMJ.7 After a hearing held as a part of the Article 32 pretrial 
investigation, which included pending court-martial charges of Rape and Forced 
Sodomy, Applicant requested to resign his commission and accept an administrative 
separation. He was released from military service with a general discharge under 
honorable conditions in June 2006. (Item 4, Exhibit A at 3; Item 7 at 90, 93, 115; Item 7 
at 4.)  
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied that a rape ever occurred. In his 
response to the FORM and the amended SOR, Applicant argued that the crime of rape 
was never substantiated, and he should not be denied a security clearance on the basis 
on one isolated incident that occurred six years ago. He claimed that being overseas 
and away from family and friends created pressures on him that no longer exist. He 
argued that he had matured, felt remorse for failing to follow orders and regulations 
proscribing fraternization, and was rehabilitated. He provided in his Answer to the SOR 
numerous letters attesting to his good character and professional accomplishments. 
(Item A; Item 4, Exhibit C through Exhibit H.) 
 
 Additionally, Applicant argued that while he deliberately lied to the investigator 
and denied a sexual relationship with his accuser, he later came forward and admitted 
consensual sexual activity with her. He opined that only three weeks had passed 
between his false statement to the investigator and his correction of it, suggesting that 
this conduct demonstrated a “prompt, good-faith” effort to correct the falsification, as 
required under AG ¶ 17(a). (Item A.) 
 
 I take administrative notice of § 4-14(b) of Army Command Policy (AR 600-20), 
dated 13 May 2002, and § 4-14(b) of Army Command Policy (AR 200-20), dated 15 July 
1999, which prohibit relationships between soldiers of different ranks if they: 
 
(1) Compromise, or appear to compromise, the integrity of supervisory 
authority or the chain of command. 
(2) Cause actual or perceived impartiality or unfairness. 
(3) Involve, or appear to involve, the improper use of rank or position for 
personal gain. 
(4) Are, or are perceived to be, exploitative or coercive in nature. 
(5) Create an actual or clearly predictable adverse impact on discipline, 
authority, morale, or the ability of the command to accomplish its mission. 
 
(Item 9; Item 10.) 
 
summary court-martial, according to the nature and degree of the offense, and shall be punished at the 
discretion of that court.” (Item 8.) 
  
7 I take administrative notice that Article 32, UCMJ, provides that “[n]o charge or specification may be 
referred to a general court-martial for trial until a thorough and impartial investigation of all the matters set 
forth therein has been made. This investigation shall include inquiry as to the truth of the matter set forth 
in the charges, consideration of the form of charges, and a recommendation as to the disposition which 
should be made of the case in the interest of justice and discipline.” (Item 8.) 
 
7 
 
 
 I also take administrative notice of UCMJ § 907, Article 107 (False official 
statements) and UCMJ § 892, Article 92 (Failure to obey order or regulation). Article 
107 reads: “Any person subject to this chapter who, with intent to deceive, signs any 
false record, return, regulation, order, or other official document, knowing it to be false, 
or makes any other false official statement knowing it to be false, shall be punished as a 
court-martial may direct.” Article 92 reads: Any person subject to this chapter who - - - 
(1) violates or fails to obey any lawful general order or regulation; (2) having knowledge 
of any other lawful order issued by a member of the armed forces, which it is his duty to 
obey, fails to obey the order; or (3) is derelict in the performance of his duties, shall be 
punished as a court-martial may direct.” (Item 8.) 
 
         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
   
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
 Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
  Under the Guideline J, “[c]riminal activity creates doubt about a person’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.”  AG ¶30. 
 
  In March 2005, while serving overseas as a U.S. military officer, Applicant was 
accused of raping an enlisted member of the U.S. military. Even though the allegation 
was not litigated, it is sufficient to raise a security concern under AG ¶ 31(c), which 
reads: “allegation or admission or criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person 
was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” 
 
  Moreover, Applicant deliberately provided false statements under oath during an 
investigation of allegations that he had an inappropriate relationship (fraternization) with 
the enlisted member. Applicant’s deliberate false statements were in violation of UCMJ 
§ 907, Article 107, and punishable by court-martial. He later admitted the inappropriate 
relationship (fraternization), which is prohibited under UCMJ, Article 134, Article 92, and 
§ 4-14 of Army Command Policy (AR 600-20) 13 May 2002 and 15 July 1999. These 
offenses raise security concerns under AG ¶ 31(a). AG ¶ 31(a) reads: “a single serious 
crime or multiple lesser offenses.”  
   
 
9 
 
 
  Three criminal conduct mitigating conditions might apply to Applicant’s case.  If 
“so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” AG ¶ 32(a) might apply. If 
there was “evidence that the person did not commit the offense,” then AG ¶ 32(c) might 
apply. If “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation, including but not limited to the 
passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job 
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive involvement,” 
then AG ¶ 32(d) might apply. 
 
  Applicant argues that his criminal conduct occurred six years ago under unusual 
circumstances, is unlikely to recur, and does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. He asserts he feels remorse for failing to follow 
orders and regulations proscribing fraternization, refers to his criminal conduct as a 
“single event,” and suggests that it would be unreasonable to hold him accountable for 
these past criminal acts. Moreover, he provides evidence that others who know him and 
with whom he works consider him to be of good character.   
 
  However, the nature of Applicant’s criminal conduct is not easily set aside, 
minimized, or ameliorated. Six years ago, as a military officer, he was accused of raping 
an enlisted member of the U.S. military. An investigation concluded that there was 
probable cause to try him at court-martial on the charge. While he denied the rape 
allegation, he admitted he had disobeyed lawful military orders and regulations 
regarding fraternization and made deliberate false statements to conceal his failure to 
follow those lawful orders and regulations. He resigned his commission rather than 
stand trial by court-martial on the rape and deliberate falsification charges. While he 
asserts that he is now remorseful and rehabilitated, this conduct raises ongoing 
concerns about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. I conclude that while AG ¶ 32(d) 
applies in part to the facts of Applicant’s case, AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(c) do not apply. I 
also conclude SOR ¶ 1.c. for Applicant because it does not, per se, allege criminal 
conduct.  
 
 Guideline D, Sexual Behavior 
  
 AG ¶ 12 explains why sexual behavior is a security concern: 
  
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. . .  . 
 
 The SOR alleges in ¶ 2.a. that the Guideline J conduct alleged in ¶ 1. also raises 
security concerns under Guideline D. Specifically, the Guideline D allegations in the 
SOR raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 13(a) and 13(d). AG ¶ 13(a) reads: “Sexual 
 
10 
 
 
behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has been prosecuted.” AG ¶ 
13(d) reads: “sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion or 
judgment.” 
 
Appellant, a military officer, was accused of raping an enlisted service member of 
the U.S. military in March 2005. Although Applicant denied the allegation of rape, the 
officer who investigated the incident that gave rise to the allegation concluded that 
Applicant “more than likely had sexual intercourse” with the accuser “without her 
consent.” Applicant argued that his sexual contact with his accuser was consensual. 
However, the record establishes that as a military officer he knowingly and willfully 
violated military policies, regulations, and standards of behavior related to inappropriate 
behavior and fraternization when he engaged in sexual intercourse with a junior enlisted 
military member. 
 
  AG ¶ 14 lists four possible mitigating conditions that could apply to sexual 
behavior that raises security concerns. AG ¶ 14(a) reads: “the behavior occurred prior to 
or during adolescence and there is no evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar 
nature.”  AG ¶ 14(b) reads; “the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, 
or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Applicant’s 
disqualifying sexual behavior occurred in March 2005, six years ago, when he was a 27-
year-old commissioned officer. The record does not support that Applicant’s 
disqualifying sexual behavior occurred under unusual circumstances, and it casts doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶¶ 14(a) and 14(b) do 
not apply in mitigation. 
 
  AG ¶ 14(c) reads: “the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, 
exploitation, or duress.” AG ¶ 14(d) reads: “The sexual behavior is strictly private, 
consensual, and discreet.” The final supplemental report of the military criminal 
investigation unit concluded that its subsequent investigation disclosed probable cause 
to believe Applicant committed the crime of rape when he had sexual intercourse with 
his accuser without her consent.  The investigating officer recommended that charges 
be preferred against Applicant for the following violations of the UCMJ: Article 20, Rape; 
Article 107, False Official Statement; and Article 134, Fraternization. Rather than go 
forward with a court-martial, Applicant voluntarily resigned his warrant and was 
administratively separated with a general discharge under honorable conditions. 
Applicant’s sexual behavior violated Army Command Policy proscriptions against 
fraternization. This behavior as well as the unresolved allegation of rape could serve as 
a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress. I conclude that neither AG ¶ 14(c) nor AG ¶ 
14(d) applies in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
 
11 
 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 Applicant’s personal conduct raises security concerns under AG ¶16(b) and AG ¶ 
16(e). AG ¶ 16(b) reads: “deliberately providing false or misleading information 
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative.” AG ¶ 16(e) reads, in 
pertinent part: “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging 
in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional or 
community standing . . .  .” 
  
AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(b) and 17(e) provide conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns in this case. AG 17(a) reads: “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to 
correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts.” AG ¶ 17(b) reads: “the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment 
was caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual specifically 
concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made aware of the requirement 
to cooperate or provide the information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully.” 
AG ¶ 17(e) reads: “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.”  
 
Applicant deliberately provided false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an investigator. The record establishes that he failed to make a prompt, 
good-faith effort to correct the falsification. He was not forthcoming and admitted his 
falsification only after direct questioning by the investigator. Accordingly, AG ¶ 17(a) 
does not apply in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case. Moreover, Applicant failed 
to provide documentation to establish that either AG ¶ 17(b) or AG ¶ 17(e) is applicable 
in his case.   
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
12 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
Applicant, a seasoned military service member and a warrant officer, deliberately 
provided a false statement under oath during an investigation into allegations that he 
engaged in an inappropriate relationship (fraternization) with an enlisted member of the 
U.S. military. He argued that he should not be denied a security clearance on the basis 
on one isolated incident that occurred six years ago. However, these events occurred 
when he was in a position of responsibility in the military. Applicant’s deliberate 
falsification under oath to a military investigator and his violation of Army command 
policy prohibiting relationships between soldiers of different ranks were serious matters, 
and they continue to raise security concerns about his judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness today. I am unable to conclude that he met his burden of persuasion in 
mitigating the Government’s security concerns as enumerated in the amended SOR.         
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under the criminal conduct, 
sexual behavior, and personal conduct adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.b.:            Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a.:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
                                               Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information.  Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
