                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07267 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations concern. He has 
accumulated over $25,000 in delinquent debt. Some of this debt dates back to 2000. He 
has not acted responsibly under the circumstances and failed to show that his financial 
problems are under control. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) made 
a preliminary determination to deny Applicant access to classified information. DOHA 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which set forth the security concerns of 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations), as the basis for its decision.1  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 On September 7, 2010, Applicant submitted his Answer to the SOR (Answer), 
wherein he admitted all nine allegations. He affirmatively waived his right to a hearing 
and requested that a decision be made on the administrative record.  
 
On October 14, 2010, Department Counsel filed its File of Relevant Material 
(FORM). It was mailed to Applicant on March 16, 2011.2 The FORM contains 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9. Applicant filed a Response to the FORM 
(Response), which was received by DOHA on April 18, 2011. Neither side objected to 
the other side’s submission. Accordingly, GE 1 – 9 and Applicant’s Response are 
admitted. The case was assigned to me on May 5, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He served on active duty in the Navy for 20 years from 
1978 to 1998.3 After retiring from the Navy, Applicant “took some time off.”4 He was 
unemployed from October to May 2001, November 2002 to September 2007, and 
December 2009 to February 2009. He has been with his present employer since 
February 2009.5 
 
 Applicant is married with one child from a previous marriage. He defaulted on his 
child support obligation, when his ex-wife “no longer wanted to accept the verbal 
agreement that she had made.”6 In 2009, Applicant owed over $13,000 in back child 
support. His wages are being garnished to satisfy this obligation, and the current 
balance is $7,845.7 
 
 Applicant submitted his security clearance application (SCA) in May 2009. He 
revealed several derogatory accounts, including the debts referenced in SOR ¶¶1.b, 
1.e, 1.f, and 1.i.8 He also revealed that this is not the first time he has applied for and 
2 The record does not contain any explanation for what appears to be a five month delay between 
the completion of the FORM and its mailing to the Applicant. However, Applicant has not claimed any 
prejudice and none is apparent. If anything, Applicant was given additional time to mitigate the financial 
concerns at issue. ISCR Case No. 06-22547 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul. 29, 2008) (“Absent a showing that a delay 
in the processing of a case prejudiced an applicant’s rights in a meaningful way, mere proof of a delay is 
not sufficient to warrant remand or reversal . . .”). 
 
3 GE 5 [5/23/09 Security Clearance Application (SCA), Sec. 15]. 
 
4 Response at 1. 
 
5 GE 5 (SCA, Sec. 13). 
 
6 Response at 1. See also, GE 5 (SCA, Sec. 17 and 18). 
 
7 GE 5 (SCA, at 18); Response, 3/01 Experian Credit Report, at 3. This debt was not alleged in 
the SOR. However, as Applicant was on notice that his finances were at issue, I will consider this debt in 
assessing the mitigation evidence and whole-person factors. ISCR Case No. 09-06770 (App. Bd. Nov. 8, 
2002); ISCR Case No. 01-07656 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2002). 
 
8 GE 5 (SCA, Sec. 26). 
 
3 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
been denied a security clearance. Applicant was first granted a clearance by DoD in 
1978 and a secret clearance by another agency in 2001. He was denied a clearance in 
November 2008, due, in part, to his financial problems.9 There was no evidence 
presented as to this previous denial. 
 
 In July 2009, Applicant was interviewed by an agent from the Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) regarding his finances. Applicant told the agent that his financial 
problems extended back to 2000 when he and his wife lost their jobs. Applicant had 
three cars repossessed in 2000, and still owes $18,109 for these three cars. These 
three debts are alleged in SOR ¶¶1.e, 1.f, and 1.i. Applicant admits these debts, but 
notes that they no longer appear on his credit report. He told the agent in July 2009 that 
he had contacted all his creditors and was working with them to satisfy his outstanding 
debts. Applicant did not submit any proof that these three debts have been paid, nor 
that he has contacted the creditor to address these debts.10 
 
Applicant had another vehicle repossessed in 2006, for which he still owes 
$2,840. This debt is alleged in SOR ¶1.b. Applicant admits this debt, but claims that the 
car belonged to his wife, who was unable to keep up with the payments after she had to 
quit her job due to inappropriate conduct that was directed at her in the workplace. 
Applicant failed to submit any documentation that he is not liable for this debt and it 
appears on several of his recent credit reports.11 
 
 Applicant has satisfied two of the minor debts listed in the SOR, which total $208 
(SOR ¶¶1.a and 1.h). However, the remaining three SOR debts, which are not car 
related, have not been paid. The three debts alleged in SOR ¶¶1.c, 1.d, and 1.g total 
$4,369. Applicant discussed the debts in ¶1.c ($1,106 hospital bill) and ¶1.d ($2,925 
collection account) with the OPM agent in July 2009. He promised to resolve these 
debts at the time, but made only one payment of $88 towards the debt in ¶1.c.12  
 
 In April 2010, Applicant responded to a DOHA Financial Interrogatory asking for 
an update as to his delinquent debts and requesting that he complete a personal 
 
 
9 GE 5 (SCA, Sec. 25). 
 
10 GE 6 at 3 (“Subject indicated that he and his wife have contacted all his creditors and that the 
creditors ware working with them to make payment arrangements.”); GE 6 at 5, ln 5 (discusses the 3 
repossessed vehicles alleged in ¶¶1.e, 1.f, and 1.i). 
 
11 See GE 4 at 7 and 16 (6/10 Experian Credit Report and 9/10 Equifax Credit Report); Response 
(3/11 Experian Credit Report at 4). See also, GE 5 (SCA at 16-17); GE 6 at 4-5. 
 
12 GE 6 at 4, ln 2 (¶1.c) and ln 3 (¶1.d). In his 3/10 Interrogatory Response, Applicant initially 
claimed that the collection account in ¶1.d was consolidated and being paid back with the other student 
loans he had defaulted on. (GE 6 at 6). However, I find that ¶1.d is a separate student loan account that 
Applicant failed to show is in repayment status. Applicant admits ¶1.d in his Answer and, this admission, 
is corroborated by his recent credit report, which shows that the debt in 1.d is separate and apart from his 
other student loans. Compare, GE 4 at 5-6, with, GE 7 at 7 (the three student loans in repayment status).  
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
financial statement (PFS). Applicant’s PFS shows that he has a net monthly remainder 
of $465, but the debts in SOR ¶¶1.b through 1.g and 1.i are not addressed. Applicant 
provided no explanation for his failure to address these debts.13 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  
 
13 GE 7. 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19. Applicant 
has accumulated of over $25,000 in delinquent debt, some of which dates back to 2000. 
He is unable or unwilling to satisfy his debts. AG ¶ 19(a) and (c) are established.14 
 
 Guideline F also lists a number of mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 that may 
mitigate the concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions, and find that the 
following warrant further discussion: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
14 “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and (c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant has now satisfied the debts in ¶¶1.a and 1.h. I find in favor of Applicant 
as to these two debts. 
 
 However, Applicant’s financial problems are significant and current. He admits to 
owing over $25,000 on seven delinquent debts, some of which date back 11 years. He 
should have been aware of the Government’s concerns about his financial situation 
when he was denied a clearance in 2008, which, in part, was due to his financial 
problems. He was then interviewed in 2009 by an OPM agent about his debts and 
promised to address them at that time. Two years have passed, and Applicant has still 
not paid or attempted to resolve the debts in the SOR. I find that Applicant’s debts are 
current and continue to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.15 
 
 In analyzing an Applicant’s debts vis-à-vis the concern of Guideline F, the Appeal 
Board has held that: 
 
[A]n applicant is not required to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for 
paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is 
that an applicant act responsibly given his circumstances and develop a 
reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by ‘concomitant conduct,’ 
that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.”16  
 
Applicant failed to establish that he has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances that led to his financial problems, to wit: his unemployment. He has been 
employed since February 2009 and has $465 in disposable income each month that he 
could be using to repay his overdue creditors. Instead, Applicant has relied upon the 
fact that some of his debt no longer appears on his credit report. However, “[a] security 
clearance adjudication is not a proceeding aimed at collecting an applicant’s debts. 
Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. Accordingly, even if a debt is legally unenforceable, the government is 
entitled to consider the facts and circumstances surrounding an applicant’s conduct in 
incurring the debt and failing to satisfy it in a timely manner.”17 Applicant has 
accumulated these seven debts over an 11 year time span and, apparently, does not 
intend to resolve them. He has not taken a financial counseling course or otherwise 
demonstrated that his financial problem is under control. Under the circumstances, 
Applicant has failed to establish any of the mitigating conditions under Guideline F. He 
failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
 
15 ISCR Case 09-07792 at 2 (App. Bd. May 10, 2011) (“. . . evidence that Applicant’s debts 
remained delinquent at the close of the record supports . . . conclusion that these debts were ongoing.”) 
 
16 ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2009). 
 
17 ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). See also, ISCR Case No. 09-07916 at 
3 (App. Bd. May 9, 2011). 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Applicant served this country for 20 years in the Navy, and this decision does 
not, and is not intended to, call into question that service. However, those 20 years of 
service do not outweigh the serious security concerns that are raised by Applicant’s 
longstanding and significant financial problems. Accordingly, I find that the favorable 
whole-person factors in this case do not mitigate the security concerns at issue. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.h:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.g, and 1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
 
