 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-07439 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 7, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 24, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), 
dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
 
2 
 
 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. Applicant answered the SOR on November 2, 2010, and elected to 
have her case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), dated March 1, 2011, 
was provided to her by letter dated March 9, 2011. Applicant received the FORM on 
March 18, 2011. She was afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She did not submit any materials, 
comments, or objections in response the FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 
12, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1a 
through 1j, and 1m through 1r. She denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1k, 1l, and 1s, and 
stated that she is making payments on these three debts. She contends that SOR ¶ 1b 
and SOR ¶ 1r are the same debt. Applicant further stated the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1n 
was paid in December 2009.  She substantiated her claims with documentation. 
Applicant’s admissions and explanations are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of 
fact.  
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old independent contractor driver, who has been employed 
by a defense contractor since February 2009.1
 
 She has a “high school diploma or 
equivalent” that was awarded in June 1974. No further information regarding Applicant’s 
education background is available. Applicant was previously married two times and is 
currently married to her third husband. She was married to her first husband from June 
1975 to November 1978 and married to her second husband from June 1979 to 
November 1986. Those marriages ended by divorce. She married her third and current 
husband in January 1992. She has five adult children and four adult stepchildren. 
Applicant did not serve in the armed forces. She is a first-time applicant for a security 
clearance. 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant disclosed several areas of concern regarding her financial history in her 
May 2009 e-QIP. These areas of concern included disclosure of a repossession, bills 
turned over to a collection agency, and debts currently over 90 days delinquent. (Item 
4.) In August 2009, Applicant was interviewed by an Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) investigator. During that interview, the investigator discussed in detail Applicant’s 
                                            
1 The source for Applicant’s biographical information is derived from her May 2009 e-QIP unless 
otherwise stated. 
 
3 
 
 
financial situation with her. The investigator reviewed Applicant’s debts from her credit 
report and discussed the circumstances that led to her indebtedness. (Item 5.) 
 
During her OPM interview, Applicant explained that her financial problems began 
in December 2007. She and her husband were working for the same employer. That 
employer sold the company to a new owner, who eliminated their benefits and had 
difficulty making payroll. As a result of these problems with the new owner, Applicant’s 
husband quit in May 2008 and Applicant quit in July 2008. In summer 2008, Applicant 
and her husband obtained their commercial driver’s licenses to become truck drivers 
and enrolled in driving school. In August 2008, Applicant developed an eye affliction and 
had to leave driving school before completing the course. Applicant was unemployed 
and was recovering until January 2009. Applicant’s spouse secured employment as a 
truck driver after completing driving school. However, he was fired in December 2008 
shortly after beginning his new job when he was involved in an accident. His employer 
held him responsible for the accident and withheld his last pay check of approximately 
$5,000 to cover damages. The combination of these events contributed to Applicant’s 
current financial situation. Although Applicant and her husband received financial help 
from family members, the help they received was not enough to make up their financial 
shortfall. (Item 5 (101).)  
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges 19 debts totaling $25,959. (SOR ¶¶ 1a – 1s.) Apart from 
the three debts that Applicant is making payments on, the two debts that Applicant 
stated are duplicates, and the debt that is paid, the FORM contains no further 
documentation that the remaining debts have been or are being resolved. (SOR 
Answer, Item 5.)  
 
Applicant presented no evidence that she has participated in financial counseling 
or that she is following a viable budget. Her January 2009 personal financial statement 
indicates that she and her husband earn a net monthly income of $4,238 and have a net 
monthly remainder of $389. As assets, Applicant listed $5 in her savings account and 
no other assets such as money in a checking account, real estate, stocks, bonds, car, 
etc. (Item 5 (99).) Applicant summarized her position, “We have always been able to 
pay our bills on time till now and it has been very hard as well as stressful to have to go 
through this at our age but we do plan to keep working and paying them until all are 
paid off. We are honest people with a low income but we still have pride that we have 
survived the hard changes in our lives.” (Item 5 (104).) As of March 2011, Applicant 
presented no additional documentary evidence of efforts to contact creditors, settle 
debts, make payments, or otherwise resolve her financial obligations.  
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
 
4 
 
 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Egan at U.S. 528. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleges and the evidence establishes that Applicant owes 14 debts 
discounting the three debts she is making payments on, the two debts that are 
duplicates, and the one debt that is paid. These debts have been ongoing for several 
years and remain unpaid or unresolved. AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts” and AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s sparse favorable evidence fails to fully raise the applicability of any 
mitigating condition. Her financial problems are ongoing, and her evidence fails to show 
they occurred under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur and do not cast 
 
6 
 
 
doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. 
 
 Applicant presented some evidence to establish circumstances beyond her 
control contributing to her inability to pay her debts such as loss of employment in 2008, 
uncovered medical bills, and reduction in income. Notwithstanding, Applicant presented 
little or no documentary evidence showing that she acted responsibly in the acquisition 
of her debts, that she made good-faith efforts to resolve her debts, or that she has a 
track record of financial responsibility. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and (d) do not apply.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because Applicant did not receive financial counseling 
and there are no clear indications that her financial problems are being resolved or are 
under control. Considering the number of delinquent debts, the date the debts were 
acquired, the aggregate value of the debts, and the limited evidence of efforts to resolve 
her financial obligations, Applicant’s information is insufficient to establish that her 
financial problems are unlikely to recur. The remaining mitigating conditions are not 
reasonably raised by the facts in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). My comments in the Analysis 
section are incorporated in the whole-person discussion. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for the 
years she was able to maintain financial responsibility. The record supports the notion 
that Applicant and her husband are good and decent people, who have worked hard 
their adult lives.   
 
 
7 
 
 
None the less, security concerns remain about Applicant’s current financial 
responsibility. Applicant’s documentary evidence failed to show financial responsibility in 
the acquisition of the debts, good-faith efforts to resolve her financial problems in a 
timely manner, or a current track record of financial responsibility. Her failure to address 
the remaining SOR debts indicates she is financially overextended. The sparse 
mitigating record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising from her financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1a – 1j:     Against Applicant 
  
 Subparagraphs 1k – 1l:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1m:     Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1n:     For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1o – 1q:    Against Applicant 
  
 Subparagraph 1r – 1s:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
