 
 
1 
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
    
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )   ISCR Case No. 09-03370 
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O’Neil, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
 
Decision 
 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for 
personal conduct. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On June 30, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
listing concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) of the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry, as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended; 
and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant signed his notarized Answer on July 7, 2010, in which he admitted 
allegation 1.a, and denied allegations 1.b through 1.e. He also requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 23, 2010. 
 
 
2 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on January 7, 2011. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on January 26, 2011.  
 
The Government offered four exhibits, which I marked and admitted as 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4. Applicant testified and presented one witness. 
He also offered seven exhibits, marked and admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A 
through G.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Prior to the hearing, by memorandum dated December 3, 2010, the Government 
amended the SOR by replacing allegations 1.a and 1.b with reworded versions. 
Applicant answered the amended SOR on December 14, 2010. He admitted the 
reworded allegation 1.a., and denied the reworded allegation 1.b. The reworded 
versions read as follows: 
 
1.a. You attempted to use countermeasures to modify the results of a May 
2001 polygraph examination with another Government agency. 
 
1.b. You attempted to use countermeasures to modify the results of 
multiple 2003 polygraph examinations with another Government agency. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admission to allegation 1.a is incorporated as a finding of fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings and the record evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He received a 
bachelor’s degree in 1974 in mechanical engineering. He married the same year and 
has two children, 28 and 31 years old. He was granted his first security clearance in 
1984. In 1985, he started his own company, and was employed as a spacecraft test 
engineer for a federal agency, working as an independent contractor. In the early 
1990s, he held a top secret clearance with access to sensitive compartmented 
information (SCI). His SCI access was revoked in 2004, and his security clearance 
suspended in 2006. (GE 1; Tr. 51-63) 
 
Applicant participated in three polygraph examinations performed by a 
government agency (AGA): May 2001, June 2002, and December 2003. He was 
notified one week before the May 2001 polygraph examination. His government-
employee co-workers had undergone polygraphs, and he discussed them with his co-
workers. They had received pre-briefings before their polygraphs about the scope of the 
test, but Applicant did not. He did not request a pre-briefing. He researched the topic of 
polygraphs online for one to two hours in the week before his first examination. In his 
statement of February 2009, he notes that other than that one time, he did not conduct 
 
 
3 
“any further research on the polygraph test or how to defeat it.” (GE 2; Tr. 63-68, 97, 
151-153, 160) 
 
Applicant was concerned about whether several events in his past would present 
a problem during his first polygraph, including his drug use during college in the early 
1970s. (Tr. 63-68) He was also concerned about events that might have been 
considered breaches of classified information: (1) In 1991, he was working at the site of 
a satellite launch. He brought his family to the local area, which was permitted. He could 
not inform them of the time of the launch because it was classified. But on the night of 
the launch, he told his wife to stay up late and keep the children up. Applicant was 
concerned that this disclosure might have been considered a security breach; (2) In 
1993, Applicant was working on classified launches. He disclosed to his wife and 
brother that he was working on a classified launch when he called them to say he was 
safe after an accident occurred at the launch site. He did not inform his company of 
these disclosures. Applicant admitted at the hearing that he was concerned enough 
about these events that he tried to manipulate the test results of his first polygraph. (GE 
2, 3; Tr. 68-73, 79-82, 129-132, 155)  
 
In his February 2009 statement, Applicant said, “Due to these concerns, during 
the first polygraph test I tried to give the examiner a stronger reaction during the control 
questions. I thought that it might help me get through the test without having to discuss 
the concerns.” During the control-question phase of the first polygraph examination, 
Applicant had been instructed to lie to a question, so that the examiner could record a 
baseline signal that would indicate falsification. Applicant testified that he believed his 
body would not give an appropriate signal because he was so agitated. Therefore, when 
he answered the control question, he tensed his leg muscles in order to produce a 
strong signal. The polygrapher asked Applicant if he was trying to control his breathing 
or otherwise manipulate the test results. Applicant admitted what he had done. The test 
continued, and Applicant disclosed the incidents that he had been concerned about. He 
testified that, other than the control question, he answered truthfully on all the 
subsequent questions, and that he had no intention of lying. In 2009, he stated, “The 
reason I did not pass the first test was my use of countermeasures over my prior 
behavior and not understanding the scope of the test.” He also noted in a February 24, 
2009 statement, “I have not, in any way, tried to alter the outcome of any polygraph that 
I have taken since the first one.” (GE 2, 3; Tr. 74-82, 105-108, 158) 
 
Since about 1980, Applicant has practiced special breathing techniques as part 
of a relaxation method that helped with his high blood pressure. In his February 2009 
statement, he said he might have received bad polygraph test results because he was 
giving involuntary responses to a stressful situation. He testified that he felt tense during 
his first polygraph examination, and “… [I] was probably trying to control my breathing.” 
(GE 2, 3; Tr. 74-82, 105-108) 
 
 
 
 
4 
                                                
Department Counsel asked Applicant about his manipulation during the first 
polygraph:  
 
Q So, in worrying about that question coming up along the line on the 
polygraph, you started to manipulate the results early so that if you had to 
lie during the polygraph about the drug use, it couldn’t be detected.  Was 
that the plan? 
 
 A Well, just the control question one, yes. 
 
Q Right.  And that’s your understanding of – that’s the purpose of 
manipulating the control questions is so that later on when they ask you a 
question whether you think it’s relevant or not, they can’t tell whether 
you’re lying or not if you’ve skewed the results during the control 
questions. 
 
A Right.  Yes. 
 
Q Is it fair to say, then, that when you went into this polygraph 
examination, your primary motivation was to come out with a passing 
score? 
 
A Yes. (Tr. 123-124) 
 
 In October 2001, Applicant had a four-hour non-polygraph interview. He told the 
interviewer that he was concerned about a sensitive lifestyle issue. He disclosed the 
issue, and the interviewer told him it was not a security concern, though he understood 
why Applicant might think it was. Applicant denies that he was providing irrelevant 
information in this exchange, as alleged in the SOR. He testified that he was trying to 
inform the interviewer of anything that might be a security concern.1 (Tr. 83-86) 
 
 In June or July 2002, Applicant had his second polygraph interview. He was 
tense and short of breath. He testified that he had a “startle reaction” to questions that 
began with a hard syllable such as “Did you ever…” but no reaction to those that started 
with soft syllables, such as “Have you ever….” Applicant denies that he tried to 
manipulate the results of this polygraph. During the test, he disclosed that he met a 
British couple during a November 2001 vacation. The couple had stayed at his home on 
April 6 through 12, 2002. In late April 2002, Applicant informed his company that he met 
them, and also disclosed the April 2002 visit. He had not disclosed his initial meeting 
with the couple, which had occurred five months earlier, because his security clearance 
was being transferred from one company to another, and he “wasn’t exactly sure where 
my clearance was in the process.” Applicant visited the same British couple when he 
completed a business trip to London in November 2002. He submitted pre-departure 
 
1 This incident is alleged in the SOR as occurring in 2002, but Applicant clarified that it happened in 
October 2001. (Tr. 85) 
 
 
5 
                                                
and post-departure forms to his security officer regarding that trip. (GE 2, 3, 4; AE A, B; 
Tr. 86-97, 143-150, 153-155) 
 
 Applicant had another non-polygraph interview in August 2003, with two 
interviewers over four hours. It focused on his delay in reporting his contact with the 
British couple, and his failure to inform the examiner in May 2001 of the sensitive 
lifestyle issue, which had turned out not to be a security concern. (GE 2; Tr. 99-101, 
143-150) 
 
 Applicant's last polygraph occurred in December 2003.2 He was nervous and 
short of breath. He did not experience “startle reactions” to the questions during this 
examination. He testified that he did not intentionally control his breathing, but felt 
“…somewhat conscious of my breathing.” In his February 2009 statement, Applicant 
said he was conflicted when the polygrapher told him that during the test he would be 
asked about personal use of government assets. Applicant sometimes used his 
government computer to read material such as news reports, so he was concerned, 
even though such uses were allowed by his agency. Applicant denies he tried to 
manipulate the results of the third polygraph, but his anxiety about the question may 
have caused a reaction to any similar-sounding question. In October 2004, Applicant's 
access to SCI was revoked by AGA for intentional manipulation of polygraph results in 
2001, 2002, and 2003; misleading an interviewer by discussing irrelevant lifestyle 
issues; unreported disclosures of classified information; and unreported foreign 
contacts. (GE 2; Tr. 97-104) 
 
Applicant's witness at the hearing has had almost daily professional contact with 
Applicant for about 30 years. He has taken several polygraphs. He was pre-briefed as 
to what would be covered before he took his first polygraph. Although he and Applicant 
usually worked in unclassified environments, he has no reason to doubt Applicant's 
ability to protect classified information. Several co-workers and close friends submitted 
character references. Most have known Applicant for 15 to almost 30 years. He is 
described as a “man of great character” and integrity, who is dependable, loyal, 
conscientious, and honest. He is dedicated to his job and his family. He is a recognized 
expert in his field, who is respected in his community. (AE C-G; Tr. 25-50) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3 Decisions 
must also consider the “whole-person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the Guidelines. 
 
 
2 The SOR alleges that Applicant underwent multiple polygraph examinations in 2003, but Applicant 
clarified at the hearing that he had only one examination in 2003. (Tr. 97) 
3 Directive at § 6.3. 
 
 
6 
                                                
 The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they 
represent policy governing the grant or denial of access to classified information. In this 
case, the pleadings and the information presented require consideration of the security 
concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).   
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the questions of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to either receive or 
continue to have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial 
burden of producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision 
to deny or revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government 
must be able to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets 
its burden, it then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s 
case. Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.5 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or his own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern about personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Guideline E allegations implicate the following disqualifying condition under 
AG ¶ 16: 
 
 
4 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
6 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
7 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable 
behavior…. 
 
Applicant's conduct during the 2001 polygraph examination with AGA raises 
concerns under AG ¶ 16(d). In the 1990s and early 2000s, Applicant disclosed 
classified information to his family, failed to timely report contacts with foreign nationals, 
and interfered with a polygraph examination. Applicant held a security clearance during 
these events. His conduct demonstrates untrustworthiness and unwillingness to comply 
with rules. AG ¶ 16(d) applies.  
 
In SOR ¶ 1.b., the Government alleges that Applicant used countermeasures 
during his polygraph examination in 2003. It relies on a letter from AGA in which an 
adjudicator states that Applicant used countermeasures during that test. Applicant 
denies that he used countermeasures at any time other than in his 2001 polygraph. As 
the record contains only the adjudicator’s unsupported statement, and no other 
independent evidence showing that Applicant tried to circumvent the 2003 polygraph, I 
find for Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
During a non-polygraph interview in 2001, Applicant discussed a sensitive 
lifestyle issue with the investigator. He thought it might be a security concern; however, 
the interviewer informed him that it was not. Applicant was disclosing a possible security 
concern, and was not intentionally providing irrelevant information. AG ¶ 16(c) does not 
apply to this disclosure. I find for the Applicant in regard to SOR ¶ 1.e. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 17, the following mitigating conditions are relevant: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s adherence to regulations regarding protecting classified information 
has not been perfect. In 1991, he disclosed, in general terms, the time of a launch, 
which was classified. In 1993, he disclosed that he was involved in a classified launch. 
In 2002, he let five months pass before he informed his security officer that he had met 
 
 
8 
and befriended foreign nationals. The 1990s events might have been mitigated by 
distance in time. However, when considered with Applicant's conduct during his 2001 
polygraph examination, they contribute to a pattern of willingness to ignore security 
rules. 
 
 Applicant admits that he deliberately tensed his leg muscles during a 2001 
polygraph examination in order to manipulate the results. Only after being confronted 
by the examiner did he admit his actions. Before the test, he also consciously engaged 
in internet research to learn how to defeat polygraph examinations. These events 
occurred 9 to 10 years ago; however, the gravity of Applicant's conduct outweighs the 
distance in time. Although he did not receive a polygraph pre-briefing, as his 
Government co-workers did, a pre-briefing was not necessary to inform Applicant that 
he was expected to cooperate during the test. Applicant knew or should have known 
that such behavior was prohibited. It cannot be considered minor or insignificant, 
because it constitutes interference with a Government investigation, and goes to the 
heart of the security clearance process. Applicant's actions reflect poorly on his 
judgment and trustworthiness. AG ¶ 17 (a) and (c) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guideline, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant deliberately manipulated his behavior to influence the results of a 
polygraph examination. He chose his own desire to “pass” the polygraph examination 
over the Government’s need for honesty. Given his many years of service to the United 
States, the quality of his work, and the high praise of his friends and co-workers, it is 
unfortunate that he chose to try to circumvent the process. However, such behavior 
 
 
9 
raises serious questions about his reliability, judgment, and trustworthiness, especially 
in light of the fact that he held a top secret security clearance with SCI access at the 
time. The Government must be able to rely on security clearance holders to place its 
need for trustworthy behavior above their own interests. 
 
 Overall, Applicant's conduct raises doubt on his suitability for access to 
classified information. The record evidence fails to satisfy these doubts, which must be 
resolved in favor of the national security. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
has not mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.b.   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c. and 1.d. Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e.   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to allow Applicant access to 
classified information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
