1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-05740
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 08, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On November 22, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1,
2006. 
 
On December 23, 2010, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. I received the case assignment on
February 4, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 10, 2011, and I convened
the hearing as scheduled on March 29, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits 1
through 8, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf
and submitted no exhibits at the time of hearing. DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing (Tr) on April 5, 2011. I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until
May 2, 2011, to submit additional documents, and nine additional pages of documents
2
that were received, have been identified and entered into evidence without objection as
Exhibits A through D. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and the testimony
of Applicant, eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR, Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations 1.a. through 1.e. After a
complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including Applicant's
RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 40 years old. He is currently married, and he has two daughters.
Applicant served in the United States Navy from 1988 to 2008. Applicant is employed by
a defense contractor, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with his
employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists five allegations (1.a. through e.) regarding overdue debts under
Adjudicative Guideline F. As reviewed above, Applicant denied all of the allegations in
his RSOR.  The allegations will be discussed below in the same order as they were
listed on the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $15,460. At the
hearing, Applicant reiterated that none of the five debts listed on the SOR were incurred
by him. He testified that for the 20 years that he was in the Navy and right up to the
present time, he has never incurred overdue debt. He averred that he has never had
any of the credit cards that are the basis for all of these debts. About these cards he
stated, “Never applied for those, never seen ‘em, never received any collection notice,
any bills.” He first became aware of these debt, during the period when he had an
interview with a Government investigator during a background investigation for a
security clearance. He did explain that he had a credit card from one of the companies
listed as a creditor on the SOR, but that was in the early 1990s, and it had been paid off
and closed out long ago. (Tr at 54-57.) Applicant also testified that he spoke to his wife,
and she told him that she had not incurred these debts. (Tr at 36-37.) 
1.b. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $27,159. This
appears to be a second debt from the same creditor as 1.a., above. Applicant denied
that he ever used a credit card from this company or incurred any debt to this creditor. 
1.c. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $13,288. Applicant
denied that he ever had a credit card from this company or incurred any debt to this
creditor. 
1.d. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $4,728. This debt is
listed as originating from a retail store. Applicant testified that he never opened an
account at this store or purchased anything there. (Tr at 26.)
3
1.e. This overdue debt is cited in the SOR in the amount of $15,082.  Applicant
denied that he ever had a credit card from this company or incurred any debt to this
creditor. 
Applicant testified that when he learned of these accounts in 2007, he called on
three occasions to TransUnion to dispute the debts. He was informed that a
representative of TransUnion would review the debts and call him back, but he never
received a response. This was the only action he took to dispute the bills until he wrote
the challenges that are Exhibit A. When he was questioned about why he was not more
aggressive in disputing these bills, he testified that he believed once he retired from the
Navy he would not need a security clearance any longer, and he also believed that
since he had raised the issue with a credit reporting agency, that eventually it would be
resolved.   
Mitigation
Among the post hearing documents submitted by Applicant was a Credit Report
Dispute form, in which Applicant disputed all of the debts listed on the SOR to all three
credit bureaus. He wrote that he never opened up any of these accounts. (Exhibit A.)
Applicant also submitted a letter from his wife, in which she wrote that she is not aware
of the accounts listed on the SOR, nor is she responsible for opening up the accounts in
her husband’s name. (Exhibit C.)  
Additionally, Applicant submitted two positive character letters. One letter was
from a 14 year friend of Applicant, who described Applicant as “reliable, trustworthy and
financially responsible.” The second letter was from Applicant’s Chief Petty Officer from
2006 to 2009 aboard a ship in the United States Navy.  He wrote that Applicant’s
“performance was exceptional and his leadership skills were that of a seasoned petty
Officer. . .  He held a Top Secret clearance and never had any disciplinary issues. His
character and personality is nothing short of outstanding.” (Exhibit D.)
Applicant also forwarded his Evaluation Report & Counseling Record for 2003
and 2004. He was described “as an absolute top performer in every respect . . .
flawlessly planned and executed a myriad of administrative and logistical tasks in
support of over 100 attendees . . . [Appellant] possesses all of the traits and
demonstrates the abilities required for increased responsibility and, ultimately promotion
to Chief Petty officer.” (Exhibit B.)   
Finally, in Applicant’s DD Form 214, it shows that Applicant received an
Honorable Discharge in August 31, 2008, and during his years in the Navy, he earned
two Navy/Marine Corps Commendation Medals, five Navy/Marine Corps Achievement
Medals, three Navy “E” ribbons, six Good Conduct Medals, two national Defense
Service Medals, and several other distinguished awards. (Exhibit G.)  
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
4
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19 (a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶ 19 (c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. In this case, the question
that has to be addressed is whether these SOR debts, that are listed on Applicant’s
credit report, were acquired by Applicant or his wife. 
I considered the following factors in reaching my decision: 1) Applicant’s
testimony was extremely credible that none of these debts were his, and he has never
lived in such a manner to have these kind of debts, nor had he used the services of any
of these companies; 2) Applicant testified that he spoke to his wife, and she told him
that she had not incurred these debts; she also submitted a letter where she
represented that she was not aware of these debts; 3) while Applicant was not as
aggressive as he should have been, he did dispute the debts with one credit reporting
service before the hearing, and he challenged it with all the agencies in writing after the
hearing. Finally, I found Applicant very credible because of his outstanding 20 year
career history in the United States Navy; I considered his DD Form 214 that showed all
of the honors he had achieved, his excellent evaluations, and his letters of
recommendation. For all of the reasons discussed above, I have reached the conclusion
that the debts listed on the SOR were not incurred by Applicant or his wife. 
I do not find that any of the disqualifying conditions are factors for consideration
in this case. I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the financial concerns of the
Government.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
6
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
  
I considered the potentially Disqualifying and Mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the Disqualifying Conditions do not apply, considered together with the
positive character letters on behalf of Applicant and his excellent military employment
history, I find that the record evidence leaves me with no significant questions or doubts
as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-
person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security
concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.e.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
