 
1 
 
 
                                                                
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
      ) ISCR Case: 09-08295   
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On June 22, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On July 8, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of Defense 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 2, 2010, Applicant filed an answer to the SOR. On October 6, 
2010, she re-filed her answer and requested the case be decided on the written record 
in lieu of a hearing. On November 17, 2010, Department Counsel prepared a File of 
 
2 
 
 
Relevant Material (FORM) containing nine Items and mailed Applicant a complete copy 
on November 20, 2010. Applicant received the FORM on December 1, 2010, and had 
30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit additional information. Applicant 
filed additional documents that I marked as Applicant Exhibits 1 through 20 and 
admitted into the record without objection from Department Counsel. On January 1, 
2011, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
 After reviewing Applicant’s answer that contained a detailed spreadsheet of the 
status of the SOR-listed debts, I requested that Applicant submit documents to support 
her assertions that she paid or was paying numerous debts. I gave her until March 28, 
2011, to tender said information. On June 1, 2011, Department Counsel informed me 
that Applicant did not submit any information. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations contained in ¶¶ 1a 
through 1.y. Her admissions, including her responses to DOHA interrogatories, are 
incorporated in the following findings. 
 
 Applicant is 44 years old. She is married and has three adult children from a 
previous marriage. She earned a Master’s degree in Management of Information 
Systems in August 2008 and earned a Bachelor’s degree in Computer Information 
Systems in November 2004. In July 2008, she began a position as a configuration 
analyst for a defense contractor.  
 
 After submitting an e-QIP in June 2009, Applicant met with a government 
investigator in September 2009 to discuss information in it, including her delinquent 
debts, judgments, and a 2003 bankruptcy. During the interview, she indicated that 
approximately $236,800 of debt, including a mortgage of $227,000, was discharged in 
July 2003. She noted that she intended to resolve numerous debts. She indicated that 
she accumulated debt prior to November 2008 because she supported too many family 
members. After November 2008, she suffered a physical injury and was on disability for 
three months, which further exacerbated her financial problems. She told the 
investigator that she intended to enroll in a financial management program to address 
her debts. (Item 7.)  
 
 In April 2010, Applicant responded to Interrogatories inquiring into the status of 
24 debts that totaled about $40,000. In it, she included a spreadsheet for 18 of the 24 
debts, noting status and current balances. She indicated that many of the debts were 
paid, or being paid via installments. She noted that documentary evidence, such as 
bank statements and copies of checks, were attached to the Interrogatories but they 
were not. She agreed to provide proof of payment for some debts. She submitted 
copies of five checks that totaled about $2,000; however, it is not clear to which debts 
those payments relate. She did not submit copies of bank statements or other 
documents to support her assertions that many debts were being paid monthly. (Item 7.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from February and May 2010, the SOR 
alleged the 2003 bankruptcy and 24 delinquent debts that totaled about $38,000. In her 
August 2010 answer to the SOR (that was received in September 2010), Applicant 
provided a spreadsheet that included each SOR-listed debt. Again, she noted that many 
debts were being paid monthly or would be paid in September 2010. Attached to that 
answer was information previously submitted and proof of the resolution of an $85 debt, 
not previously submitted. (Item 4.) In response to the FORM, she again provided 
information previously submitted, but also included proof of payment for other debts. To-
date it appears from the documents in the case file that she has paid approximately 
$5,000 of the $38,000 of delinquent debts.1
 
  
 Applicant did not provide evidence that she has obtained credit counseling. She 
provided no evidence concerning the quality of her job performance. She submitted no 
character references or other evidence tending to establish good judgment, 
trustworthiness, or reliability.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
                                                          
1Applicant submitted exhibits that document payments on the debts listed in ¶¶ 1.i, 1.m and 1.q. 
Throughout this process, she submitted other documents that indicate payments made on debts, but said 
documents do not clearly identify the specific SOR-listed debts to which the documents relate. 
 
4 
 
 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 In July 2003, Applicant had approximately $238,000 of delinquent debt 
discharged through bankruptcy. Since then, she has accumulated about $38,000 in 
delinquent debts, of which approximately $33,000 remains unresolved. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. AG ¶ 20 sets forth conditions that could mitigate financial security 
concerns: 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Because Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing and unresolved, there is 
insufficient evidence to support a finding that the indebtedness is unlikely to recur or 
continue. Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
Although some of Applicant’s debts may be the consequence of family and 
health issues, which were situations beyond her control, she did not submit sufficient 
evidence documenting her attempts to responsibly manage the debts while they 
accrued, as required under AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant established no mitigation under AG & 
20(c) because she did not provide evidence of credit counseling or documentation that 
$33,000 of her debt is being resolved and is under control. She provided evidence that 
she paid at least $5,000 of her debt, warranting a limited application of AG & 20(d). 
There is no evidence to support the application of AG & 20(e).  AG & 20(f) is not 
applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature, educated 
individual, who has worked for a defense contractor since July 2008. In September 
2009, she learned of the Government’s concerns relating to her financial problems and 
delinquent debts. In April 2010, she completed interrogatories seeking information 
regarding the resolution of said debts. In July 2010, she received an SOR that notified 
her that approximately $38,000 of delinquent debt and a previous bankruptcy raised 
security concerns. In November 2010, the Government filed the FORM. In March 2011, 
she was given another opportunity to submit evidence to support her numerous 
statements that she had paid or was paying many of her delinquent debts. For at least 
18 months, she has been on notice that the delinquent debts were potentially 
jeopardizing her employment.  Despite that knowledge and opportunities to do so, she 
did not provide documentary proof to corroborate the statements in her answer or 
interrogatories that many debts were paid or being resolved. The record contains 
insufficient other evidence about her character, trustworthiness, or responsibility to 
mitigate these concerns, or make their continuation less likely. 
 
Overall, the record evidence creates sufficient doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:             Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.i:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.j through 1.l:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.m:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.n through 1.o:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.q:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.r through 1.y:   Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
