  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05488 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has three charged-off accounts, which total in excess of $51,000. He 
asserts his wife incurred these debts and he does not intend to pay them. Applicant has 
failed to rebut or mitigate the security concerns under financial considerations. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
1 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 8, 2010, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. 
  
 On August 26, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
January 6, 2011, I was assigned the case. On January 26, 2011, DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing for the hearing held on February 8, 2011.  
 
 The Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A and B, which 
were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held open to allow 
additional information from Applicant. (Tr. 35) No additional information was received. 
On February 16, 2011, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the factual allegations, with 
explanations. After a thorough review of the record, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old instructor who has worked for a defense contractor 
since 2007, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. He teaches students how to 
repair vehicles. (Tr. 27) He called no witnesses other than himself, and produced no 
work or character references.  
 
 In June 1968, Applicant married and in October 2007, they separated. His 
spouse is now 70 years old and there are no plans to divorce. (Ex. 2) During their 
marriage, his wife worked for a candy company and retired at age 62. (Tr. 50) She 
receives $1,048 monthly social security payments. (Tr. 37) He lives in the mid-west and 
she lives on the west coast. He pays his wife’s rent and utility bills, which are 
approximately $1,200 per month. (Tr. 38) He does not send the money to his wife, but 
pays the accounts directly. (Tr. 37, 38) He also pays her additional expenses such as 
groceries and clothing. In total, he pays about $2,000 monthly for his wife’s expenses. 
(Tr. 39)  
 
 When Applicant’s wife told him she could no longer meet the monthly payments 
on their bills, he asked how much they owed and she told him $200,000. (Tr. 31) His 
wife never told him what caused the debt. (Tr. 46) He is unaware of what was 
purchased. (Tr. 31) In 2005, Applicant and his wife sold their home they owned for 31 
years to pay their outstanding debts. (Tr. 30) Applicant said the sale was “quite 
traumatic.” (Tr. 53) The amount received exceeded their debts by approximately 
$30,000. After the house sold, he moved in with his son. During 2006 and 2007, 
Applicant was unemployed for eight months and used this money to pay living 
expenses. (Tr. 32) Following the sale of the home, Applicant took over management of 
the household finances. (Tr. 56)  
 
 
3 
In April 2009 and May 2009, Applicant was questioned about his finances. (Ex. 2) 
At that time, he was unaware of the three SOR debts and stated he believed the debts 
belonged to his wife. The debts include: a $31,365 jewelry store account (SOR 1.a), a 
$17,765 major credit card account (SOR 1.b), and a $2,131 home improvement store 
credit card (SOR 1.c). All three are joint credit accounts. (Ex. 6) The major credit card 
account was opened in November 1988, the jewelry store account was opened in July 
2000, and the home improvement store account was opened in April 2006. (Tr. 33, Ex. 
4. 5, 6) Timely payment were made for the first nine months the home improvement 
store account was open. (Tr. 49)  
 
Applicant does not believe he is responsible for the three debts and does not 
intend to pay them. (Tr. 43) In September 2009, in response to written interrogatories, 
he stated he had confronted his spouse about the debts and she said she would take 
care of them. In November 2010, his wife met with the creditor for the jewelry store 
account and agreed to make $100 monthly payments on the debt. (Ex. A) In December 
2010, his wife made a $100 payment. (Ex. B) If no additional interest is charged on this 
account, it will take approximately 26 years to pay this debt at a rate of $100 per month. 
(Tr. 55)  
 
Applicant asserts the only credit card he carried was for the major credit card 
account (SOR 1.b). He never carried the jewelry store or the home improvement store 
cards. (Tr. 34) He is unaware which, if any, credit cards his wife currently possesses. 
(Tr. 47) He provided no documentation that all of the joint accounts have been 
canceled. He has no car payments. (Tr. 41) He has not received financial counseling. 
(Tr. 36) His monthly gross income is $4,000. (Tr. 37) Following the payment of his 
monthly expenses of $1,790 and payment of $1,951 on his wife’s monthly expenses, he 
has a net monthly remainder of approximately $500. (Tr. 42) He has approximately 
$45,000 in his checking account. (Tr. 41) He also has a retirement plan, but does not 
know its value. (Tr. 42) He produced no documentation or testimony that he has 
terminated all of his joint accounts with his wife other than to indicate he has a debit 
card, but maintains no credit cards.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
 
4 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
5 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. There are three charged-off, joint 
credit accounts totaling more than $51,000. Applicant does not believe they are his 
accounts and has no intention of paying them. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His 
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple. For eight months during 2006 and 
2007, he was unemployed and used a portion of the $30,000 received in the sale of his 
 
6 
home for living expenses. He has received no credit or financial counseling, has not 
demonstrated that the three debts have been paid, that he has a plan to pay them, or 
that he has made a good-faith effort to satisfy his debts. 
 
In 2005, when Applicant’s house was sold, $200,000 in delinquent debt was paid. 
Applicant was not sure how this large debt was incurred. He thought all of his debts 
were paid at that time. When the house was sold, Applicant took over the household 
finances. However, concern over his finances still exists.  
 
Applicant’s inability to explain the nature of the $200,000 debt or explain how the 
three charged-off accounts were incurred following the sale of his home undermines 
confidence that he will not experience debt problems in the future. The mitigating 
condition listed in AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
Even as of the date of the hearing, Applicant produced no documentation or 
testimony that all of his joint accounts with his wife have been cancelled, other than to 
indicate he has a debit card, but maintains no credit cards. This statement is insufficient 
to find the joint credit accounts are currently terminated. The major credit card account 
(SOR 1.b) was opened in November 1988 and the jewelry store account (SOR 1.a) was 
opened in July 2000. These joint accounts were opened years before he and his spouse 
separated in 2007. The smallest of the charged-off accounts was the home 
improvement store account (SOR 1.c) opened in April 2006. It was opened after the 
sale of the home and prior to their separation.  
 
If the only debt were the home improvement store charged-off account, the risk 
imposed would be minimal since he has more than $45,000 in his checking account. It 
is noted he failed to document the value of his checking account or his retirement 
account.  
 
Even after the traumatic loss of his home of 31 years in 2005 due to unexplained 
debt, Applicant was unaware of the charged-off accounts until being questioned about 
his finances during interviews in April 2009 and May 2009. In September 2009, he 
answered interrogatories about these three debts. In the past two years, since learning 
of the three charged-off accounts, the only information he has provided was evidence 
his wife had made a single payment in December 2010. I fail to find the financial 
problems were largely beyond his control. The debts were incurred because he failed to 
terminate the joint accounts. He has not acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
The mitigating condition in AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
Applicant has received no financial counseling and the three charged-off 
accounts have not been paid. The mitigating conditions in AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not 
apply. For the mitigating condition in AG ¶ 20(e) to apply there must be a reasonable 
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and he must provide documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue, which Applicant has failed to do. He 
asserts he confronted his wife about the three debts and she will take care of them. 
 
7 
However, her limited income makes this unlikely to occur. It will take 26 years to pay the 
jewelry account debt, which is the only debt she has admitted is her debt. He provided 
no documentation as to the other charged-off accounts. AG ¶ 20(e) clearly states the 
Applicant must not only dispute the debt, but must substantiate the basis of the dispute, 
which he failed to do.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Two years ago Applicant was 
questioned about the three joint charged-off accounts. Since then he has documented a 
single $100 payment on the more than $51,000 owed on these three charged-off 
accounts. His spouse has an agreement to repay the jewelry store charged-off account, 
but there is no documentation the agreement is being honored. The single $100 
payment in December 2010 is insufficient to show his financial problems are being 
addressed. He asserts, but failed to document, the other charged-off accounts were his 
spouse’s debts. The charged-off accounts were joint accounts opened before he 
separated from his spouse in October 2007. He failed to insure the joint accounts were 
properly closed when their home was sold and their delinquent debts paid. He still has 
not shown the joint accounts have been cancelled. 
 
The issue is not simply whether the charged-off accounts are paid, which they 
are not, but whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold 
a security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1)) Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
arising from his financial considerations. 
 
 
8 
This decision should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot 
or will not attain the state of true reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award 
of a security clearance. The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime 
occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to 
the evidence presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not 
recommended. Should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security 
clearance in the future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance 
with a repayment plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations, he may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security worthiness. However, a clearance at 
this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
