 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 10-00557 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on November 12, 2008. On August 2, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal 
conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department 
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in an undated response, which DOHA received 
on September 7, 2010. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 13, 
 
2 
 
 
2011. The case was assigned to me on February 1, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on February 16, 2011, scheduling the hearing for March 3, 2011. The hearing 
was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G, 
which were received without objection, and testified on his own behalf.  
 
I held the record open until March 17, 2011, to afford Applicant the opportunity 
to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE H through J, which were 
received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 14, 
2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1a and 1g, and denied the remaining allegations 
under ¶ 1. He did not provide written answers to allegations under ¶ 2, which dealt 
with falsifying his e-QIP. During the hearing, Applicant augmented his SOR Answer by 
orally denying SOR ¶¶ 2a and 2b. His answers are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. (SOR Answer, Tr. 11-12, 14-16.) 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old operations analyst, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since November 2008. He seeks to retain his top secret security clearance, 
which is a requirement of his continued employment. Applicant has continuously and 
successfully held a security clearance since he enlisted in the U.S. Army in September 
1979, discussed infra. (GE 1, Tr. 33-34, 37-38.) 
 
Applicant graduated from high school in May 1977. Since graduating from high 
school, Applicant has earned an associate’s degree in business administration and 
has completed approximately 90 hours of online college credits towards a bachelor of 
arts degree. (GE 1, Tr. 34-37.) Applicant served in the U.S. Army from September 
1977 to August 2005, having served 25 years, 8 months of active duty. He retired as a 
master sergeant (pay grade E-8). He served the majority of his Army career with 
Special Forces and Special Operations forward deployed. (AE G, Tr. 18-19, 34, 38-
39.) 
 
Applicant married his first wife in November 1981, separated from her in 
approximately 2000, and divorced her in April 2005. He has two adult daughters from 
his first marriage, who are independent. Applicant remarried in May 2007, and has 
three minor stepchildren with his second wife. (Tr. 20, 37.)  
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges eight separate debts totalling $96,567. These debts are a 
combination of credit card debt, a cell phone bill, a student loan, and a mortgage 
deficiency. (SOR ¶¶ 1a – 1h., Tr. 17.) 
 
Applicant had paid, made payment arrangements, or successfully disputed all 
debts alleged. A summary of their disposition follows: (1) charged-off cell phone bill for 
$445 – paid in full (SOR ¶ 1a) (AE I, Tr. 49, 62); (2) charged-off credit card for $32,713 
– disputed because he did not apply for account, disposition pending (SOR ¶ 1b) (GE 
3, Tr. 50, 64-65); (3) three charged-off credit card accounts to same creditor in the 
amounts of $1,568, $8,794, and $2,747 – set up payment plan with creditor making 
$900 monthly payments (SOR ¶¶ 1c, 1d, and 1f) (AE C -  AE E, Tr. 51, 66); (4) 
charged-off mortgage payment for $23,030 – home awarded to former wife in divorce 
decree, former wife was to assume possession and payments (SOR ¶ 1e) (GE 4, Tr. 
51-52, 60-68);  (5) collection account for education loan for $2,598 – settled and paid 
in full (SOR ¶ 1g) (AE B, AE H, Tr. 52, 54, 68-69) and (6) charged-off credit card for 
$24,672 – successfully disputed because he did not apply for account, creditor 
removed from credit report (SOR ¶ 1h) (GE 3, AE G, Tr. 55, 69-70). 
 
Applicant’s financial problems stem primarily from a failed marriage, separation, 
and divorce. He was forward deployed and away from his family the majority of his 
Army career. During Applicant’s deployments and separations, he relied on his former 
wife to manage the family finances. Applicant had provided his wife with an allotment 
for family support and to cover household expenses. That arrangement failed and led 
to his current difficulties. (Tr. 32-33.) 
 
Applicant has paid, settled, or successfully disputed overdue creditors or 
resolved all debts alleged. Applicant submitted a budget post-hearing that reflects a 
net monthly remainder of $3,076. This budget demonstrates that Applicant is living 
within his means and takes into account the salary of his second wife. (AE J.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to disclose debts over 180 days old in the 
seven years preceding the completion of his November 2008 e-QIP and debts 
currently over 90 days delinquent. (SOR ¶¶ 2a – 2b.)  During the time Applicant was 
married to his first wife, they had joint credit card accounts; however, he did not use 
them. At the time Applicant completed his e-QIP, he and his former wife were living in 
separate states and not communicating. With the exception of the cell phone bill for 
$445 alleged in SOR ¶ 1a, all of the statements were going to his former wife’s home. 
Applicant acquired the cell phone in his name during a nine-month temporary 
assignment. He had family in the area and when he finished his assignment, he gave 
his cell phone to a family member to close out. Applicant was current on his cell phone 
bill the entire time he had possession of the phone. Unfortunately, his family member 
did not close out the cell phone and used the phone running up charges. Applicant 
 
4 
 
 
was not aware that his cell phone had not been returned to the cell phone company or 
that the family member had run up charges when he completed his November 2008 e-
QIP. (Tr. 40-46.)  
Applicant had never looked at his credit report until he went to buy a car in 
2010 and the salesman informed him, “your credit’s so bad.” (Tr. 46-48.) He testified 
that he had been through the security clearance application process several times 
during his Army career. He credibly testified that he had no intention to deliberately 
provide false information with the intent to deceive and that his failure to accurately 
respond to questions regarding his financial situation was caused by oversight or lack 
of situational awareness.  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted documentation of numerous awards and decorations that 
he received during an extraordinary 25-plus year active duty Army career. Those 
awards and decorations include the Legion of Merit, Bronze Star, Meritorious Service 
Medal with Two Oak Leaf Clusters, Joint Commendation Medal, Army Commendation 
Medal with Two Oak Leaf Clusters, Army Achievement Medal with Four Oak Leaf 
Clusters, Good Conduct Medal with Eight Oak Leaf Clusters, NATO Medal, Two 
Combat Infantry Badges, and various campaign and service awards. (AE G.) 
 
Applicant also submitted nine reference letters from senior officers, senior non-
commissioned officers, and civilians who commented on his active duty years as well 
as his current duties as a defense contractor. All of these individuals know Applicant 
well and have observed him primarily in a professional capacity; however, several 
individuals know him in a personal capacity. The overwhelming sense of these 
reference letters is that that Applicant is loyal, honest, hard working, and trustworthy. 
All of these individuals strongly recommend Applicant for a security clearance. 
Applicant’s current civilian performance evaluation as well as his NCO Evaluation 
Reports document sustained superior performance and extraordinary potential for 
future service. (AE G.) 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
5 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems, “Failure 
or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may 
indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.” 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”; and “(c) a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 26, 2006) provides, “Applicant’s credit report was sufficient to establish the 
Government’s prima facie case that Applicant had    .  .  delinquent [SOR] debts that 
are of security concern.” Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is also documented in 
his Responses to DOHA interrogatories, his SOR response, and his oral statement at 
his hearing. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) 
and 19(c). Further inquiry about the applicability of mitigating conditions is required.  
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. 
Therefore, his debt is “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s 
jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing 
ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)).  
 
Applicant receives credit under AG ¶ 20(b) because his financial problems 
resulted when his former wife diverted household incoem from its intended purpose. 
Applicant divorced his former wife in April 2005; however, the financial fallout from this 
experience lingers.1
 
 He established that he acted with sufficient initiative and resolve 
to address his delinquent debts. Applicant provided documentation about his income 
and expenditures to receive full credit under AG ¶ 20(b). 
AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies. Although Applicant did not seek financial 
counseling, he has submitted evidence that there are clear indications that the 
problem is being resolved and is under control. Moreover, he demonstrated a firm 
grasp of budgeting, payment plans, and expense reduction. He leads a lifestyle 
consistent with his income level and within his means, and manages to remain current 
on his present obligations yet still manages to make payments to former creditors. He 
has the self-discipline necessary to reduce and resolve his debts. There are “clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” He has also 
established full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) because he showed good faith2
 
 in the 
resolution of his SOR debts.   
                                                          
1“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether the Applicant maintained contact with his or her creditors and attempted to 
negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant contested the validity of two SOR debts. He submitted documentation 
supporting the basis of his disputes with creditors. One of the creditors has removed 
the debt from Applicant’s credit report and the results of the second disputed account 
are still pending. He receives full credit under AG ¶20(e) in regard to SOR ¶¶ 1b and 
1h. I am further convinced if the second creditor establishes that the debt is valid, 
Applicant will repay them. In sum, Applicant has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating, “Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of special interest is any 
failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.” 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case in regard to the allegation Applicant provided a false 
security clearance application: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 A false statement raises a concern when it is made knowingly and willfully. An 
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely 
forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or honestly 
thought the information did not need to be reported. 
 
The issue here is Applicant’s truthfulness when answering two e-QIP questions 
regarding past and present delinquent accounts. Applicant was not aware his debts 
were delinquent. Having had the opportunity to listen to his testimony and observe his 
demeanor, his explanations as noted in the findings of fact are accepted as credible. 
The evidence is not sufficient to show that he made deliberately false statements 
when he answered these two questions.  
 
AG ¶ 17(f) provides a condition that could mitigate security concerns in this 
case, stating, “the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.” AG ¶ 17(f) fully applies to SOR ¶¶ 2a – 2b. Although Applicant 
acknowledged his answers regarding his financial situation were incorrect, he honestly 
and reasonably believed that the information he provided was correct at the time.3
                                                          
3The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 To 
 
 
9 
 
 
conclude, Appellant presented evidence to explain, extenuate, or mitigate this security 
concern. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
    
There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. His debts have been 
ongoing for a number of years. His efforts to resolve his delinquent debt raise security 
concerns. Applicant’s record of good employment weighs in his favor. There is no 
evidence of any security violation. Aside from the delinquent debt (which is a civil, 
non-criminal issue), he is a law-abiding citizen. The Appeal Board has addressed a 
key element in the whole person analysis in financial cases stating: 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden 
of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or 
prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a 
Judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is 
direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at 
the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to 
conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E 
and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to 
explain the omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 
9, 2004)). 
 
10 
 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has ‘ . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.’ The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (‘Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.’) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Once Applicant became 
aware of the extent of his adverse credit, he took prompt and appropriate corrective 
action. As in the case of many deploying service personnel, the spouse who remains 
behind typically manages the family budget. Applicant was providing his former wife 
with the funds to pay the bills; however, as their marriage deteriorated, so did their 
financial situation. Unfortunately for Applicant, he did not realize his financial situation 
had deteriorated until his credit was significantly damaged. The record supports the 
fact that Applicant has paid numerous debts over the years. He has established a 
“meaningful track record” of debt payment sufficient to trust his promise to pay or 
otherwise resolve his remaining debts. These factors show responsibility, 
rehabilitation, and mitigation.  
 
Applicant has demonstrated his loyalty, patriotism, and trustworthiness through 
his 25 years of distinguished military service and more recently as a defense 
contractor employee. Noteworthy is the fact that he has successfully held a security 
clearance for 32 years. 
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
financial considerations and personal conduct security concerns.    
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1a – 1h:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2a – 2b:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
