                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05003 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana from 1993-1994 until January 2010. He used 
cocaine twice between 2003 and 2007. He illegally used drugs after he was granted 
access to classified information at the secret level in 2001. His behavior is recent and it 
continues to cast doubt on his reliability, judgment, and ability and willingness to comply 
with the law and follow rules. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 2, 2010. 
After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
On December 6, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal 
Conduct) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2 Department Counsel amended the SOR 
on February 15, 2011, adding an additional Guideline H allegation. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on January 28, 2011, and to the 
amended allegation on March 7, 2011. He requested a hearing before an administrative 
judge. The case was assigned to me on March 2, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on March 3, 2011, convening a hearing on March 30, 2011. At the hearing, the 
Government offered two exhibits (GE 1 and 2). Applicant testified and presented four 
exhibits (AE 1 – 4). All exhibits were received without objection. DOHA received the 
transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 7, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations under SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 2.a, and 
2.b, with explanations. He denied SOR ¶ 1.c, because he believed that, as written, the 
allegation implied more use than just two times. At the hearing, Applicant admitted he 
used cocaine twice while holding a security clearance. His admissions are incorporated 
herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence of record, his answers 
to the SOR and interrogatories, and his demeanor and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old mechanical engineer working for a government 
contractor since 2001. Applicant is single and has no children. He attended college from 
1995 until 1999, and received a bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering. He was 
granted access to classified information at the secret level in December 2001. There is 
no evidence to show that he has ever compromised or caused others to compromise 
classified or proprietary information.  
 
Applicant’s supervisors and co-workers consider him to be a reliable, trustworthy, 
and security conscious employee who follows the rules and regulations concerning the 
handling of classified information. His supervisors are impressed with Applicant’s 
judgment, professionalism, technical knowledge, and the quality of his work. His work 
ethic is excellent, and his performance consistently ranks in the higher percentages of 
his team. Over the years, he has received several performance awards for his excellent 
work. In sum, he is considered to be an asset to his company. His references 
recommend he be granted access to classified information. 
 
Applicant’s security concerns arose out of his long-term illegal drug use, most of 
which occurred while he was holding a security clearance. He illegally used marijuana 
approximately 12 times during his junior year in high school (1993-1994). (Tr. 34) He 
also used marijuana approximately three times in 1995, while a freshman in college. 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DoD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
Thereafter, he got serious, concentrated on his studies and did not use marijuana again 
until 2003. (Tr. 30) 
 
Applicant was required to undergo a urinalysis test, and to submit an SCA, as a 
condition of his employment in 2001. He did not disclose any illegal drug use in his 2001 
SCA. He was made aware that his company has policies against the unlawful use of 
any drugs, including marijuana and cocaine.  
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana about monthly from January 2003 until January 
2009. He used cocaine twice between 2003 and 2007. From 2003 until 2006, he 
purchased marijuana for his personal use approximately four times. He never sold 
marijuana or used any other drugs than marijuana or cocaine. He used marijuana, 
approximately once every other month, from January 2009 until January 2010. 
Applicant’s last use of marijuana was in January 2010, one month before he submitted 
the pending SCA. His use of illegal drugs occurred primarily during social settings, while 
at parties and with his friends. He felt compelled to participate in the use of illegal drugs 
because of peer pressure and his desire to belong to the group. 
 
Applicant explained that during the summer of 2009, he developed chest pains 
and visited a doctor. He disclosed to the doctor his use of marijuana and he was 
provided literature about the health risks associated with the use of marijuana. He 
stopped using marijuana and started to exercise and to live a healthier life. Applicant 
testified he no longer associates with anyone who uses cocaine. He only associates 
socially with three of his marijuana-using friends. He believes that these three friends 
are no longer using marijuana because they are now married and have children. He still 
attends some concerts with his drug-using associates. 
 
Applicant acknowledged that he always knew his use of marijuana and cocaine 
was illegal, and that his employer would “frown” at his use of marijuana. He believed 
that as long as his use of marijuana did not interfere with his professional life, it would 
be okay for him to use marijuana. He finally realized it was not smart for him to use 
illegal drugs. Applicant has never been diagnosed as a drug abuser, and he has not 
participated in any drug counseling or treatment. 
 
In February 2010, Applicant submitted an SCA, asking for access to classified 
information at the top secret level, and disclosed that in the last seven years he illegally 
purchased, possessed, and used drugs while possessing a security clearance. During a 
subsequent security clearance interview, Applicant cooperated with the investigator and 
disclosed in detail his illegal drug use as described above. 
 
Applicant testified that he is deeply sorry, remorseful, and regretful about his past 
questionable behavior. He understands that the use of illegal drugs is a serious offense. 
He testified he is fully committed to never using any illegal drugs again. He submitted a 
written statement of intent with automatic revocation of his security clearance for any 
violation. (AE 1) He did not submit a recent diagnosis and prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional concerning his substance abuse problem. Applicant believes that 
 
4 
 
 
his performance during the last 10 years, and his honesty in the 2010 SCA, and through 
the security clearance process, demonstrate his integrity and that he is trustworthy.  
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole-person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant has an extensive history of illegal marijuana use extending from around 
1993-1994, when he was in high school, until January 2010. He also used cocaine twice 
between 2003 and 2007. He illegally used drugs after he was granted access to 
classified information at the secret level in December 2001. He knew that the illegal use 
of drugs constitutes a serious offense, and that his employer had a policy against the 
use of any illegal drugs.  
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Three drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise a security concern and are disqualifying in this particular case: AG ¶ 
25(a) “any drug abuse,”3 AG ¶ 25(c) “illegal drug possession . . . purchase, sale, or 
distribution,” and AG ¶ 25(g) “any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance.” 
 
 
3  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: (1) Drugs, 
materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions. Considering the evidence as a whole, I find that none of the mitigating 
conditions fully apply. Applicant stopped using marijuana in January 2010. As such, his 
use is recent. His illegal use of marijuana spans a period of over 16 years, and it 
occurred under normal circumstances. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant is well-educated, and has extensive experience working for a 
government contractor and dealing with the security clearance process. He was 24 
years old in 2001, when he was granted access to classified information. He was almost 
33 years old when he last used marijuana in January 2010. Applicant was well aware 
that using illegal drugs is a criminal offense and about the adverse job-related 
consequences of his actions. Notwithstanding, he elected to use marijuana and cocaine. 
He failed to disclose his past marijuana use in his 2001 SCA because he knew it would 
adversely impact on his ability to hold his job and a security clearance. 
 
Applicant used illegal drugs for his personal enjoyment, because of peer 
pressure, and to socially fit in with his group of friends. He still associates with at least 
three of his drug-using friends. I note that he submitted a written statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of his security clearance for any violation. Notwithstanding, in light 
of his continued association with his drug-using friends, he failed to establish a clear 
commitment not to abuse drugs in the future, to disassociate from his drug-using friends, 
and to avoid environments where the use illegal drugs is possible. AG ¶ 26(b) partially 
applies, but does not fully mitigate the drug involvement security concerns. 
 
Applicant’s evidence is insufficient to show that the factors that triggered his 
illegal drug use are no longer present. He did not present evidence that he has 
satisfactorily completed a drug treatment program and received a favorable prognosis 
by a duly qualified medical professional. He also failed to establish that he does not 
have a current substance abuse problem. Considering the totality of the circumstances, 
without credible corroborating evidence, Applicant’s assertions of abstinence, well-
being, change of lifestyle, and promise to abstain from illegal drugs are insufficient to 
mitigate the present security concerns. AG ¶ 26(d) does not apply. AG ¶ 26(c) was not 
raised by the evidence in this case and does not apply. 
 
Applicant’s past questionable behavior still casts serious doubts on his reliability, 
judgment, and his ability and willingness to comply with the law. Applicant’s favorable 
evidence, at this time, is not sufficient to mitigate the Guideline H security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
7 
 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant illegally used drugs (as described under the Guideline H discussion, 
incorporated herein), after he was granted access to classified information at the secret 
level in December 2001. He knew that the illegal use of drugs constitutes a serious 
offense, and that his employer had a policy against the use of any illegal drugs. His 
behavior triggered the applicability of disqualifying conditions: AG ¶ 16(e): personal 
conduct . . . that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
(1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing; and AG ¶ 16(g): association with persons involved 
in criminal activity.  
 
  After considering the seven mitigating conditions set out in AG ¶ 17, I find that, 
for the same reasons discussed under Guideline H (incorporated herein), none fully 
apply to the facts of this case. Applicant was involved in serious criminal behavior 
during approximately 15 years while holding a security clearance. He stopped his illegal 
drug use in January 2010, thus, his behavior is recent. His evidence failed to establish 
that his behavior happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur, 
and it still casts doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. AG ¶ 
17(c) does not apply. 
 
  Applicant acknowledged his misconduct and has taken some steps to change his 
lifestyle and to avoid the circumstances that led to his illegal drug use. Notwithstanding, 
his evidence is not sufficient to establish he has implemented significant and permanent 
lifestyle changes showing that his behavior is unlikely to recur. Applicant continues to 
associate with some of his drug-using friends. He presented no medical evidence to 
show that he currently does not have a drug problem, and he has not participated in any 
drug treatment or counseling. AG ¶¶ 17(d) and (g) do not apply. 
 
  By disclosing his illegal drug use in his 2009 SCA, to his supervisors, and 
cooperating in the security clearance process, Applicant has taken some steps to 
reduce or eliminate his vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 
17(e) applies in part, but does not fully mitigate the personal conduct security concern. 
Not enough time has passed to establish that Applicant currently does not have a drug 
problem, that he has implemented permanent lifestyle changes, and he has the ability 
and willingness to comply with the law, rules, and regulations. The remaining mitigating 
conditions are not reasonably raised by the evidence in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
8 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated in my whole-
person analysis my comments on the analysis of Guidelines H and E. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a well-educated and 
valuable employee. He receives credit for disclosing his illegal drug use in his 2010 
SCA and for cooperating in the security clearance process. He expressed remorse, 
regret, and embarrassment for his questionable behavior, and promised to remain 
abstinent. This recent conduct shows responsibility, good judgment, and some 
mitigation. 
 
Notwithstanding, the factors against granting his access to classified information 
are more compelling. Applicant illegally used marijuana for many years and while 
holding a security clearance. He broke the trust placed in him. At this time, his evidence 
is insufficient to show that the factors that triggered his illegal drug use are no longer 
present. He failed to establish that he does not have a current substance abuse 
problem, that he has implemented permanent lifestyle changes, and his ability and 
willingness to comply with the law, rules, and regulations. On balance, the record 
evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1a – 1d:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1a and 1b:    Against Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
