 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 10-04564    
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
Noel, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
public trust position in the defense industry. The evidence shows she has a history of 
financial problems. Although she has recently taken preliminary steps to resolve her 
delinquent debts, she has not provided any documentation showing that any payments 
have been made. Because Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns stemming from her history of 
financial problems, this case is decided against Applicant. 
 
 
2 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on November 23, 
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of 
reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust position. The SOR detailed the factual basis 
for the action under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial 
considerations.    
  
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on February 17, 2011. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on March 3, 2011. She 
did not object to the items appended to the Government’s brief. These documents are 
admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 13.  
 
Applicant submitted a response to the FORM to which Department Counsel did 
not object. These documents are admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through F. In 
addition to these documents, she submitted a copy of the SOR, which is already 
admitted as part of the Government’s FORM. 
 
The case was assigned to me on May 18, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old employee of a defense contractor for whom she has 
worked since January 2008. She completed her application for a public trust position 
shortly after she began her employment.2 
 
 Applicant admits that in November 2004, she filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
protection. In 2003, Applicant’s now-estranged husband caused an accident while 
driving her car. As a result of the accident, several passengers in the other vehicle were 
injured and pursued legal action against Applicant as the owner of the vehicle. To avoid 
judgments stemming from the accident, she sought bankruptcy protection. In March 
2006, she converted the bankruptcy to Chapter 7. The petition was successfully 
discharged in March 2007.3 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case.  The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H 
(2006). The AG replace the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
2 GE 4. 
 
3 GE 3; GE 5; GE 10. 
 
3 
 
 
 After the bankruptcy was discharged, she began to accumulate consumer debt 
which eventually became delinquent. Unemployed for five months between July 2007 
and January 2008, she started to fall behind on her bills. Even after she began working 
in January 2008, her financial situation continued to deteriorate for reasons unexplained 
in the record. Eventually, she accumulated seven delinquent debts totaling 
approximately $20,147, as alleged in the SOR. Applicant admits that she is responsible 
for all of the debts in the SOR except ¶ 1.h. Although she provides no explanation for 
her denial, it is most likely because she believes the debt is a duplicate of ¶ 1.g. While 
the amounts of the debts alleged in ¶ 1.g. and 1.h. are close, the account numbers are 
different. Applicant has not provided any documentation supporting the basis of her 
denial.4 
  
 Finally, in March 2011, after having taken no prior actions to resolve her 
delinquent debts, Applicant enrolled in a debt repayment program offered by a law firm. 
Under the program, the law firm will verify each delinquent debt and attempt to 
negotiate settlements with each creditor. Starting March 25, 2011, Applicant has agreed 
to pay $225 for 49 months to resolve five SOR debts (1.b. - 1.e. and 1.g.). As of March 
30, 2011, the law firm sent representation letters to the five creditors included in the 
program and informed them that the law firm would soon contact them to negotiate 
settlements on the delinquent accounts. To date, Applicant has not provided any 
documentation that settlement agreements have been reached or that she has made 
any payments as required under the debt repayment program.5 
 
 Separately, she negotiated a settlement agreement for the only debt not included 
in the program, ¶ 1.f. The creditor agreed to settle the delinquent debt for a fraction of 
the amount owed. In turn, Applicant agreed to pay the settlement amount in three 
installments scheduled between March and May 2011. She has not provided any 
documentation showing these payments have been made.6 
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”7 
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties, is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the national 
interests.”8 Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
                                                          
4  GE 3; GE 4; GE 6; GE 7; GE 11. 
 
5 AE A; AE B; AE F. 
 
6 AE E. 
 
7 Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
8 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
 
4 
 
may be made.9 An administrative judge’s objective is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision that embraces all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to a public trust position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s financial problems have persisted since at least 2003. After receiving the 
benefit of Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in 2007, she continued to accumulate debts 
that she could not pay. The evidence is sufficient to establish the applicability of the 
disqualifying conditions cited above.  
                                                          
9 See Regulation ¶C8.2.1. 
 
5 
 
 Of the six mitigating conditions potentially available under AG ¶ 20,10 none apply.  
Applicant’s financial problems are recent and the record does not support a finding that 
her financial difficulties occurred under unusual circumstances as required by AG ¶ 
20(a). Although a brief period of unemployment between July 2007 and January 2008 
was beyond her control, AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply because she has not acted 
responsibly to resolve any of her debts. She did not take any actions to address her 
delinquent debts until March 2011. Because she provided no evidence that she has 
reformed her financial habits or that she has received financial counseling, I cannot 
apply AG ¶ 20(c).  
 
 Applicant gets some credit for engaging the services of a law firm to help her 
craft a debt repayment plan and negotiating, on her own, a settlement agreement with 
the creditor not included in the program, however these actions alone do not mitigate 
the concerns raised by her negative financial history. She has not provided any 
documentation showing that any payments have been made. An applicant is reasonably 
expected to provide documentation concerning her finances.11 Absent this 
documentation, I cannot apply AG ¶ 20(d). Mitigating Conditions AG ¶¶ 20(e) and (f) are 
not raised by facts of this case. 
 
To conclude, the evidence as a whole justifies current doubts about Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I have given due 
consideration to the whole-person concept. Nevertheless, Applicant did not meet her 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is 
decided against Applicant.  
                                                          
10 20(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
20(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., 
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
20(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 
20(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts; 
20(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the 
cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and  
20(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
11 See ISCR Case No. 00-0104 (App. Bd. Mar. 21, 2001). 
 
 
6 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.h:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
