1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-05111
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s daily use of marijuana generates a security concern that she failed to
mitigate. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On February 14, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a  Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing a security concern cross-
alleged under Guidelines H, drug involvement, J, criminal conduct, and E, personal
conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
On March 7, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all of the allegations.
The case was assigned to me on March 29, 2011. That day, a notice of hearing was
issued scheduling the case for April 13, 2011. The hearing was conducted as
2
scheduled. I received five Government exhibits, marked and identified as Government’s
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, and two Applicant exhibits, marked and identified as
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 20, 2011. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 49-year-old woman with two adult children. A prior marriage ended
in divorce approximately 22 years ago. Applicant did not finish high school, but earned a
GED in the early 1980s. For the last seven years, she has worked for a defense
contractor. Currently, she is a team leader in the field of digital conversion. (Tr. 17) 
Applicant has been smoking marijuana since she was approximately 16 years
old. She smoked it “casually” during her teen years, then quit for about five years after
getting married and having children. (Tr. 24) She resumed using marijuana in 1985. By
1988, she was using it every weekend, and since 1989, she has used it nearly every
night. (Tr. 24-25)
Applicant’s ex-husband was abusive. She initially increased her marijuana use
“as a way to get away” from her marital troubles.” (Tr. 24) From 1988 to 1997, Applicant
dated a man who was a serious drug abuser. During this period, she smoked marijuana
daily. (Tr. 26) After she stopped seeing this man, her use decreased until 2004, when
she began to experience chronic pain related to migraines. She then resumed regular
use.
Applicant continues to use marijuana daily. In addition to relieving her migraine
symptoms, it helps her relieve stress, and numerous other ailments. (Tr. 34) Medical
marijuana is not legal in the state where Applicant lives. (Tr. 28) Applicant’s physician
knows Applicant uses marijuana and does not condone it. (Tr. 28) Applicant does not
believe her “use of marijuana to help relieve [her] pain at home in the evening has
[anything] to do with [her] honesty in regard to [her] work.” (Tr. 34)
In March 1998, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of
paraphernalia. The charge was nolle prossed later that year. 
SOR subparagraph 1.d alleges that Applicant received a non-judicial punishment
in 1987 for violating Article 112A of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) for
wrongful possession, use and distribution of hashish. Applicant admits to being
investigated for dealing hashish by the police from the foreign country where her then
husband, a military member, was stationed at the time, but does not recall being
charged. She has never served in the military. She disclosed to the foreign investigative
authorities that she dealt hashish, as they suspected. (GE 4; Tr. 20)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
3
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are used to evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
Under this guideline, “use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can
raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment, and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations” (AG ¶ 24). Applicant’s longstanding and
continued use of marijuana triggers the application of  AG ¶¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,”
25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase,
sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.” and 25(c), “expressed intent
to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and convincingly commit to discontinue
drug use.”
Applicant’s continued use of marijuana, and her assertion that it has no bearing
on her security-clearance worthiness renders any of the mitigating conditions
inapplicable. Applicant failed to mitigate the drug involvement security concern.
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
Under this guideline, “criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.” (AG ¶ 30) Moreover, “by its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.”
(Id.) Applicant never served in the military. Consequently, subparagraph 1.d, alleging a
4
non-judicial punishment under the UCMJ, is invalid on its face. I resolve this
subparagraph in Applicant’s favor.
Nevertheless, Applicant admitted to the foreign investigative authorities in 1987
that she had been dealing hashish. Also, she has used marijuana, an illegal drug, for
more than 30 years, and her use prompted a drug-related criminal charge in 1998. She
is a current marijuana user. AG ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal conduct,
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or
convicted,” applies. Applicant has failed to mitigate this security concern for the same
reason she failed to mitigate the security concern discussed above.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information” (AG ¶ 15). Applicant’s conduct triggers the application of AG ¶ 16(e),
“personal conduct . . . that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s
personal, professional, or community standing . . .” For the reasons discussed above,
none of the mitigating conditions apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I have considered the whole-person concept in my analysis of the disqualifying
and mitigating conditions above, and it does not merit a favorable conclusion. Applicant
is an unacceptable candidate for a security clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
5
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
