                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
------------------------------------- )       ADP Case No. 10-07047
)
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, Applicant failed to
mitigate financial concerns. Eligibility for holding a public trust position is denied.
 
Statement of Case
On January 21, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for holding a public trust position and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether eligibility to hold
a public trust position should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs), implemented by the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on February 14, 2011, and elected to have her
case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
Material (FORM) on March 25, 2011, and submitted additional information for
2
consideration on April 25, 2011, within the 30 days permitted. Applicant’s submission
consisted of an undated letter of explanation. In her letter, she claimed that she
completed all of her pre-bankruptcy paperwork for her attorney, and that her bankruptcy
petition has been initiated.  However, she provided no documentation of a filed
bankruptcy petition. In the balance of her letter, she stressed her trustworthiness and
financial mistakes with her marriage that she is trying to rectify. Applicant’s submission
was identified as AE 1 and admitted. The case was assigned to me on May 3, 2011.   
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated 12 delinquent debts
exceeding $100,000. In her response to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the
allegations without explanation.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 26-year-old employment services representative for a defense
contractor who seeks a determination of eligibility to hold a public trust position. The
allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and
material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Prior to moving to her current state of residence in October 2007, Applicant was
unmarried and childless. (Item 4) Since moving to her current state in 2007, she
cohabited with a male friend with whom she had a child in early 2010. (Item 6) Claims
conflict as to whether she married the boyfriend who fathered her child.  In her interview
with an agent from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), the agent credited her
with referring to her boyfriend as her husband. (Item 6) When subsequently asked
about the  accuracy of the interview summary in an October 2010 interrogatory, she
denied the boyfriend was her husband. (Item 6)
In her supplemental response to the FORM, Applicant claimed her live-in
boyfriend and father of her new-born is her husband.  Without reconciling all of her
explanations of her relationship, inferences warrant that at some point in time in 2010 or
2011, Applicant married her live-in boyfriend (either by formal marriage or through a
recognized common-law union).  Marriage best characterizes Applicant’s current living
arrangement.
Applicant has been employed by her current defense contractor since March
2010. (Item 3) She likes her work and would like the opportunity to continue with her
employment.
Applicant’s Finances 
Applicant and her boyfriend at the time purchased a home together in January
2006 in her former state of residence for about $120,000. (Item 6) She and her
boyfriend financed their purchase with an 80-20 mortgage. This mortgage was
3
comprised of a first mortgage of around $86,000, a second mortgage of $28,000, and
an undetermined down payment. (Items 5 and 6)  
Applicant experienced recurrent unemployment problems between October 2006
and March 2010 and encountered difficulties keeping up with her bills.  When she left
her boyfriend in her former state of residence in 2007, she understood that her
boyfriend assumed responsibility for paying the two mortgages on the property.  (Item
10)  However, he failed to maintain the required mortgage payments, and the home
was foreclosed by the creditor holding both mortgages in August 2007.  How much the
property produced in the public sale is unknown. Applicant, though, remains exposed to
potential deficiency claims on the two mortgages.  
Besides her real estate mortgages, Applicant accumulated a number of utility,
consumer, medical, and student loan debts between 2006 and 2009. (Items 5-7) She
has been unable to address any of the listed debts with her available income sources.
She committed all of her income to preparing for the arrival of her baby. (Item 7)
According to her last correspondence, her baby was born in July 2010. (AE 1) Her
claims are not controverted and are accepted.  
Applicant’s non-real estate debts do not exceed $3,000.  However, she has not
addressed any of these debts to date or obtained financial counseling to assist her with
her finances. While she assures she has prepared the necessary paperwork for
initiating a bankruptcy petition, she has provided no documentation of a bankruptcy
filing, or other evidence of concrete steps taken towards seeking bankruptcy relief. (AE
1)
In her July 2010 OPM interview, Applicant provided personal financial
information covering her income sources and expenses. (Item 6) Based on the
information she provided, Applicant earned net monthly income of $1,690. (Item 6) Her
boyfriend at the time earned net monthly income of $2,100. Their combined net monthly
income totaled $3,790. (Item 6) She listed monthly expenses of $2,974 and a net
monthly remainder of $816. (Item 6) Because she no longer receives food stamps, he
food expenses have increased to $450 a month. (Item 6) Diaper expenses for her
newborn (about $350 a month) have further reduced her monthly remainder.
Endorsements 
                         
In her response to the SOR, Applicant cited her productive performance and
demonstrated responsibility as proof of her trustworthiness. (AE 1) She assured that
she has learned from her mistakes and will not encounter recurrent mistakes of
financial judgment in the future. However, she did not provide any endorsements or
performance evaluations on her behalf. Nor did she provide any proof of community
and civic contributions, or service-related awards and commendations.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
4
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
hold a public trust position. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate trustworthiness concerns.” These guidelines must
be considered before deciding whether or not eligibility to hold a public trust position
should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made
about whether the applicant is an acceptable trust risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: “Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes including
espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources of income is also a
security concern.  It may indicate proceeds from financially profitable criminal acts.”
AG, ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's eligibility to hold a public trust position may be made only
5
upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.
Because the Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense
appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an
applicant's eligibility to hold a public trust position depends, in large part, on the
relevance and materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S.
759, 792-800 (1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only
those inferences which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of
record. Conversely, the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on
speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR; and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to hold or
maintain a public trust position. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused a position requiring trust and reliability before it can deny or
revoke eligibility to hold a public trust position. Rather, the judge must consider and
weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to
demonstrate good judgment and trustworthiness. 
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her eligibility to hold a public trust position through evidence of
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865
that all public trust positions be clearly consistent with the national interest, the
applicant has the ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her trust eligibility. Like
security clearance determinations, public trust eligibility decisions“ should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531
(1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is an employment services representative of a defense contractor
who accumulated a number of delinquent debts, mostly while residing in another
state. Together with her boyfriend, Applicant assumed first and second real estate
mortgages exceeding $106,000.  When her boyfriend failed to meet the mortgage
obligations following their separation, the lender foreclosed.  Without any documented
information of the sale price of the property at the foreclosure sale, it cannot be
determined how much of a deficiency, if any, that Applicant is currently exposed to. 
To date, she has provided no documentation concerning her foreclosed real
estate or any of her other delinquent debts covered in the SOR. At least since her July
2010 OPM interview, she has committed to a bankruptcy strategy for resolving her
delinquent debts. Such a strategy may work for her once she files a petition.
However, to date she has not provided any proof of a bankruptcy filing or firm
indications as to when she can expect a discharge. 
6
Applicant’s pleading admissions of the debts and initiated foreclosure of her
home covered in the SOR negate the need for any independent proof (see
McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th ed. 2006)).  Each of Applicant’s listed debts are
documented in her latest credit reports and provide corroboration of her debts.  Her
accumulation of delinquent debts, her past inability and unwillingness to address
these debts, and her failure to date to take any concrete steps towards petitioning for
federal bankruptcy warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC)
of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and ¶ 19(c)
“a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Moreover, some judgment problems persist over Applicant’s explained
delinquencies and her failure to demonstrate she acted responsibly in addressing her
listed debts. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). Not only are her
listed debt delinquencies still outstanding, but she has failed to address them in any
good-faith manner. Resolution of a debt through foreclosure (as is the case with
creditors 1.a and 1.I) rather than through voluntary repayment efforts carries much
less mitigating force, and does not afford Applicant any cognizable mitigation credit for
the handling of her real estate loans to date. See ISCR Case No. 04-07360 (App. Bd.
Sept. 26, 2006).  
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the trust
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980).
Failure of the applicant to make concerted efforts to pay or resolve her debts when
able to do so raises concerns about whether the applicant has demonstrated the trust
and judgment necessary to safeguard classified information.
 
Applicant’s debts are attributable in part to her taking on too much real estate
and other obligations with an unreliable partner, which exposed her to considerable
risks of deficiency enforcement by the foreclosing lender, and other creditors with
smaller credit balances. All of the listed debts in the SOR are either unpaid or
unresolved.  While Applicant’s real estate deficiency risks are in part attributable to
her boyfriend’s failure to pay the mortgages after their separation (as promised), her
failure to seek and obtain relevant financial data from her ex-boyfriend and public
sources about the status of her foreclosed mortgages reflect mitigation lapses of her
own doing. Her explanations do not account for her failure to provide a meaningful
record of communication exchanges between herself, her ex-boyfriend, the lender,
and public authorities responsible for maintaining records of real estate sales. 
Based on the documented materials in the FORM, some extenuating
circumstances are associated with Applicant’s inability to pay of or otherwise resolve
her debts. Available to Applicant in part is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in
the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
7
separation, and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” But
extenuating circumstances alone are not enough to enable Applicant to mitigate trust
concerns over her failure to date to address her debts, either through payment
arrangements or initiated bankruptcy proceedings.
                                     
A whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by her accumulation of delinquent debts and failure to take
responsible steps to address them. While recurrent unemployment problems,
preparations for the birth of her child, and the absence of cooperation and assistance
from her ex-boyfriend may have played a considerable role in her accumulation of so
much debt exposure, her continuing failure to take any action on her admitted debts
and real estate foreclosure is a source of continuing trustworthiness and judgment
concerns.  Endorsements and performance evaluations might have been helpful, too,
in making a whole-person assessment of her overall clearance eligibility, but were not
provided. Overall, a trustworthiness eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the
limited amount of information available for consideration in this record does not
enable her to establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome concerns
arising out of her accumulation of delinquent debts.  
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations and her lack of any acceptable explanations for her
declinations to address her delinquent debts, it is still too soon to make safe predictive
judgments about Applicant’s ability to either repay her debts, or resolve them through
a completed bankruptcy discharge, and restore her finances to stable levels
commensurate with the minimum requirements for holding a public trust position.
Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.l.  
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs. 1.a through 1.l:                 Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to
hold a public trust position.  Eligibility is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
8
                                        
  
