 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00133    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 2, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 22, 2010, and elected to have the 
case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel prepared a 
file of relevant material (FORM) on March 8, 2011. On March 14, 2001, Applicant was 
mailed a complete copy of the FORM and advised that she could file objections or 
 
2 
 
submit other material for consideration within 30 days of its receipt. Applicant received 
the FORM on March 23, 2011. As of May 11, 2011, she had not submitted a response. 
The Government’s exhibits included in the FORM are admitted. The case was assigned 
to me on May 12, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
her current employer since May 1998. She obtained a bachelor’s degree from a major 
university in 1997. She married in September 2007 and divorced in March 2009. Her 
Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86), submitted on September 1, 2009, 
does not list any children. She is applying for a security clearance for the first time.1 
 
 The SOR alleges five delinquent mortgages that were either charged off or past 
due in the approximate total amount of $285,478 and had balances totaling about 
$919,499. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted each of the alleged delinquent 
debts, but denied the paragraph setting forth the Guideline F security concern. Her 
admissions are hereby incorporated as findings of fact.2 
 
 In 2005, Applicant was dating her future husband/ex-husband. At that time, they 
discussed marrying and moving to another town. They were also planning for her to 
take time off work so that they could begin a family. Based on the advice of her brother-
in-law who was a real estate broker, she purchased four townhomes (Properties A 
through D) in 2005 with the intent of renting them. The townhomes were located in 
Town X (approximately 120 miles from her residence). After the purchase of these 
townhomes, she and her boyfriend changed their minds about moving. This was the first 
time that she purchased property and was unaware of the expenses (e.g., property 
taxes and homeowners’ association (HOA) fees) that were involved. Her brother-in-law 
handled the leasing arrangements and picked the property manager. The property 
manager was also one of the tenants in the townhomes. She claimed the property 
manager turned out to be a criminal who stole money from the tenants (apparently the 
HOA fees were stolen, but the amount stolen is unknown). She also provided 
documentation showing that other people claimed they were defrauded by the property 
manager.3  
 
 In 2006, Applicant started falling behind on her mortgage payments. She was 
sued by the HOA and hired an attorney to represent her. From approximately October 
2006 to March 2007, she contracted with a real estate company in an attempt to sell the 
townhomes. No offers were submitted for these properties. She also contacted the 
mortgage companies seeking to dispose of the townhomes through Deeds in Lieu of 
                                                          
1 Item 4.  
 
2 Items 1, 3. It is unknown whether Town X is where her boyfriend was then living. 
 
3 Item 7. MapQuest was used to determine the mileage between her residence and Town X. 
 
 
3 
 
Foreclosure and short sales. Due to the slow housing market, she was unable to sell or 
otherwise dispose of the townhomes.4 
 
 Due to HOA fee deficiencies, the HOA instituted legal action to auction the 
townhomes and transfer title pursuant to Assessment Lien Deeds. On February 6, 2007, 
the four townhomes were auctioned at the county courthouse and sold to the highest 
bidder. Property A was sold for $7,500, Property B for $7,000, Property C for $100, and 
Property D for $100. After the auctions, Applicant was given right to redeem the 
properties from the purchasers. No evidence was presented that Applicant redeemed 
the properties.5 
 
 During an interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
on November 24, 2009, Applicant indicated that she does not owe any money to the 
mortgage companies and that she has received Form 1099-A’s for the mortgages. She 
also indicated that she was informed that the mortgages will continue to appear on her 
credit report until the allotted time has passed for them to be removed. Furthermore, 
she indicated that purchasing the townhomes was a terrible financial decision that she 
will never make again.6  
 
 In responding to interrogatories in June 2010, Applicant provided four Form 
1099-A’s (Acquisition or Abandonment of Secured Property) and one Form 1099-C 
(Cancellation of Debt). Each of these forms was for tax year 2007. These forms contain 
the following information: 
 
 a. Form 1099-A for Property A 
  1. Date of lender’s acquisition or knowledge of abandonment:  03/06/07; 
  2. Balance of principal outstanding:  $332,000; 
  3. Fair market value of property:  $413,000; and 
  4. Was borrower personally liable for repayment of debt?  Yes. 
 
 b. Form 1099-A for Property B 
  1. Date of lender’s acquisition or knowledge of abandonment:  08/27/07; 
  2. Balance of principal outstanding:  $324,000; 
  3. Fair market value of property:  $440,000; and 
  4. Was borrower personally liable for repayment of debt?  Yes. 
 
 c. Form 1099-C for Property B 
  1. Date canceled:  04/17/07; 
  2. Amount of debt canceled:  $80,557; 
  3. Interest if included in box 2:  [blank]; and 
  4. Fair market value of property:  $00. 
                                                          
4 Item 7. 
 
5 Id.  
 
6 Id.  
 
 
4 
 
 d. Form 1099-A for Property C 
  1. Date of lender’s acquisition or knowledge of abandonment:  03/07/07; 
  2. Balance of principal outstanding:  $331,539; 
  3. Fair market value of property:  $354,755; and 
  4. Was borrower personally liable for repayment of debt?  No. 
 
 e. Form 1099-A for Property D 
  1. Date of lender’s acquisition or knowledge of abandonment:  03/06/07; 
  2. Balance of principal outstanding:  $349,605; 
  3. Fair market value of property:  $375,000; and 
  4. Was borrower personally liable for repayment of debt?  Yes.7 
 
 Based on a review of the SOR, Form 1099-A’s, and credit reports, I find that the 
Form 1099-A for Property B is for the mortgage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, the Form 1099-C 
for Property B is for the mortgage alleged in SOR ¶1.b, and the Form 1099-A for 
Property D is for the mortgage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. There were first and second 
mortgages on some of these properties. From the information provided, the remaining 
Form 1099-A’s above cannot be equated to specific allegations in the SOR. 
 
 In the interrogatories, Applicant stated, “I feel overwhelmed and embarrassed 
and that I feel I can’t afford to make repayment.” In May 2010, a debt collection agency 
for Property D contacted her, and she paid that agency $150 in June 2010. Evidence of 
further payments to that debt collection agency has not been provided. She also 
provided a canceled check showing a payment of $165, but it is unknown for which debt 
that payment was made. She provided a personal financial statement (PFS) dated June 
11, 2010, that reflects a monthly income of $4,885, monthly expenses of $2,717, 
monthly debt payments of $395, and a net remainder of $1,773. On the PFS statement, 
she listed a monthly payment of $150 to the debt collection agency, but no payments to 
the creditors holding the defaulted mortgages.8 
 
 In the interrogatories, Applicant also provided her federal income tax return for 
2007. This return reported the sales (i.e., foreclosures) of the four townhomes for 
losses. Furthermore, she provided an Internal Revenue Service Final Determination 
dated April 2010 that states: 
 
We considered your Form 8857, Request for Innocent Spouse Relief, and 
have made our final determination. . . . 
 
For TAX YEAR(S) 2007 
 
You are granted relief. You will not be held liable for the balance owed.  
 
                                                          
7 Id.  
 
8 Id.  
 
 
5 
 
No explanation was provided as to why she submitted these tax documents.9 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of her professional 
performance or her level of responsibility at work. She submitted no character 
references or other evidence tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or 
reliability. I was unable to evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or character in person 
since she elected to have her case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
                                                          
9 Id.  
 
 
6 
 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 In 2006, Applicant defaulted on five mortgages. The properties were foreclosed 
in 2007. One of the alleged mortgage debts (SOR ¶ 1.b) has been cancelled. Contrary 
to her earlier assertion, a FORM 1099-A is not evidence of cancellation of a debt.10 
Based on the evidence presented, she is still financially responsible for the four alleged 
mortgages totaling about $838,841. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
  
  Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
                                                          
10 See ISCR Case No 09-05252 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec 3, 2010) (IRS Form 1099 A Applicant 
received is not evidence of the cancellation of mortgage debt).  
 
 
7 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has been continually employed since 1998. As an inexperienced 
homebuyer, she purchased four townhomes in 2005. The total amount of these 
properties was over $900,000. The properties were located about 120 miles from where 
she lived. She relied on others to manage the properties. This was a risky venture that 
failed. When she started to have problems in meeting the mortgage payments, she 
attempted to sell the properties. Due to a slow housing market, she was unable to sell 
or otherwise dispose of them. In 2007, the four townhomes were sold at foreclosure 
auctions. One mortgage (SOR ¶ 1.b, apparently a second mortgage) has been 
canceled. She remains financially responsible for four defaulted mortgages. 
 
 Although she claimed her property manager was a criminal, Applicant has failed 
to explain how his behavior negatively impacted her. Both her marriage and divorce 
occurred after the properties were foreclosed. Currently, she has about $1,773 in 
disposable income each month. In June 2010, she made one payment of $150 to a debt 
collection agency seeking payments on one of the mortgages. Evidence of further 
payments to that collection agency has not been provided. She has failed to provide 
sufficient evidence to conclude that her financial problems resulted from conditions 
beyond her control or that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. Additionally, 
no evidence was presented that she received financial counseling. Her financial 
problems are recent and ongoing and insufficient evidence has been presented to 
conclude those problems are being resolved or are under control. Based on the 
information provided, I am unable to determine her financial problems are unlikely to 
recur and that they do not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to SOR 
¶ 1.b.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
8 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. The limited information in the record 
has not convinced me that Applicant’s finances are sufficiently in order to warrant a 
security clearance.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.e:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
