1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-06658
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Phillip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s financial problems were caused by a six-month period of
unemployment between April and September of 2009. Since gaining his current job in
October 2009, Applicant has either satisfied his delinquent debts or arranged payment
plans for them. Applicant’s omission of information concerning his federal income taxes
from his security clearance application was unintentional. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On December 6, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines F, financial considerations, and G, personal conduct. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).
2
Applicant answered the SOR on December 29, 2010, admitting SOR
subparagraphs 1.a and 1.g, and denying the remainder. Applicant also requested a
hearing. On February 11, 2011, the case was assigned to me. On February 16, 2011,
DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the case for March 15, 2011. 
The hearing was conducted as scheduled. I received Applicant’s testimony.
Applicant moved for me to admit four exhibits, which I marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE)
A through D, into evidence. I admitted AE A and B, but reserved on the admissibility of
AE C and D, two unsigned recommendation letters objected to by Department Counsel.
At Applicant’s request, I left the record open at the end of the hearing for him to submit
signed copies of AE C and D, in addition to any additional documents. Within the time
allotted, Applicant submitted signed copies of the disputed recommendation letters and
14 additional documents. Department Counsel had no objections, therefore, I replaced
the unsigned copies of AE C and D with the signed ones and admitted them along with
the 14 additional documents marked as AE E through Q. The transcript was received on
March 23, 2011.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 26-year-old single man. He graduated from high school in 2003,
and has earned some college credits and some information technology certifications.
(Tr. 23) Over the years, he has worked at various positions in the information
technology field. Since October 2009, he has worked for a defense contractor as an
information security specialist responsible for managing the network’s security
certifications and accreditations. (Tr. 23) 
Applicant worked for a consulting company from February 2008 through January
2009. (GE 1 at 30) He left this job after his then employer encouraged him to pursue a
higher-paying, managerial position at another company owned by the same parent
company.  (Tr. 53) Applicant applied and was later hired. 
Applicant did not like the new job. It was highly stressful, and he frequently
clashed with his supervisor over the direction of the business and the amount of his
assigned tasks. Consequently, Applicant quit. (Tr. 53-54)
After quitting, Applicant was unable to find another job, and subsequently was
unemployed for six months before his current employer hired him. While unemployed,
Applicant began struggling to make ends meet. By the time his current employer hired
him in October 2009, he had accrued approximately $48,000 of delinquent debt,
including a $23,000 deficiency on a repossessed car and a $6,000 student loan. (GE 2
at 8, 40) Also, he did not file his federal or state income tax returns for tax year 2008.
Applicant began satisfying these delinquencies shortly after being hired. By
November 2010, he had negotiated a reduced payment amount for the automobile
The supporting documentation does not list the amount of the reduced payoff. However, it is a letter from1
the creditor stating that the debt was settled “in full.” 
None of these debts are listed on the SOR.2
3
deficiency and satisfied it. (GE 2 at 16 ) Also, he had contacted the student loan1
creditor, arranged another payment plan and “rehabilitated the loan.” (Id. at 7) In
addition, he satisfied approximately $2,500 of his remaining delinquencies, including a
delinquent fitness club membership, a utility, an overdrawn credit card account, a
miscellaneous debt owed to a former landlord, and two credit cards.  (Id. at 12-19) 2
The Government listed the remaining debts in the SOR. Subparagraph 1.a
alleges Applicant’s failure to file back taxes. Applicant admits that he had not filed either
his 2008 or 2009 federal and state income tax returns by the date of the SOR’s
issuance. (Tr. 67) He filed them on March 11, 2011. He owes approximately $1,600 in
2008 federal and state income taxes. (AE G and I; Tr. 72) He does not owe any back
taxes for tax year 2009. (AE H at 2; AE I)
Applicant filed his 2010 federal income taxes on time. He owes $2,660, and has
arranged to satisfy this debt in four, $653 payments between April 2011 and January
2012. (AE O) Applicant did not produce any evidence that he filed his 2010 state
income taxes. The SOR does not allege that he failed to file 2010 state income taxes.
Currently, Applicant has satisfied all of the remaining SOR debts except
subparagraphs 1.b and 1.g. (Answer at 3-7; see also, Tr. 29, 45 - Department Counsel
stipulations) Applicant owes the debt listed in SOR subparagraph 1.b to a rental
property company. He cosigned a lease on an apartment for his mother. Later, she
moved two months before the lease expired, prompting the property management
company to assess a fee. (Tr. 26) Applicant’s mother arranged a payment plan, but
failed to execute it. (Tr. 27) By November 2010, this debt had accrued to approximately
$9,300.  That month, Applicant arranged a payment plan. Consistent with the plan, he
has been paying $790 monthly. (AE K at 5; AE L at 3; AE M at 3; AE N at 3) This debt
will be satisfied in ten months.
SOR subparagraph 1.g is a security system Applicant purchased for his
apartment shortly before he lost his job in 2009. While unemployed, this account
became delinquent, accruing to approximately $4,500 by December 2010. Three weeks
after the hearing, before the record closed, Applicant successfully negotiated a payment
agreement with this creditor. (AE R) Under the plan, he will pay $200 monthly until the
delinquency is satisfied. (Id.)
Applicant’s employer, with whom he worked through March 2009, paid him a
salary of approximately $30,000 per year. (Tr. 53) Currently, Applicant earns
approximately $68,000. (Tr. 75) This salary increase has helped him satisfy his debts.
Moreover, some time after the issuance of the SOR, Applicant borrowed $8,000 from
Have you failed to pay Federal, state, or other taxes, or to file a tax return, when required by law or3
ordinance?
4
his aunt. (Tr. 34) He used this money to pay his creditors, and is repaying his aunt
through $200 monthly payments. (AE Q)
Applicant is no longer incurring rental or utility expenses because he recently
moved into a home with his mother. Before the move, he was paying approximately
$1,700 monthly on these expenses. (Tr. 76)
Applicant maintains a budget. (AE Q) He has approximately $2,100 of after-
expense income. Neither Applicant’s payment plans with the Internal Revenue Service
nor the security company (SOR subparagraph 1.g) had begun when he created his
budget. These prospective expenses are not included in his budget.  
Applicant completed a security clearance application in January 2010. He failed
to disclose that he had not filed his 2008 income tax returns, as required in response to
Section 26c  when he completed the application. Applicant attributes this omission to3
carelessness. (Tr. 66) Elsewhere on the application, Applicant answered “yes” to
questions regarding whether he ever had any property repossessed, whether he was
currently delinquent on a federal debt, whether he ever had any debts turned over to
collection agencies, whether he ever had any credit cards charged off, and whether he
had ever been more than 180 days delinquent on any bill. (AE 1 at 46) He also listed
the names and the account numbers of 23 creditors whose accounts were delinquent
when he completed the security clearance application. ((Id. at 47-65)
Applicant is a well-respected individual who is active in the community and his
church where he serves as a worship leader. (AE A) According to his pastor, “his
character always stands out as upright and honest.” (AE C)
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process to evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified
information. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a
number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge
must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present,
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
5
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, the “failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”
(AG ¶ 18) Applicant’s history of financial problems and his failure to file his 2008 federal
and state income tax returns on time trigger the following disqualifying conditions under
AG ¶ 19:
(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations, and
(g) failure to file annual federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.
The following mitigating conditions, as set forth in AG ¶ 20, are potentially
applicable:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Although Applicant’s economic hardship was triggered by a six-month
unemployment in 2009, it does not constitute a circumstance beyond his control
because he voluntarily left his job. Nevertheless, he could not have anticipated the
length of time it took to find another job. Since obtaining his current job, he has either
satisfied some of his debts entirely, been paying others through payment plans, or
arranged to begin paying them. He was already making steady progress toward debt
6
satisfaction when the SOR was issued.  Currently, he earns more than twice the salary
he earned on his previous job and his expenses are significantly less because he is
living with his mother rent-free. 
Applicant has yet to implement a payment plan for his delinquent federal and
state income taxes from tax year 2008. Income tax delinquencies are a major indicia of
financial instability or irresponsibility. Conversely, since regaining employment in
October 2009, Applicant has reduced his indebtedness from $48,000 to approximately
$17,000. Approximately $2,600 of this $17,000 remainder constitutes his 2010 income
tax bill, which was never in delinquent status. These factors outweigh the negative
inference generated by his outstanding income tax debts. I conclude that all of the
above mitigating conditions apply.
Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.” (AG ¶ 15) Also, “of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and
candid answers during the security clearance process. . . .” (Id.) 
Applicant’s failure to disclose that he had not filed his 2008 federal and state
income tax returns when he completed his security clearance application raises the
issue of whether AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of
relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award
fiduciary responsibilities,” applies. Applicant was thoroughly responsive to other
questions regarding his financial debts in response to other questions on the security
clearance application, including one question that requested he disclose whether he had
any delinquent debts owed to the federal government. Under these circumstances,
Applicant explanation for failing to answer Question 26c correctly was credible. I
conclude there are no personal conduct security concerns. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
7
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant’s financial problems did not occur because of excessive or
irresponsible spending. Rather, they were triggered by his lengthy unemployment in
2009. As soon as his financial situation improved, he began satisfying his delinquencies,
and has been steadily reducing his indebtedness since then. Moreover, Applicant
makes more than twice the salary he earned on his previous job. Under these
circumstances, I am confident Applicant will adhere to his payment plans. Applicant has
mitigated the security concern.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant 
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
