 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 10-00594 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns pertaining to Guideline B (foreign 
influence). Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 26, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On December 10, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs after September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
 
2 
 
 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on March 9, 2011, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated April 15, 2011, was provided to him by cover letter on the same 
day. Applicant received his copy of the FORM on April 21, 2011. He was given 30 days 
from the date he received the FORM to submit any objections, and information in 
mitigation or extenuation. On May 17, 2011, he submitted additional information, which 
was within the 30-day period. On May 24, 2011, Department Counsel reviewed 
Applicant’s response to FORM and did not object to its admissibility. The case was 
assigned to me on June 3, 2011. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning India. 
Department Counsel provided supporting documents to show detail and context for 
those facts. Applicant did not object, and I granted Department Counsel’s request. (See 
FORM.) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from Government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations. His answers and 
explanations are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 52-year-old senior engineer, who has been employed by a defense 
contractor since June 1995. He is a first-time applicant for a security clearance. (GE 1.)  
 
Applicant was born in India, where he was raised, educated, and spent his 
formative years. The highest level of education that he achieved in India was his PhD 
degree, which he was awarded in July 1986. Applicant immigrated to the United States 
 
3 
 
 
in September 1989. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in June 2009, and was issued 
a U.S. passport in July 2009.  
 
Applicant’s wife, like him, was born, raised, educated, and spent her formative 
years in India. They married in India in December 1982. Applicant’s wife also became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen and currently works as an elementary school teacher. They 
have two adult children; their oldest child was born in India in December 1984 and 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen. Their youngest child was born in the United States in 
February 1991. Applicant states that he is not a dual citizen of the United States and 
India. 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concerns under foreign influence are rather straightforward 
stemming from Applicant’s connections with India. His mother is a citizen and resident 
of India. Applicant has weekly contact with her by telephone and visits her in India once 
a year. Applicant’s brother-in-law (wife’s brother) and sister-in-law (wife’s sister) are 
citizens and residents of India. Applicant has telephone contact with both of them a 
“couple of times a year” and visits them whenever he goes to India. His sister-in-law is a 
housewife, and his brother-in-law is a prominent elected official in India. Applicant has a 
cousin (daughter of his father’s brother), who is a citizen and resident of India. Applicant 
has telephone contact with her a “couple of times a year” and visits her whenever he 
goes to India. Applicant estimates that his future contact and visits with these relatives 
will remain the same. (Items 6 and 7.) 
 
Applicant also has a bank account in India with a balance of approximately 
$10,000. He explained that he maintains this account “for the sake of my mother.” 
Applicant added that his father passed away and his mother does not receive any social 
security benefits. As the eldest son, he stated, “I have the responsibility to take care of 
her day-to-day living expenses and any medical treatments. I am keeping this money 
solely for her personal needs.” (SOR Answer.) 
  
Applicant has a brother and sister, who also immigrated to the United States and 
became naturalized U.S. citizens. His brother is a manager in a chemical factory and his 
sister is a physician. (Items 5 and 6.) 
  
 In Applicant’s response to FORM, he took exception to the fact that Department 
Counsel raised and discussed security concerns as they pertained to him. He asserts 
that he is a loyal U.S. citizen, who took his U.S. citizenship oath seriously. (Response to 
FORM.) 
 
India 
 
According to its Constitution, India is a “sovereign, socialist, secular democratic 
republic.” It is a multiparty, federal, parliamentary democracy with a bicameral 
parliament and a population of approximately 1.1 billion. India’s political history since it 
 
4 
 
 
gained independence from Great Britain in 1947 has included: (a) wars with Pakistan in 
1947, 1965, and 1971, and the 1999 intrusion of Pakistani-backed forces into Indian-
held territory that nearly turned into full-scale war; (b) a 1975 declaration of a state of 
emergency, with the suspension of many civil liberties; (c) the assassination of Prime 
Minister Indira Gandhi in October 1984; (d) the assassination of Prime Minister Rajiv 
Gandhi in May 1991 while he was campaigning for parliamentary elections; (e) sporadic 
outbreaks of religious riots, in which numerous people have been killed; and (f) violent 
attacks by a variety of separatist and terrorist groups in different parts of the country.  
 
 In late November 2008, terrorists coordinated attacks in Mumbai, targeting areas 
frequented by Westerners, which highlighted the risk of Americans becoming intended 
or unintended victims of terrorism in India. According to the U.S. Department of State, 
the Indian government generally respects the rights of its citizens, but “serious problems 
remained.”  Police and security forces have engaged in extrajudicial killings of persons 
in custody, torture, and rape, and “[o]fficials use special antiterrorism legislation to justify 
the excessive use of force.”  “[A]llegations were made that authorities used torture to 
extort money, as summary punishment, and to obtain confessions. In some instances, 
these confessions subsequently were used as evidentiary support for a death 
sentence.” Corruption in the police force is “pervasive and acknowledged by many 
government officials” and “[o]fficers at all levels acted with considerable impunity and 
were rarely held accountable for illegal actions.” 
 
 The Soviet Union was India’s “main trading partner and most reliable source of 
economic and military assistance for most of the Cold War.” After the 1979 Soviet 
invasion of Afghanistan, India “implicitly supported the Soviet occupation.” India had 
long-standing military supply relationships with the Soviet Union, and Russia remains 
India’s largest supplier of military systems and spare parts. 
 
 Although the United States has sought to strengthen its relationship with India, 
there are some differences between the United States and India, including differences 
over India’s nuclear weapons programs and the pace of India’s efforts to economic 
reforms. Furthermore, during 2007, Members of Congress have expressed concerns at 
India’s relations with Iran, a country with which India “launched a bilateral ‘strategic 
partnership,’” including concerns about India’s increasing cooperation with the Iranian 
military. In July 2009, however, the United States and India issued a joint statement of 
their intentions to foster bilateral relations by establishing working groups to address (1) 
strategic cooperation, (2) energy and climate change, (3) education and development, 
(4) economics, trade, and agriculture, and (5) science and technology, health, and 
innovation. 
 
 In March 2008, the owner of an international electronics business pleaded guilty 
to conspiracy to illegally export controlled technology to government entities in India that 
participate in the development of ballistic missiles, space launch missiles, and fighter 
jets. Furthermore, there have been other cases involving the illegal export, or attempted 
illegal export, of U.S. restricted, dual use technology to India, including: (1) high-tech 
testing equipment that posed “an unacceptable risk of being diverted to a weapons of 
 
5 
 
 
mass destruction program”; (2) equipment “which can be used in military and civilian 
aircraft to extract vibration information from engines and to simulate output for 
calibrating, servicing, and testing that equipment”; (3) “equipment that is used to 
manufacture a material that improves the accuracy of strategic ballistic missiles with 
nuclear capabilities”; (4) an animation system to an Indian entity “determined to present 
an unacceptable risk of diversion to programs for the development of weapons of mass 
destruction or their means of delivery”; (5) nuclear pulse generators to two Indian 
entities “that have been determined to present an unacceptable risk of diversion to 
developing weapons of mass destruction or missiles used to deliver these weapons”; 
and (6) heat treating containers to an Indian entity “determined to present an 
unacceptable risk of diversion to developing weapons of mass destruction or missiles 
used to deliver these weapons.” Foreign government entities, including intelligence 
organizations and security services, have capitalized on private-sector acquisitions of 
U.S. technology, and acquisition of sensitive U.S. technology by foreign private entities 
does not slow its flow to foreign governments or its use in military applications. 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Egan at 528. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision. 
  
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
 
6 
 
 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
Under Adjudicative Guideline ¶ 6, the Government’s concern is:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
7 
 
 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and  
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.1
 
 Applicant has frequent contacts with his mother 
in India and has contact to a lesser extent with his in-laws and cousin in India. Applicant 
feels it is important to maintain these contacts. Applicant makes annual visits to India 
primarily to visit his mother and sees his other relatives during his visits to India.  
These contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation 
because there is always the possibility that individuals adverse to the U.S. may exploit 
the opportunity to obtain information about the United States. Applicant has very strong 
family ties, contacts, and connections to India. He was born, raised, and educated in 
India, and has traveled frequently to India to visit family members, especially his mother 
to whom he provides financial support. Also as noted, Applicant’s brother-in-law serves 
in a prominent political position in India. In short, his connections with his family 
members in India create a “heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” 
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising these four potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts 
to the Government. 
 
  Four Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
                                                     
1  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001). 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
After considering the totality of the facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case, I 
conclude that only mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies.  
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies because Applicant has developed a sufficient 
relationship and loyalty to the United States, that he can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the United States’ interests. He has lived in the United 
States for approximately 22 years. Applicant has established himself as an American 
citizen and embarked on a successful career. He appears to have a track record of 
diligent labor as an employee of his company. Although this mitigating condition is 
partially applicable, it is insufficient to overcome the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
The FORM does not contain information regarding Applicant’s financial and 
business interests in the United States. This lack of information precludes an analysis of 
asset comparison and therefore, it is uncertain to what extent AG ¶ 8(f) would apply.  
 
Applicant has frequent contact and a close relationship with his mother in India 
and to a lesser extent with his in-laws and cousin. Understandably, Applicant has a 
strong bond with his mother and as the eldest son has a strong sense of responsibility 
and obligation towards her. As such, in addition to maintaining frequent contact with his 
mother by telephone, he also maintains a bank account in India for his mother’s benefit 
valued at approximately $10,000.  
 
Guidelines ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) do not fully apply. Applicant did not establish “it is 
unlikely [he] will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
 
9 
 
 
foreign individual, . . ., or government and the interests of the U.S.” His frequent contact 
and a close relationship with his mother could potentially force him to choose between 
the United States and India. His contact with his in-laws and cousin triggers partial 
application of AG ¶ 8(c). However, even with partial application of AG ¶ 8(c), he did not 
meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with his Indian 
family members] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”  
 
Applicant’s brother-in-law holds a prominent elected office in India and his sister-
in-law is a housewife. His brother-in-law is associated and affiliated with the Indian 
government. The same cannot be said of his sister-in-law or cousin. The record does 
not identify what influence, if any, the Indian government could exert on Applicant’s 
mother, in-laws and cousin as a result of their being resident citizens of India. However, 
their presence in India and Applicant’s foreign travel creates concerns under this 
Guideline. As such, the burden shifted to Applicant to show his relatives in India and 
travel there does not create security risks.  
 
“[T]he nature of the foreign government involved in the case, and the intelligence-
gathering history of that government are important evidence that provides context for all 
the other evidence of the record . . .” See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-0776 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Sept. 26, 2006); see also ISCR Case No. 02-07772 at 7 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2003). As 
noted supra under the subheading “India,” India has engaged in economic espionage 
and has had cordial relations with governments hostile to the U.S. Notably, the affects 
of terrorism have been felt within India’s borders. 
 
Applicant denies having “divided loyalties” between the U.S. and any foreign 
country. It should be noted Applicant’s allegiance to the U.S. was not challenged in this 
proceeding. Notwithstanding, foreign influence mitigating conditions cannot fully be 
applied in this case, and the security concerns cannot be fully mitigated because there 
is no reason for India to contact his relatives about Applicant until he receives access to 
classified information. Even taking for granted that apart from Applicant’s brother-in-law, 
his Indian family members currently have low-key non-controversial lifestyles, and that 
the Indian government or factions within India have not contacted them about Applicant 
in the past, such factors are insufficient to mitigate the security concerns because of the 
nature of such entities and its relationship to the United States. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
10 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
My comments in the Analysis section are incorporated in my whole-person 
analysis. I recognize and appreciate Applicant’s frustration with a process that he 
believes questions his loyalty and commitment to the United States. However, it is the 
presence of relatives in India and Applicant’s connection with those relatives, 
particularly his mother that raises foreign influence concerns. In reaching my decision, I 
was also limited to the information contained within the FORM. In any event, Applicant 
should not construe the final outcome of this decision as an adverse assessment of his 
integrity or as questioning his loyalty as a U.S. citizen. 
  
“Because of the extreme sensitivity of security matters, there is a strong 
presumption against granting a security clearance. Whenever any doubt is raised . . . it 
is deemed best to err on the side of the government’s compelling interest in security by 
denying or revoking [a] clearance.” Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F.2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 
1990). For reasons discussed supra, Applicant has not mitigated or overcome the 
Government’s case. I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole-person 
factors”2
 
 and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the 
Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines.   
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1a – 1e:    Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                     
2See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
11 
 
 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
