 
1 
 
 
                                                                
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   ) ISCR Case: 10-01242   
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On October 12, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On September 1, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On September 28, 2010, Applicant filed an answer to the SOR and requested 
that the case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On January 30, 2011, 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing nine Items 
 
2 
 
 
and mailed Applicant a complete copy on January 31, 2011. Applicant received the 
FORM on February 9, 2011, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and 
submit additional information. Applicant did not submit other documents. On April 4, 
2011, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the sole allegation contained in ¶ 
1a. His admission is incorporated into the following findings. 
 
 Applicant is 46 years old. He is married. He has two children and two step-
children. He served in the U.S. Air Force from July 1982 to September 1983, while 
attending the Air Force Academy. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1988 and a 
master’s degree in 2002. He did additional graduate work from 2005 to 2007. From 
1988 to 1995, he worked as an electronics engineer for the U.S. Air Force. He was a 
project manager for an electronics company from 1995 to 2009. He began a Director of 
Engineering position with a federal contractor in June 2009. He held a security 
clearance while working for the U.S. Air Force. (Item 4.)   
 
 After submitting an e-QIP in October 2009, Applicant met with a government 
investigator in November 2009 to discuss information in it and delinquent accounts 
listed on an October 2009 credit bureau report (CBR.). During that interview, he stated 
that he purchased a home in October 2005 with zero down and an adjustable rate 
mortgage. He also secured a second mortgage on the property. In December 2008 the 
adjustable loan rate increased to $1,800 a month and he was not able to manage the 
mortgage payments. Both mortgages became delinquent in January 2009 after he 
stopped making payments. Applicant contacted the mortgagors, attempting to revise the 
terms of the second loan and arrange a short sale to resolve the first loan. He was 
unsuccessful, as the housing market began experiencing a serious collapse. At the time 
of the interview, the property was in foreclosure. The balance on the first loan was 
$537,000 with a past due amount of $35,000. The balance on the second mortgage was 
$130,000 with a past due amount of $12,000.1 (Items 2, 8.) 
 
 In June 2010 Applicant responded to Interrogatories regarding the $130,000 debt 
owed on the second mortgage that appeared on a March 2010 CBR. He acknowledged 
that his last payment was in January 2009. Because that mortgage was tied to the first 
mortgage, he asserted that it was forgiven under the applicable state law when the first 
mortgage was foreclosed. (Item 7.) He did not provide documentation from the 
mortgage company supporting that assertion, such as an Internal Revenue Service 
Form 1099-C (Cancellation of Debt) or other material indicating that the matter was 
resolved.   
 
                                                          
1In his October 2009 e-QIP, Applicant stated that he owed $850,000 on said home, but that the 
value was $370,000. (Item 4.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant submitted his monthly budget. The family’s net income is $7,900. Their 
expenses are $6,120, which includes a $2,600 mortgage payment.2 He also pays 
approximately $1,147 on other monthly debts, leaving a remainder of $670 at the end of 
the month.  
 
Applicant offered no evidence of a plan to resolve the debt owed on the second 
mortgage. He repeatedly indicated that he is not obligated to pay it. (Item 2.) He has not 
obtained credit counseling. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his job 
performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
                                                          
 2This mortgage payment is made on a home that Applicant has owned since August 2000.  He 
rented out that house when he purchased and moved into the house, which is the subject of the SOR, in 
October 2005. That is the house which went into foreclosure in January 2009. (Items 4, 7.)  
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
In January 2009 Applicant defaulted on a $130,000 second mortgage. He 
asserted that he is no longer responsible for paying or resolving it. He provided no 
documentary evidence supporting his contention. The evidence is sufficient to raise 
these two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. AG ¶ 20 sets forth conditions that could mitigate financial security 
concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Because Applicant’s delinquent mortgage debt is ongoing and unresolved, there 
is insufficient evidence to support a finding that the indebtedness is unlikely to recur or 
continue. Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Although Applicant’s mortgage problems 
are the consequence of a national housing crisis, a situation beyond his control, he did 
not submit sufficient evidence documenting his attempts to responsibly manage the 
debt once it accrued, as required under AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant established no mitigation 
under AG & 20(c), AG & 20(d), or AG & 20(e). He did not submit evidence that he 
received credit counseling or that that $130,000 debt is under control. He did not 
present evidence that he made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve this debt.3 He 
asserted that the second mortgage was forgiven, but did not submit proof to support 
that assertion.  AG & 20(f) is not applicable. 
 
                                                          
3 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6 [now 
Mitigating Condition 20(e)], an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving 
the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the 
Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts 
in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she 
relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of 
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual, who 
has worked for a defense contractor since June 2009. He worked as a civilian for the 
U.S. Air Force from November 1988 to November 1995. He held a security clearance 
during those years.   
 
 In November 2009 Applicant learned of the Government’s concerns relating to 
his delinquent second mortgage. In June 2010 he completed interrogatories seeking 
information regarding the resolution of said debt. In September 2010 he received an 
SOR that notified him that the $130,000 unpaid second mortgage debt raised a security 
concern. In January 2011 the Government filed the FORM. For over a year, he has 
been on notice that said debt was creating security concerns and potentially affecting 
his employment.  Despite that knowledge, he did not provide proof to corroborate his 
statements that the second mortgage was resolved with the foreclosure action on the 
first loan. The record contains insufficient other evidence about his character, 
trustworthiness, or responsibility to mitigate these concerns or make their continuation 
less likely. 
 
Overall, the record evidence creates sufficient doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:               Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
