 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07794    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. In 2007, Applicant resigned, in lieu of 
termination, from his employment with a government contractor because he misused 
the employer’s computer system. Applicant presented evidence that he understands the 
nature and seriousness of his conduct and has not engaged in similar conduct in almost 
four years. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on January 13, 
2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replaces the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 
 
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR detailed the factual basis for 
the action under security guidelines M (Use of Information Technology Systems) and E 
(Personal Conduct). 
  
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on March 4, 2011. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on March 18, 2011. He 
did not object to the items appended to the Government’s brief. These documents are 
admitted as identified in the FORM as Items 1 though 6. 
  
Applicant submitted a response to the FORM. Department Counsel did not 
object. As a result, it is admitted as Applicant’s Exhibit (AE) A.  
 
The case was assigned to me on May 5, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 32-year-old employee of a defense contractor who works as a 
software engineer. He has been employed with this company since 2008.2 
 
 Between 2002 and 2007, Applicant worked as a software engineer with a 
different government contracting company. His former employer had a very strict 
internet policy, which blocked employees from accessing their personal email accounts, 
as well as popular internet and social networking sites. Frustrated by the policy, 
Applicant admits that starting in 2004 he improperly used his employer’s software and 
computer system to create a secure “tunnel” to his home computer in order to 
circumvent the company’s firewall. This tunnel allowed him to access prohibited sites 
from his workstation through his home computer without compromising the company’s 
network.3 
 
 Impressed by his accomplishment, Applicant admits he bragged about his 
actions on his MySpace page. In his posts, he named his employer and confirmed his 
status as an active employee. He disclosed that he internally circumvented the 
company’s intranet firewall. He also disclosed that he had illegally downloaded 
thousands of copyrighted songs and one to two dozen movies from the internet onto his 
personal computer. Although it is unknown how his employer learned of the postings, 
Applicant was confronted by the human resources director in July 2007. Applicant 
admitted the allegations and was suspended for five days. At the end of his suspension, 
the human resources director informed Applicant that he was being terminated. He 
                                                          
2 Item 5. 
 
3 Items 5-6; Response to FORM.   
 
 
3 
 
asked if he could resign in lieu of termination, and his employer agreed. After his initial 
confrontation by his employer, Applicant removed the MySpace postings.4 
 
 In the aftermath of his resignation, Applicant admits that while he understood that 
he violated company policy, he did not understand why, if no harm was done, his 
actions caused such a problem. Reflecting on his actions, Applicant cites his divorce as 
an aggravating factor. Going through a divorce, at 28 years old, after only two years of 
marriage, depressed him. He began to experience low self-esteem, which ultimately 
caused him to behave immaturely. At the time, he thought his MySpace posts made him 
look “cool” and the postings provided a boost to his ego. Now, Applicant sees that his 
behavior was wrong, immature, and dangerous. He understands that he placed himself 
and his former employer in a potentially compromising and vulnerable position. Since 
then, he has taken a more serious approach to security. He also sees a therapist 
regularly to deal with the issues stemming from his divorce.5  
 
 In the four years since he resigned from his former employer, he has not misused 
information technology systems entrusted to him by his subsequent employers. Nor has 
he committed any security violations. Since 2008, Applicant has not illegally 
downloaded copyrighted materials. He only purchases music and movies from legal on-
line retailers.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
                                                          
4  Item 6. 
 
5 Items 4, 6.  
 
6 Response to FORM. 
 
4 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline M, Use of Information Technology Systems 
 
The security concern for Use of Information Technology Systems is set out in AG 
¶ 39:       
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or inability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns, 
however, only AG ¶¶ 40(b) and (e) apply. Applicant admits that between 2004 and 
2007, he manipulated software available on his work computer to access his home 
computer allowing him to circumvent his employer’s firewall and access otherwise 
restricted websites from his work computer. His actions constitute an “ . . . unauthorized 
modification [or]  manipulation  . . . of access to information software, firmware, or 
hardware in an information system technology,” under AG ¶ 40(b). His actions are also 
 
5 
 
disqualifying under AG ¶ 40(e) as an unauthorized use of a government or other 
information technology system. 
  
Of the three mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 41, one is applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment. 
 
 Applicant’s last known misuse of an information technology system occurred four 
years ago. Furthermore, he engaged in this behavior while going through a difficult 
divorce, which caused him to act out. Since then, he has seen the errors of his ways. 
Applicant’s statements show he understands the security risk created by his behavior 
and that he will not engage in similar activity in the future. He has stated a commitment 
to security practices, as well as, respecting the integrity of the information systems to 
which he now has access.  
 
 While I cannot make a credibility determination of Applicant because I have not 
had the chance to observe him in person, I make the following observations of the 
record, which tend to support a finding in favor of Applicant’s security worthiness. He 
self-reported his conduct on his security clearance applications. He reported his 
resignation in lieu of termination and the offenses leading to his resignation. He has 
been candid about his actions. He admitted the allegations of misconduct when 
confronted by his employer and has continued to do so. He takes responsibility for his 
actions. He has repeatedly expressed remorse for his behavior. These themes are 
consistent in his security clearance applications, his responses to Agency 
interrogatories, his Answer, and his FORM response. Also, in taking responsibility for 
his actions he is able to specifically identify several potential risks caused by his actions, 
which shows that he understands the nature and seriousness of his conduct. Finally, he 
is in therapy to deal with the issues of low self-esteem caused by his divorce. Viewed in 
its totality, these factors contribute to my favorable evaluation of Applicant’s written 
statements. 
 
 While Applicant’s past actions were serious, he has shown a more mature and 
responsible attitude leading me to conclude that he will not commit such actions in the 
future and that his past actions do not reflect negatively on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
6 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant’s resignation in lieu of termination raises 
questions about his security worthiness. I find that this is not disqualifying under AG ¶ 
15. Applicant’s resignation is a consequence of his misuse of his former employer’s 
information systems. Applicant properly disclosed his resignation in lieu of termination 
on his security clearance application and offered an accurate explanation for the 
circumstances. However, his underlying actions are disqualifying under the general 
concern raised in AG ¶ 15. The security concerns raised by Applicant’s misuse of his 
employer’s information system is more appropriately addressed under Guideline M. 
 
 Applicant’s admission that he illegally downloaded music and movies from the 
internet over a period of years cannot be ignored. His admission is credible adverse 
information in another issue area (in this case Guideline J, Criminal Conduct) that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, 
when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with 
rules and regulations, or other characteristics  indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information under AG ¶ 16(c). 
 
 Applicant’s MySpace posts about misuse of his employer’s information systems 
and his illegal downloading of copyrighted material raises significant questions about his 
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. 
Although these actions are not explicitly covered under any other guideline, when 
combined with all available information, they support a whole-person assessment of 
questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics  indicating that the person 
may not properly safeguard protected information under AG ¶ 16(d).  
 
 Of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶17, only the following is 
relevant: 
 
17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 In mitigating Applicant’s illegal downloading of copyrighted material, I find 
Applicant illegally downloaded copyrighted material to his personal computer for his own 
use. There is no indication that he distributed any of the material he illegally obtained. 
While he did not believe so at the time, Applicant appreciates the security concern 
raised by illegally downloading copyrighted material. He now uses only legally 
acceptable methods to obtain copyrighted material from the internet. Given his change 
in behavior and attitude, I find that his past conduct does not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
  
 
7 
 
 Although Applicant’s MySpace boasts cannot be considered minor lapses of 
judgment, I find that the conduct is mitigated for many of the same reasons as 
discussed in my analysis of AG ¶ 41(a).  
  
When viewing the record as a whole, I have no reservations about Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. I 
considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts 
and circumstances surrounding this case. In doing so, I have also considered the 
whole-person concept in my analysis of the applicable mitigating conditions and find a 
favorable conclusion is warranted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline M:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.c.:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
