 
1 
 
 
                            
                   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04616 
                                                            )                                 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O’Neil, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the written record in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline C, Foreign Preference. His eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
                                                       Statement of Case 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on March 8, 2010. On October 28, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, and Guideline C, Foreign Preference. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)  
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
                                           
 On January 21, 2011, DOHA received Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. He 
requested that his case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing. After compiling 
its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on March 7, 2011, the Government provided the 
FORM to Applicant on March 14, 2011, with instructions to submit any additional 
information or objections within 30 days of receipt. The FORM contained documents 
identified as Items 1 through 7. In addition, the Government compiled facts about 
Turkey from four official U.S. government publications, provided them to Applicant and 
to me, and requested that I take administrative notice of those facts. I have marked the 
administrative summary and the four source documents as Administrative Exhibit (AE) 
A. Applicant received the file on April 7, 2011. His response was due on May 7, 2011. 
Applicant timely submitted additional information, which I marked as Item A and 
admitted to the record without objection. On June 3, 2011, the case was assigned to me 
for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains ten allegations that raise security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.j.), and one allegation that raises security 
concerns under Guideline C, Foreign Preference (SOR ¶ 2.a.). In his Answer to the 
SOR, Applicant admitted all Guideline B and Guideline C allegations. His admissions 
are admitted herein as findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant, who is 59 years old, was born in Turkey. In 1971, when he was 20 
years old, he was drafted into the Turkish army and served two years of mandatory 
service. In 1980, he immigrated to the United States. In 1987, he returned to Turkey to 
marry his wife, who later became a U.S. citizen. Applicant became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 1989. Applicant and his wife are the parents of a daughter, who is in college, 
and a son, who is a high school student. (Item 5; Item 6; Item A.)  
 
 Since March 2010, Applicant has been employed in a linguist program by a 
government contractor. He seeks a security clearance for the first time. (Item 5.)   
 
 Applicant’s brother and sister are citizens and residents of Turkey. His mother-in-
law, brother-in-law, and sister-in-law are citizens and residents of Turkey.1 In addition, 
Applicant admitted that his aunt and nine uncles are citizens and residents of Turkey. 
However, the aunt is not further identified in the record, and the only information 
provided in the record about the nine uncles is that they all served mandatory military 
service in Turkey. None of Applicant’s relatives who are citizens of Turkey are employed 
by the Turkish government. (Item 5; Item 6; Item 7.) 
   
 
1 The record establishes that Applicant’s brother-in-law is his wife’s brother and his sister-in-law is his 
brother’s wife. Applicant identified them as immediate relatives in responses to DOHA interrogatories. 
(Item 7 at 7.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 On April 6, 2010, Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from 
the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM.)2 Applicant told the investigator that 
he has a close familial relationship with his sister, brother, and mother-in-law. As a first-
born son, Applicant feels a responsibility to provide for his brother and sister if they have 
financial need. He speaks with them and his mother-in-law on the telephone six or 
seven times a year. Additionally, Applicant and his family enjoy traveling to Turkey for 
vacations and to see their relatives. On his e-QIP, he listed travel to Turkey in 2004 and 
2006. (Item 5; Item 6; Item A.) 
 
 Applicant told the investigator that he was not required to renounce his Turkish 
citizenship when he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. He retained his Turkish 
passport, which expired in 1984. In 2010, as a condition of employment with his current 
employer, Applicant wrote to Turkish authorities and renounced his Turkish citizenship 
and surrendered his expired Turkish passport. His expired Turkish passport was 
returned to him. There is no documentation in the record to establish that Applicant’s 
renunciation of Turkish citizenship was acknowledged by responsible Turkish 
government representatives. Applicant, his wife, and their children consider the United 
States as their home. (Item 6 at 5; Item A.) 
 
 In 1998, Applicant purchased a home in Turkey, which he uses for vacations.3 
The house has an estimated value of $35,000. Applicant’s mother-in-law lives in the 
house during the summer months. Applicant told the investigator he would be willing to 
surrender possession of the home, if necessary, in order to receive a security 
clearance.  (Item 6 at 6.) 
 
 Additionally, Applicant receives a pension from the Turkish government of 
approximately $400-$500 a month. He authorizes the deposit of the pension proceeds 
into a bank account he owns in Turkey with a value of approximately $3,000. Applicant’s 
sister shares joint control of the account with Applicant and is authorized to withdraw 
money for her needs. Applicant stated he would be willing to abandon his interest in the 
checking account and his Turkish pension, if necessary, to receive a security clearance. 
(Item 6 at 3, Item 7 at 9.)  
 
 I take administrative notice of the following facts about Turkey, as contained in 
official U.S. government documents provided by Department Counsel to Applicant in the 
FORM:4 
 
2 On September 21, 2010, after reviewing the investigator’s report, Applicant signed a statement that the 
report accurately reflected his April 6, 2010 interview. (Item 6.) 
 
3 In his personal subject interview, Applicant told the investigator he purchased the vacation home in 
Turkey in 1985. (Item 6 at 6.) 
 
4 The following official U.S. Government documents were used to provide the factual summary on Turkey 
quoted in this decision: U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Turkey, November 19, 2010 (9 
pages); U.S. Department of State, Turkey: Country Specific Information, July 29, 2010 (10 pages); U.S. 
Department of State, 2009 Human Rights Report: Turkey, March 11, 2010 (29 pages); U.S. Department 
 
4 
 
 
                                                                                                                                            
Turkey is a constitutional republic with a multiparty parliamentary system 
and a president with limited powers. Turkey has a population of about 76.8 
million people. In foreign relations, Turkey’s primary political, economic, 
and security ties are with the West. Turkey entered NATO in 1952 and 
serves as the organization’s vital Eastern anchor, controlling the straits 
leading from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean Sea and sharing borders 
with Syria, Iraq, and Iran. The United States and Turkey have a close 
relationship that began in 1947 with an agreement implementing the 
Truman Doctrine. 
 
Domestic and transnational terrorist groups have targeted Turkish citizens 
and foreigners in Turkey for more than 40 years. Terrorist groups that 
operated in Turkey have included Kurdish nationalists, al-Qaida, Marxist-
Leninist, and pro-Chechen groups. The most prominent among terrorist 
groups in Turkey is the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK). The PKK 
operates from bases in northern Iraq and directs its forces to target mainly 
Turkish security forces. 
 
Terrorist bombings over the past five years - - - some causing significant 
numbers of casualties - - - have struck religious, government, government-
owned, political, tourist and business targets in a number of locations in 
Turkey. A variety of terrorist groups have targeted U.S. and Western 
interests as well. Terrorists claiming association with al-Qaida were 
responsible for suicide bombings in Istanbul in 2003 that targeted Western 
interests. Terrorists do not distinguish between official and civilian targets. 
 
In terms of human rights, the Turkish government generally respected the 
human rights of its citizens; however, serious problems remained in 
several areas, including a documented rise in cases of torture, beating, 
and abuse by security forces. Security forces committed unlawful killings 
as well. Other forms of human rights abuses continue with respect to 
detainees, fair criminal trials, and freedom of speech, the press, and 
religion. In addition, societal attitudes allowing such practices as the 
“honor killing” of women continue to be a widespread problem. 
 
                                                     Burden of Proof 
 
 The Government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the Government's case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the 
applicant then bears the burden of persuasion. The "clearly consistent with the national 
interest" standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant's 
suitability for access to classified information in favor of protecting national security. 
 
of State, Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism, Country Reports on Terrorism 2009, Chapter 2, 
Country Reports: Europe and Eurasia: Overview, August 5, 2010 (30 pages). I have omitted footnotes in 
the quoted text and have modified some spelling and punctuation. 
 
5 
 
 
         Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
6 
 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Turkey, an ally of the United States and other Western nations, shares 
geographical borders with Syria, Iraq, and Iran. Terrorist groups, including Kurdish 
nationalists, al-Qaida, and pro-Chechen groups, target Turkish citizens and foreigners in 
Turkey. Terrorist bombings in Turkey over the past five years have struck government, 
political, religious, tourist, and business targets throughout Turkey. 
 
 Despite its positive relationships with the West, Turkey has ongoing human rights 
problems. Turkish security forces have been involved in torture, beatings, and unlawful 
killings. Additionally, Turkish cultural practices, such as the “honor killing” of women 
continue. 
 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the Foreign Influence 
guideline.  The facts in this case raise security concerns under disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(e). Under AG ¶ 7(a), it is disqualifying if “contact with a foreign 
family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a 
citizen of or resident in a foreign country . . . creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” Under AG ¶ 7(b), it is 
disqualifying if “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country . . .  
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect 
sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, 
 
7 
 
 
group, or country by providing that information.” Under AG ¶ 7(e), it is disqualifying if an 
applicant possesses “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the 
individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” 
 
 Applicant has 15 relatives who are citizens and residents of Turkey. He accepts a 
retirement pension from the Turkish government. Applicant has particularly close 
familial relationships with his brother, sister, and mother-in-law, all of whom are citizens 
and residents of Turkey. As the oldest child in his family, Applicant feels a duty to care 
for his siblings if they are in need. For that reason, he has given his sister joint control 
over a checking account he maintains in Turkey to receive his monthly pension 
payments from the Turkish government. Additionally, in the summer season, he 
provides his mother-in-law with housing in his vacation home, which is located in 
Turkey. He stays in touch with his brother, sister, and mother-in-law in Turkey, and he 
speaks with them on the telephone six or seven times a year. 
 
 Applicant also has a brother-in-law and sister-in-law who are citizens and 
residents of Turkey. In response to DOHA interrogatories, he identified these individuals 
as immediate family. Applicant also admitted that his aunt and nine uncles are citizens 
and residents of Turkey. While Applicant’s relationships with these individuals were not 
as explicitly enumerated in the record as his relationships with his sister, brother and 
three in-laws, they are also part of the extended family with which he has some contact. 
He failed to show that his relationships and contacts with his aunt and nine uncles 
would not be of security significance.  
 
 Applicant owns a home valued at $35,000 in Turkey. He uses the home when he 
returns to Turkey for vacations. Additionally, he owns a bank account in Turkey, which 
contains about $3,000 in proceeds from his Turkish pension.    
 
 Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply. If “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, 
financial, or property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual, then 
AG ¶ 8(f) might apply. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Applicant’s relationships with his brother, sister, and mother-in-law are neither 
casual nor infrequent, but are based on long-standing family ties of affection and 
obligation. He feels a strong familial obligation to these individuals, and he uses his 
financial and real property resources in Turkey to provide them with benefits. His 
concern for these individuals also suggests a collateral concern for his brother’s wife 
(sister-in-law) and his wife’s brother (brother-in-law), both of whom are also citizens and 
residents of Turkey. Applicant identified them as immediate family members in his 
response to DOHA interrogatories. His relationships with his aunt and nine uncles are 
less explicit, although it is noted that Applicant’s immediate relatives also have 
relationships with them that could be exploited to Applicant’s detriment. 
 
 Turkey has a history of terrorist activity; its location in the Middle East exposes it 
to the dangers of ongoing terrorism. Governmental agents in Turkey are known for 
violating human rights. In this environment, Applicant’s concerns for his family members 
who are Turkish residents and citizens are understandable. At the same time, his 
loyalties to his family members in Turkey could also expose him to exploitation and 
coercion.   
 
 Applicant receives a retirement pension from the Turkish government. He owns 
property valued at about $35,000 in Turkey. The value of these assets is not 
inconsequential, and the visible connections they provide to Turkey raise unresolved 
security concerns, for they could make Applicant vulnerable to exploitation, pressure, or 
manipulation.  
 
In summary, Applicant’s many familial relationships with relatives in Turkey, a 
country subject to instability and terrorism, raises unresolved security concerns. 
Additionally, Applicant’s property interests in Turkey expose him to further risk of 
exploitation or pressure in his work as a federal contractor, and this could raise 
additional concerns that might also threaten U.S. security interests. Although Applicant 
offered to divest himself of his bank account and summer home, if necessary, in order 
to be granted access to classified information, he failed to provide information to rebut 
or mitigate these security concerns. I conclude that the mitigating conditions under AG 
¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), 8(c), and 8(f) are inapplicable. 
 
 Nothing in Applicant’s answers to the Guideline B allegations in the SOR 
suggested he was not a loyal U.S. citizen. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 
specifically provides that industrial security clearance decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.”   
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9, the security concern involving foreign preference arises “[w]hen 
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over 
the United States.”  Such an individual “may be prone to provide information or make 
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
9 
 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes several conditions that could raise a security concern and 
may be disqualifying.  These disqualifying conditions are as follows: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member.  This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; 
 
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign 
country; 
 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or 
other such benefits from a foreign country; 
 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business 
interests in another country; 
 
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election; 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen; 
 
(c) performing or attempting to perform duties, or otherwise acting, so as 
to serve the interests of a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in conflict with the national security interest; and  
 
(d) any statement or action that shows allegiance to a country other than 
the United States: for example, declaration of intent to renounce United 
States citizenship; renunciation of United States citizenship. 
 
 As a U.S. citizen, Applicant receives retirement benefits valued at $400 to $500 
each month from the Turkish government. Under Guideline C, this action could show a 
preference for Turkey over the United States. I conclude that Applicant’s conduct raises 
potentially disqualifying security concerns under AG ¶ 10(a)(3). 
 
Under AG ¶ 11(c), an individual’s “exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations 
of foreign citizenship might be mitigated if it occurred before becoming a U.S. citizen or 
when the individual was a minor.” As a mature adult and a U.S. citizen, Applicant 
receives a monthly pension from the government of Turkey. While he has stated he 
would relinquish the pension, if necessary, in order to be granted a security clearance, 
 
10 
 
 
he has not done so. Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶ 11(c) does not apply in mitigation 
in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge must also consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant, who became a U.S. 
citizen in 1989, is in frequent contact with his immediate family members who are 
citizens and residents of Turkey. He is a concerned and generous family member. He 
owns a bank account in Turkey into which he deposits retirement benefits he receives 
from the Turkish government. His sister can access the account for her financial needs. 
Applicant owns a house in Turkey valued at $35,000. He permits his mother-in-law to 
live in the house for the summer months. Applicant uses his resources in Turkey for the 
benefit of his many family members who are citizens and residents of Turkey. At the 
same time, by these actions, he is vulnerable to foreign influence, expresses a 
preference for Turkey, and exposes himself to the risk of exploitation and coercion.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under the 
foreign influence and foreign preference adjudicative guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
11 
 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. through 1.j.: Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:                      Against Applicant 
  
                           Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
