 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 10-02576 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on December 8, 2009. On 
January 6, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on January 12, 2011; answered it in an undated 
document; and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
 
2 
 
 
request on February 3, 2011. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on February 
25, 2011, and the case was assigned to me on March 2, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on March 17, 2011, scheduling the hearing for April 6, 2011. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 9 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through 
C, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until April 22, 2011, to 
enable Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. He timely submitted AX D 
through G, which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s comments 
regarding AX D through G are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on April 13, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR, 
except SOR ¶ 1.cc, which he denied. His admissions in his answer and at the hearing 
are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old logistician employed by a defense contractor since July 
2007. He has worked for defense contractors since August 1996. He served on active 
duty in the U.S. Army from February 1981 to August 1995, and he elected to take an 
early retirement because of limited promotion opportunities. He has held a second job 
since September 1997, working two nights a week as a security guard and doorman at 
a night club. (GX 1 at 15; Tr. 73.) He has held a security clearance since January 1999. 
 
 Applicant married in June 1981, separated in August 1995, and divorced in May 
2000. He married his current wife in May 2009. He has four adult children from his first 
marriage. His current wife is employed as a laboratory technician at a local hospital. (Tr. 
36.) 
 
 Applicant was required to pay child support after he and his first wife separated, 
and he also was responsible for most of the debts incurred during the marriage. (GX 6.) 
He filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 2001, and received a discharge in September 
2001. (GX 9 at 1.) This bankruptcy is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.dd. 
 
 Applicant incurred two student loans, alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, while 
attending college courses in criminal justice. After the loans were referred to a collection 
agency, he made five monthly payments, but he stopped sending payments because he 
was not receiving any responses from the collection agency. (Tr. 47-52; AX D; AX E.) 
 
 The delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.e, 1.k, 1.l, and 1.cc are credit card 
accounts. The account alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.cc was settled for ten percent of the amount 
due. (Answer to SOR; GX 5 at 24-25.). The remaining credit card debts are unresolved. 
 
 Applicant suffers from recurrent kidney stone problems requiring hospitalization 
or treatment about every 90 days. He testified that his medical problem was caused by 
his exposure to burning oil fields during the first Gulf War. The 19 delinquent medical 
 
3 
 
 
bills alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h-1.j and 1.m-1.bb are related to treatments for kidney stones. 
He has medical insurance, but he is indebted for the copayments. (Tr. 38-41.) Of the 19 
delinquent medical bills, five are for less than $100 and one is for $107. None of the 
medical debts are resolved. 
 
 Applicant testified that he had done nothing to resolve his medical debts because 
he is concentrating on resolving his federal and state tax debts. He testified he “forgot” 
to file his state tax return for tax year 2009, because he had just married and “had so 
much going on.” The return was due on May 1 and he realized he had missed the filing 
date about May 15. He did not consider filing late or requesting an extension of time to 
file. He decided he would do nothing until he filed his return for tax year 2010. (Tr. 72, 
82-83.) He owed state taxes of $1,165, which were collected by a tax levy on his pay. 
(GX 4 at 11, 14.) He owes federal income taxes of about $1,295 for tax year 2009, and 
he expects to owe about $2,000 for tax year 2010. (GX 4 at 13; Tr. 60.) His deliberate 
failure to file his 2009 state tax return is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.dd. The federal and state 
tax debts are not alleged in the SOR. 
 
 Applicant submitted a personal financial statement in September 2010, reflecting 
net monthly income, including his wife’s income, of $4,777, expenses of $2,611, debt 
payments of $1,127, and a net monthly remainder of $1,039. (GX 5 at 26.) He and his 
wife each drive three-year-old economy cars. They live in a rented apartment. He has 
about $1,200 in his savings account and $600 in his checking account. He does not 
have a retirement account other than his military retirement. After their marriage in 
2009, he and his current wife spent their honeymoon on a cruise to the Bahamas. (Tr. 
74.) 
 
 Applicant submitted two receipts for payments to a law firm, but he did not show 
any connection between the law firm and the debts alleged in the SOR. (AX A; AX B.) 
He also submitted 30 pages of accounting documents from the hospital where he 
receives treatment for kidney stones, but the documents do not reflect any payments on 
the debts alleged in the SOR. (AX C.) 
 
 Applicant completed an online financial management course and has consulted 
with a bankruptcy attorney. He has not sought or obtaining any other financial 
management counseling. (Tr. 75-76.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
4 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges 27 delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e and 1.h-1.cc).1 
Applicant’s admissions, corroborated by his credit reports, establish all the allegations in 
the SOR, except SOR ¶ 1.cc. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.cc has been resolved. The 
concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Applicant’s financial history raises three disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(g): failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns 
as required or the fraudulent filing of the same.  
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established, because Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous and 
ongoing, and they did not occur under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s marital breakup in 
1995 and the financial obligations resulting from that breakup were conditions beyond 
his control, but the financial consequences of his marital breakup were resolved by his 
bankruptcy discharge in September 2001. His chronic problem with kidney stones is a 
condition beyond his control, but he has not acted responsibly in resolving the medical 
                                                          
1 There are no subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g in the SOR. Subparagraph 1.e is followed by subparagraph 1.h. 
 
6 
 
 
copayments for his treatment. His financial statement reflects that he has a significant 
monthly remainder. He was able to finance a honeymoon cruise to the Bahamas, but he 
has done nothing to resolve his medical debts, even though many of them are for small 
amounts. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(b) is established for the bankruptcy alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.dd, but it is not established for the delinquent debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.e and 
1.h-1.bb. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). Neither 
prong of this mitigating condition is established. His completion of a two-hour online 
course falls short of the type of counseling contemplated by AG ¶ 20(c), and his 
financial problems are not under control. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). An applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only 
establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement 
the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be 
paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). This mitigating 
condition is established for the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.cc, but not for the other debts 
alleged in the SOR. He has made no effort to resolve the other debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1-a-1.e and 1.h-1.bb, and he has no plan for doing so. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not disputed any of the 
debts alleged. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR cross-alleges the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.ee that Applicant deliberately 
failed to file his state income tax return for tax year 2009 (SOR ¶ 2.a). The security 
concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: “Conduct involving questionable 
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. . . .” The relevant disqualifying condition is AG ¶ 
16(c):  
 
 
7 
 
 
[C]redible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. 
 Applicant’s explanation that he “forgot” to file his state tax return was plausible 
and credible in light of his track record of inattention to financial matters. However, it 
does not explain or justify his failure to submit a late return or request an extension of 
time when he realized two weeks later that he had forgotten to file it. He decided to do 
nothing and address the problem during the following tax year. I conclude that AG ¶ 
16(c) is established. 
 
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct may be mitigated if: “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). Applicant’s 
failure to file his return is arguably minor and it occurred only once. However, it did not 
happen under unique circumstances. When considered in the context of his overall 
history of financial neglect, it raises questions about his reliability, judgment, and 
willingness to comply with rules and regulations. I conclude that AG ¶ 17(c) is not 
established. No other enumerating mitigating conditions are applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
 
8 
 
 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult. He served honorably in the U.S. Army for 14 years, 
including service in a combat zone. He has worked for defense contractors and held a 
clearance for many hears. He suffers from a chronic medical problem that apparently 
was caused or aggravated by his combat service. On the other hand, he has a long 
track record of financial neglect. His approach to his debts has been generally passive. 
He has not demonstrated the sense of obligation expected of someone entrusted with 
classified information.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations and 
personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g:   Omitted from SOR 
  Subparagraphs 1.h-1.bb:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.cc-1.dd:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.ee:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
