 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04339 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John G. Pierce, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 6, 2010, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on August 19, 2010.2 On another unspecified date, DOHA issued him 
another set of interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories on September 11, 
2010.3 On December 9, 2010, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86), dated January 6, 2010. 
 
2 Government Exhibit 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated August 19, 2010).  
 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) for all 
adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive. The SOR alleged 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and detailed reasons 
why DOHA could not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine 
whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on December 16, 2010. In a sworn undated 
statement, received by DOHA on January 10, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed on February 3, 2011, and the case was assigned to 
me on February 10, 2011. A Notice of Hearing was issued on March 4, 2011, and I 
convened the hearing, as scheduled, on March 24, 2011. 
 
 During the hearing, six Government exhibits (GE 1-6) and one Applicant exhibit 
(AE A) were admitted into evidence without objection or over objection.4 Applicant and 
one other witness testified. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received on April 7, 2011. 
The record was kept open until April 7, 2011, to enable Applicant to supplement it. It 
also remained open until April 21, 2011, to enable the parties to submit written closing 
arguments. Upon Applicant’s motion, it remained open until June 29, 2011, to enable 
Applicant to supplement the record. Prior to the April 7th deadline, Applicant submitted 
11 additional documents. That submission is discussed below. Prior to the June 29th 
deadline, he submitted two additional documents and his closing argument. Those 
documents were admitted, over Department Counsel’s previous objection, as AE M-N. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
Applicant submitted six documents, to which Department Counsel objected. They 
were duplicates of GE 1-6, annotated with comments and corrections as to the 
information previously placed in some of the documents by Applicant when he 
completed them. For example, he made alterations to entries on his SF 86 and to his 
answers to the interrogatories. On the three credit reports, he corrected the account 
numbers of some of the accounts appearing therein. Applicant also submitted three 
documents that can best be described as one email, one letter of transmittal, and a 
“summary of evidence of discrepancies, errors and conflicts” pertaining to GE 1-6.” 
Department Counsel also objected to them. One document was Department Counsel’s 
letter to Applicant describing the hearing and transmitting the proposed GE 1-6. It is 
 
3 Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated September 11, 2010). 
 
4 Applicant objected to three credit reports, not based on admissibility, but rather on accuracy. I overruled 
the objection, and admitted the documents as GE 4 through 6, respectively. See Tr. at 181-182.  
 
 
3 
                                      
 
unclear what Applicant’s purpose was in offering the document. Department Counsel 
objected to it as well. The bases for Department Counsel’s objections were as follows:  
 
The documents are unresponsive to the Administrative Judge’s offer to 
allow Applicant to supplement the record. (Tr. at 121-27). . . . Many of the 
documents submitted duplicate Government exhibits, and the SOR, and 
others are irrelevant. Many of the comments added now seek to contest 
account numbers. The documents do not disprove the accounts are 
Applicant’s merely because the account numbers on credit reports are 
partial numbers. The comments do not rebut his indebtedness and, 
therefore, are irrelevant. In addition, Applicant had the opportunity at 
hearing to provide evidence concerning any alleged inaccuracies in 
documents, including information that he provided himself and failed to 
take advantage of that opportunity. To allow Applicant at this point to 
attempt to impeach the evidence he had the opportunity to contest at the 
hearing, including information he previously provided, would wrongly deny 
the Government the opportunity for cross-examination. 
 
While I disagree with Department Counsel’s characterization that some of the 
proffered evidence is irrelevant, I find that it is immaterial and not responsive to my 
initial order. Before completing the SF 86 or his answers to the interrogatories, Applicant 
had the opportunity to insure that his responses were complete and accurate. Upon 
receiving the proposed GE 1-6 before the hearing, he had other opportunities to make 
corrections, and he did make some. At the hearing, he had an additional opportunity to 
note corrections. He did not do so. Accordingly, as to AE B-K for identification, the 
objection is sustained and those documents will be set aside. As to AE L for 
identification, Department Counsel made an objection to portions of the proffered 
exhibit. The objection is overruled and AE L is admitted in its entirety. 
 
On April 14, 2011, one day before the scheduled deadline for the submission of 
the Government’s written closing argument, citing heavy workload responsibilities, 
Department Counsel moved for a continuance of one week, until the close of business 
on April 22, 2011, in which to submit closing argument. Applicant did not submit any 
comment to the motion. Due to the press of other business, I did not rule, in writing, on 
the motion of Department Counsel, but did so orally. The motion was granted. 
 
On May 5, 2011, citing new developments related to several of the SOR 
allegations, Applicant moved for a continuance to submit closing argument and 
supplemental documentation. Department Counsel did not object to “some additional 
period to submit argument (such as an additional week),” however, he did object to the 
submission of additional documents because the record had been closed for the 
submission of documents several weeks earlier. Applicant proffered the nature of the 
documents and urged that his motion be granted. On May 9, 2011, Applicant moved for 
a rehearing, citing new developments related to issues set forth in the SOR.  
 
On May 26, 2011, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s brief in 
opposition to Applicant’s motion “for rehearing or to re-open the hearing” and “to 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                          
submission of proposed post-hearing evidence.” I denied Applicant’s motion for a 
rehearing, but granted his motion for a continuance to submit closing argument and 
supplemental documents, limited to documentation related to the current status of the 
five properties and/or mortgages identified in the SOR and referred to by Applicant in 
his motion. As noted above, two submissions were timely made. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted one of the factual allegations (¶ 
1.f.) of the SOR. Applicant's admission is incorporated herein as a finding of fact. He 
denied the remaining factual allegations (¶¶ 1.a. 1.e., and 1.g. through 1.i.) of the SOR. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as 
a product manager.5 He is seeking to retain a secret security clearance that was initially 
granted to him in 1983.6 A 1977 high school graduate, Applicant has a 1983 bachelor’s 
degree in electrical engineering technology, a 2000 master’s degree in business 
administration, and a 2001 master’s degree in computer resource information systems.7 
Over the years, Applicant has held several different positions with various employers. 
He was a design engineer and a production test engineer.8 He joined his current 
employer as a senior staff test engineer in February 1986.9 Since that time, there is no 
evidence of Applicant being unemployed. Applicant has never served with the U.S. 
military.10  
 
Applicant was married in November 1983.11 He and his wife have two sons, born 
in 1985 and 1987, respectively.12 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
At some unspecified point before 2002, Applicant decided to invest in real estate. 
He obtained professional financial counseling to determine how to pursue his goal in a 
conservative, stable manner, and hired tax attorneys for assistance in setting up an 
5 Tr. at 35. 
 
6 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 36. 
 
7 Tr. at 34-35, 81. 
 
8 Id. at 35. 
 
9 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 13. 
 
10 Id. at 16. 
 
11 Id. at 19. 
 
12 Id. at 22-23. 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
investment plan.13 In 2002, he approached a realtor to assist him with the development 
of some vacant real estate that he already owned.14 They subsequently decided to 
create a real estate investment partnership.15 The realtor-partner believed their 
subsequent acquisitions were low-risk investments.16 Applicant and his wife planned to 
establish a number of business entities to collect rental income, operate diagnostics test 
facilities, operate as a radon mitigation specialist, and manage properties.17 His 
investments since his 2002 plan to sell a portion of his split real estate property (S-1), 
were as follows: In 2003, he acquired property S-3; in 2004, he sold the split portion of 
property S-1 for $90,000, he acquired a medical diagnostic center with the profits from 
his sale of the portion of property S-1, and he became a certified radon mitigation 
specialist; in 2005, he split and sold both the lot and the house of the S-3 property, and 
executed a tax-deferred exchange of property held for productive use or investment 
(1031 exchange) by relinquishing his interest in property S-3 and acquiring two 4-plex 
townhouses;18 in 2006, he initiated a split of a 4-plex (HC-4) into four separate 
townhouses; in 2007, he initiated a split of another 4-plex (TC-4), he acquired a second 
medical diagnostic center, and he refinanced the TC-4 4-plex townhouse.19 While 
Applicant and his partners operate under a limited liability company name, all of the 
investment properties are actually titled in the names of Applicant and his partners.20 
 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until 2008 when, because 
of the downturn in the economy and what his realtor-partner called the “horrific” local 
housing market,21 Applicant started to lose renters in his investment properties. Tenants 
lost their jobs and were unable to pay the monthly rent. Applicant’s financial difficulties 
commenced in 2008 when his tenants started losing their jobs and he experienced 
difficulties in finding replacement tenants.22 Because Applicant’s rent fee was $950 – 
above the market value – tenant vacancy accelerated.23 He surveyed the surrounding 
 
13 Tr. at  37-39. 
 
14 Id. at 41-42, 129-130. 
 
15 Id. at 45-46, 167-169. 
 
16 Id. at 170. 
 
17 Applicant Exhibit A (Tax Plan Structure February 2004, undated). 
 
18 A 1031 exchange is a method for selling one qualified property and acquiring another qualified property 
within a specific time frame. The entire transaction is treated as an exchange and not as a simple sale, and enables 
the participants to qualify for a deferred gain treatment. Sales are taxable with the IRS and 1031 exchanges are not. 
See, US CODE: Title 26 U.S.C. §1031, Exchange of Property Held for Productive Use or Investment; Tr. at 43.  
 
19 Applicant Exhibit A (Investment Plan, undated), at 1-3; Tr. at 42-44. 
 
20 Tr. at 179-181. 
 
21 Id. at 173. 
 
22 Applicant Exhibit A (Investment Plan, undated), at 3. 
 
23 Id. 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
properties and determined they were also having problems, so he reduced his rental 
rates.24 
 
With rapidly emptying properties, Applicant decided to intentionally stop making 
the monthly payments, supposedly to qualify for mortgage modifications,25 and 
foreclosure proceedings were commenced by the mortgage lenders in 2009.26 Applicant 
engaged the professional services of two different real estate law firms to assist him in 
obtaining mortgage modifications with his mortgage lenders.27 In April 2010, Applicant 
and his partners attended a foreclosure and loss mitigation conciliation conference to 
seek mortgage modifications.28 While the modifications were supposedly approved, no 
documentation was ever issued by the mortgage lender.29 Applicant never placed the 
remaining investment properties on the real estate market for sale and had not 
considered any short sales.30 It is Applicant’s intention to hold on to the investment 
properties so that they appreciate in value and start generating a positive cash flow.31 
At the hearing, Applicant, for the first time, said that if the mortgage modifications fall 
through, he might have to consider short sales “if we have to.”32  
 
In September 2010, Applicant submitted a personal financial statement reflecting 
a monthly income of $8,335, and monthly expenses of $8,501, including purported 
mortgage payments.33 He failed to estimate a monthly remainder, if any, available for 
discretionary spending.34 At that time, he reflected $2,000 in savings and $125,566.28 
in stocks and bonds.35 In February 2010, Applicant estimated he had a monthly 
 
24 Tr. at 47-48. 
 
25 Id. at 63, 70; Government Exhibit 3 (Personal Subject Interview, dated February 9, 2010), at 2-5, attached 
to Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories. 
 
26 Government Exhibit 4 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated January 16, 
2010), at 9, 11, 17; Government Exhibit 5 (Equifax Credit Report, dated July 1, 2010), at 2; Government Exhibit 6 
(Equifax Credit Report, dated September 2, 2010), at 2. 
 
27 Tr. at 48. 
 
28 Id. at 49-50. 
 
29 Id. at 51. 
 
30 Id. at 80. 
 
31 Id. at 81. 
 
32 Id. at 116-117. 
 
33 Government Exhibit 2 (Personal Financial Statement, undated), attached to Applicant’s Answers to 
Interrogatories. Applicant contended he was making “actual” payments of $10,120.25 to three identified mortgage 
lenders, but in reality, at that time no such payments were being made.  
 
34 Id.  
 
35 Id. In February 2010, Applicant disclosed that he had a 401(k) with $30,000 available to use. It is unclear if 
that 401(k) is included in his stock and bond portfolio.  
 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
discretionary income of $1,500, exclusive of income derived from his rental properties.36 
In March 2011, Applicant acknowledged having $24,000 in rent receipts on hand.37  
 
Applicant failed to timely file his 2008 Federal income tax return, and eventually 
entered into a repayment schedule with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) requiring 
that he pay $500 per month until the tax obligation of between $25,000 and $30,000 is 
resolved.38 He also failed to make the required payments on some non-investment 
accounts. As a result, several accounts fell into arrears and became delinquent. In 
addition, the student loan for which he co-signed for his son became delinquent. 
 
The SOR identified nine purportedly continuing delinquencies, including seven 
mortgages in a foreclosure status, as reflected by three credit reports from 2010,39 
totaling approximately $1,312,152, of which $157,375 is past due. Some accounts 
reflected in the credit reports have been transferred, reassigned, or sold to other 
creditors or collection agents. Other accounts are referenced repeatedly, in many 
instances duplicating other accounts listed, either under the same creditor name or 
under a different creditor name. Some accounts are identified by complete account 
numbers, while others are identified by partial account numbers, in some instances 
eliminating the last four digits and in others eliminating other digits. The information 
reflected in the credit reports is not necessarily accurate or up to date.  
 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.): Applicant is indebted to one mortgage lender for five 
mortgages on different properties (HC-4 and TC-4). All five mortgages went into a 
foreclosure status in 2009 when Applicant intentionally stopped making the monthly 
payments, supposedly to qualify for mortgage modifications. As a result, the unpaid 
balances on each mortgage grew. Despite negotiations with the mortgage lender, no 
mortgage modification for any of the mortgages has been agreed to by the mortgage 
lender. Applicant has not made any recent mortgage payments for any of the 
mortgages. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.f.): Applicant is indebted to one mortgage lender for one investment 
property (S-1). The mortgage went into a foreclosure status in 2009 when Applicant 
intentionally stopped making the monthly payments, supposedly to qualify for a 
mortgage modification. As a result, the unpaid balance on the mortgage grew. 
Negotiations with the mortgage lender apparently collapsed and the mortgage lender 
sued Applicant and his partners seeking foreclosure.40 The matter is currently in 
litigation. Applicant has not made any relatively recent mortgage payments for the 
mortgage. 
 
36 Government Exhibit 3 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 25, at 2. 
 
37 Tr. at 64. 
 
38 Government Exhibit 3 (Personal Subject Interview), supra note 25, at 1-2. 
 
39 Government Exhibits 4-6, supra note 26. 
 
40 Government Exhibit 2 (Motion to Dismiss Complaint, dated July 31, 2009), attached to Applicant’s 
Answers to Interrogatories. 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                          
 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.g.): Applicant cosigned a student loan for his son. The account went 
into a deferred status, but Applicant failed to make the required monthly payments. In 
May 2010, the unpaid balance, including late fees, had increased to $1,907.31.41 
Applicant made a $25 payment in February 2011.42 Although Applicant contended the 
account had been paid off,43 during the hearing he acknowledged he is still paying on 
the account.44 There is no evidence of additional payments made by Applicant or 
receipts from the creditor to confirm either that the account is being paid or that it has 
been paid off. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.h.): Applicant is indebted to one mortgage lender for his primary 
residence. The mortgage went into a foreclosure status in 2009 when Applicant 
intentionally stopped making the monthly payments, supposedly to qualify for a 
mortgage modification. As a result, the unpaid balance on the mortgage grew. 
Negotiations with the mortgage lender apparently collapsed and the mortgage lender 
sued Applicant seeking foreclosure.45 The matter is currently in litigation. Applicant has 
not made any relatively recent mortgage payments for the mortgage. 
 
(SOR ¶ 1.i.): Applicant took out a line of credit in the amount of $7,967 for one of 
his business enterprises.46 At some point he fell behind 90 days in his monthly 
payments and the account was charged off in the amount of $6,806.47 In March 2011, 
the unpaid balance was reflected as $5,935.91, and Applicant made a payment of 
$300.48 During the hearing, Applicant contended the account was current.49 There is no 
evidence of additional payments made by Applicant or receipts from the creditor to 
confirm either that the account is being paid or that it is considered current. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
41 Applicant Exhibit L, at AA-1 (Letter from Creditor, dated May 10, 2010). 
 
42 Applicant Exhibit L, at AA-4 (Cancelled Check, dated February 11, 2011). 
 
43 Applicant Exhibit L, at AA-19 (Notation on Payment Confirmation, dated March 25, 2011). 
 
44 Tr. at 76, 93. 
 
45 Government Exhibit 2 (Answer and Affirmative Defenses to Complaint, dated March 30, 2010), attached 
to Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories. 
 
46 Tr. at 77; Government Exhibit 4, supra note 26, at 13. 
 
47 Government Exhibit 4, at 13, 
 
48 Applicant Exhibit L, at AA-14 (Account Summary, dated March 6, 2011). 
 
49 Tr. at 77, 94. 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                          
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”50 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”51   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”52 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.53  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
50 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
51 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
52 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
53 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
                                                          
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”54 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”55 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. As noted above, there was nothing unusual about Applicant’s 
finances until 2008 when, because of the downturn in the economy and the local 
housing market, Applicant’s investment properties started to lose renters. With rapidly 
emptying properties, Applicant decided to intentionally stop making the monthly 
payments on all of his investment properties, as well as on his personal residence, 
supposedly to qualify for mortgage modifications. Mortgages and other accounts 
became delinquent, and his mortgages went into a foreclosure status. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c) apply. 
 
54 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
55 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                          
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where Athe conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Evidence 
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@56  
 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until 2008 when, because 
of the downturn in the economy and what his realtor-partner called the “horrific” local 
housing market, Applicant’s investment properties started to lose renters. Tenants lost 
their jobs and were unable to pay the monthly rent. Those economic conditions were 
unexpected and beyond Applicant’s control. However, the degree to which those factors 
had an impact on Applicant’s ability to overcome them has not been explained. 
Applicant was confronted with two issues. One was a financial issue and the other was 
a business issue. With rapidly emptying properties, Applicant decided to intentionally 
stop making the monthly payments, supposedly to qualify for mortgage modifications, 
and foreclosure proceedings were commenced by the mortgage lenders in 2009. 
Applicant engaged the professional services of two different real estate law firms to 
assist him in obtaining mortgage modifications with his mortgage lenders. Applicant 
never placed his investment properties on the real estate market for sale and had not 
considered any short sales. Instead, Applicant intends to hold on to the investment 
properties so that they appreciate in value and start generating a positive cash flow. 
Until then, his apparent goal is to ignore his creditors or force them to agree to loan 
modifications.  
  
Applicant continued to accrue revenue from the rents generated by his rental 
properties, and income from his other business enterprises, and was seemingly capable 
56 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
of meeting most of his personal and family financial obligations. He simply decided not 
to pay his mortgages in an effort to force the mortgage lenders to comply with his 
wishes to lower his monthly payments and otherwise modify all of the mortgages. As a 
result, he permitted seven mortgages to fall into arrears and become delinquent. While 
three mortgage lenders attempted to foreclose on the seven properties, Applicant was 
only concerned with litigation to retain his properties without making the required 
monthly payments. In September 2010, Applicant had a monthly net income of $8,335. 
He claimed monthly expenses of $8,501, including purported mortgage payments, but in 
reality, he was not making those mortgage payments. He had $2,000 in savings and 
$125,566.28 in stocks and bonds. Applicant took the tax benefits of his various business 
enterprises, but refused to comply with his agreed monthly mortgage payments. 
 
Applicant has a degree in business administration. Hoping to build his financial 
empire, he joined in a partnership with a realtor and sought guidance of attorneys to 
assist him in the growth of his business portfolio. He engaged the services of litigation 
attorneys to assist him initially in seeking mortgage modifications and subsequently to 
fight off foreclosure suits. Other than some generic guidance, there is no evidence of 
financial counseling, debt management, or debt repayment.  
 
Some of what occurred was beyond Applicant’s control and took place under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. Applicant received counseling related to 
his business, but not related to his financial problems. There is little indication that the 
problems associated with his mortgages are now being resolved. By making cold 
business decisions related to his mortgages, Applicant acted irresponsibly under the 
circumstances, and his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, are in 
question. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have evaluated the various aspects of 
 
13 
                                      
 
                                                          
this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely performed a 
piecemeal analysis.57      
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. In 2002, he 
decided to start building wealth and accumulate investment properties. He did so and 
was very successful in purchasing them at reasonable prices, rehabilitating them, and 
renting them. Unfortunately, because of the unexpected downturn in the economy and 
the housing market crash, he lost renters when they lost their jobs and were unable to 
pay the monthly rent. He reduced his rental asking price. He sought mortgage 
modifications from his three mortgage lenders.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:58 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
There are some questionable actions by Applicant in handling his delinquent 
accounts. At some point in 2009, Applicant made a business decision to stop paying his 
monthly mortgage payments for both his investment properties and his primary 
residence. He continued to accrue revenue from the rents generated by his rental 
properties, and income from his other business enterprises, and was seemingly capable 
of meeting most of his personal and family financial obligations. He simply decided not 
to pay his mortgages in an effort to force the mortgage lenders to comply with his 
wishes to lower his monthly payments and otherwise modify all of the mortgages. As a 
result, he permitted seven mortgages to fall into arrears and become delinquent. While 
three mortgage lenders attempted to foreclose on the seven properties, Applicant was 
57 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
58 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
14 
                                      
 
only concerned with litigation to retain his properties without making the required 
monthly payments. He had $2,000 in savings and $125,566.28 in stocks and bonds. 
Applicant took the tax benefits of his various business enterprises, but refused to 
comply with his agreed monthly mortgage payments. I conclude that Applicant has 
failed to establish a meaningful track record. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
