                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04179 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant owes three delinquent debts, totaling $72,857, all of which are 
unresolved. He presented no documentary evidence to show financial responsibility in 
the acquisition of the debts, good-faith efforts in the resolution of the debts, or a current 
track record of financial responsibility. There are no clear indications that his financial 
problems are being resolved or are under control. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on February 2, 2010. 
After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
1 
 
 
                                            
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
On November 22, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
which specified the basis for its decision - security concerns raised under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 18, 2011. He elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated March 24, 2011, was provided to him by transmittal letter dated 
March 28, 2011. Applicant received his copy of the FORM on April 9, 2011. He was 
allowed a period of 30 days to submit any objections to the FORM and to provide 
material in extenuation and mitigation. He did not respond to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on June 3, 2011, to determine whether a clearance should be granted 
or denied.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1a through 1.c. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough 
review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 61-year-old principal technician specialist employed by a defense 
contractor. He enlisted in the U.S. Air Force in November 1969, and served on active 
duty until November 1973. His service was characterized as honorable. In 1985-1986 
he attended college for approximately one year, but did not complete a degree. 
Applicant married his wife in January 1983, and they were divorced in July 1992. He 
has no children.  
 
Applicant stated in his SCA that he was granted access to classified information 
at the top secret level in August 1971, while serving in the Air Force; and that he was 
granted secret clearances in September 1987 and February 1991. There is no evidence 
as to how long he held these clearances. His SCA’s work history indicates that he was 
self-employed and worked part-time as a consultant from July 2002 until June 2008. He 
was hired by his current employer, a government contractor, in June 2008.  
 
Applicant disclosed in his February 2010 SCA that he was having financial 
trouble. Specifically, he disclosed that he had debts turned over to collection agencies; 
credit cards suspended, charged off, or cancelled for failing to pay as agreed; and that 
he was over 180 days delinquent on some debts, and currently 90 days delinquent on 
some debts.  
 
In March 2010, Applicant was interviewed by a Government investigator about 
the three delinquent and charged-off debts alleged in the SOR and his overall financial 
situation. During the interview, he explained that he retired from a job in 2001, and 
started living off his investments. Because of the decline of the stock market his 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
investments did not do well. He was living in a high-cost living area and, in 2007, his 
investments and retirement savings started to run out. He looked for a job, but was not 
successful. He used the credit cards alleged in the SOR to pay for his day-to-day living 
expenses. By late 2007, all of the alleged accounts were already over 180 days 
delinquent and in collection. In March 2008, he was evicted from his apartment for 
failure to pay his rent. 
 
Applicant borrowed $3,000 from each of his siblings and moved to his current 
state seeking employment. He has been living with his sister since. After he started 
working in June 2008, he paid the loans to both of his siblings. He claimed that after he 
repaid the loans, he continued to provide $500 in financial assistance to both of his 
siblings because they are having financial difficulties.  
 
Applicant explained that he did not contact his creditors or make any payments 
toward his delinquent debts because he was providing financial assistance to his 
siblings and he does not have the financial means to pay his day-to-day living expenses 
and his delinquent debts. He anticipated a pay bonus in April 2010. He promised to pay 
his delinquent debts sometime in the near future and to acquire no additional financial 
obligations. 
 
Applicant presented no evidence that he has participated in financial counseling 
or that he is following a budget. His July 2010 personal financial statement indicates 
that since June 2008, he has earned a monthly gross income of $5,892; deductions of 
$2,928; and monthly expenses of $1,150. He indicated a monthly net remainder of 
approximately $1,800. He has $30,000 in bank savings. His plans were to use his 
bonus and bank savings to make $5,000 lump-sum payments to each alleged creditor 
and then make monthly payments of $250. As of June 2011, Applicant presented no 
documentary evidence of any efforts to contact creditors, settle his debts, make 
payments, or otherwise resolve his financial obligations.  
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
 
4 
 
 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
 
5 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
The SOR alleges and the evidence established that Applicant owes three 
delinquent debts, totaling $72,857, all of which are unresolved. AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c) “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations” apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s sparse favorable evidence fails to fully raise the applicability of any 
mitigating condition. His financial problems are ongoing, and his evidence fails to show 
they occurred under such circumstances that they are unlikely to recur and do not cast 
doubt on Applicant's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
does not apply. 
 
 Applicant presented some evidence to establish circumstances beyond his 
control contributing to his inability to pay his debts, the downturn of the financial markets 
and his inability to find a job in 2007. Notwithstanding, Applicant’s presented no 
documentary evidence showing that he acted responsibly in the acquisition of his debts, 
that he made good-faith efforts to resolve his debts, or that he has a track record of 
financial responsibility. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and (d) do not apply. 
 
6 
 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because there are no clear indications that his 
financial problem is being resolved or is under control. He has not participated in 
financial counseling, and there is no documentary evidence he follows a budget. 
Considering the number of delinquent debts, the date the debts were acquired, the 
aggregate value of the debts, and the limited evidence of efforts to resolve his financial 
obligations, Applicant’s information is insufficient to establish that his financial problems 
are unlikely to recur. The remaining mitigating conditions are not reasonably raised by 
the facts in this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated in my whole-
person analysis my comments on the analysis of Guideline F. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant receives credit for his 
years of honorable service in the defense of the United States and for his good work for 
a government contractor. Additionally, he is a good brother who provides financial 
support for his siblings. These factors show some responsibility.  
 
Notwithstanding, security concerns remain about Applicant’s current financial 
responsibility. Applicant’s documentary evidence failed to show financial responsibility in 
the acquisition of the debts, good-faith efforts to resolve his financial problems in a 
timely manner, or a current track record of financial responsibility. His failure to address 
any of the SOR debts indicates he is probably financially overextended. The sparse 
mitigating record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising from his financial considerations.  
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
