 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 10-02109 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on March 24, 2009. On 
December 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 18, 2011, denied all the allegations in 
the SOR, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the 
 
2 
 
 
request on January 20, 2011. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on February 
25, 2011, and the case was assigned to me on March 2, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on March 17, 2011, scheduling the hearing for April 7, 2011. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 9 were admitted without 
objection. Applicant testified but did not present any witnesses or documentary 
evidence. I kept the record open until April 29, 2011, to enable him to present 
documentary evidence. He timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through D, 
which were admitted without objection, Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX 
A through D are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on April 18, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old communications technician employed by a defense 
contractor since July 2006. He worked as a network technician for another defense 
contractor before his current job. He served on active duty in the U.S. Air Force from 
June 1991 to November 2002. He served in the Air National Guard from November 
2002 to January 2004 and in the U.S. Air Force Reserve from January 2004 to 
November 2008. He received a security clearance in July 1991. (GX 2 at 8.) 
 
 Applicant married in November 1992, divorced in September 1997, and had one 
child during this marriage. He married again in September 1998, divorced in September 
2002, and had two children during this marriage. (GX 2 at 3-4.) Applicant had a 
relationship with another woman from June 2000 to June 2003, and they had one child. 
He had a relationship with another woman from April 2004 to August 2008 and they had 
one child. He pays child support for the two children from his second marriage, and his 
payments are current. (Tr. 37.) He has joint custody of his oldest child and has no 
financial obligations for his support. (GX 2 at 3-7.) His oldest son, now age 18, lives with 
him. (Tr. 37-38.)  
 
Applicant told a security investigator in September 2009 that two states were 
garnishing his pay for child support but that his payments were current. (GX 2 at 7.) This 
child support obligation arose from the birth of a son in November 2002, after his 
second divorce. He was making payments to the child support enforcement office in his 
former state of residence, but he and the mother of his child had moved to another 
state, and the mother did not receive the payments. The child’s mother obtained a child 
support order in their new state of residence, the child support records were transferred 
to the new state, and the records of the new state now reflect that Applicant’s payments 
are current. (Tr. 56-59; AX C.) Applicant’s most recent credit report, which was attached 
to his answer to the SOR, reports only the child support account in the new state. One 
credit reporting agency reports a zero balance and no past due payments, one agency 
reports that the account is closed, and the third agency reports that the account is past 
due. SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c allege delinquent child support payments in both the old state 
and the new state. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant testified that he enrolled in a college course but did not attend any 
classes because he received deployment orders and withdrew from the course before 
the classes began. The college charged him for the course, and the debt is alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c. He testified that the state tax liens alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i and 1.m are for the 
college tuition, but he submitted no documentation showing the connection. (Tr. 87.) He 
testified that he is disputing the debt, but he provided no documentation of the basis for 
the dispute or the actions taken to resolve it. (Tr. 39, 63-66.) 
 
 The table below summarizes the evidence concerning the delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR. 
 
SOR Debt Amount Status Evidence 
1.a Credit card $559 Amount disputed; 
unresolved 
GX 9 at 1; CBR1 at 4; 
Tr. 51-56 
1.b Child support $11,223 Account is current AX B; GX 2 at 7; 
CBR at 7; Tr. 56-59 
1.c College tuition $1,446 Disputed; 
unresolved  
GX 7 at 2; CBR at 13;  
Tr. 63-66  
1.d Credit card  
(collection) 
$1,191 Disputed; 
unresolved 
GX 7 at 3; CBR at 12; 
Tr. 66-69 
1.e Credit card  
(collection) 
$2,106 Unresolved GX 7 at 3; CBR at 12 
1.f Voluntary car 
repossession 
$15,274 Unresolved GX 9 at 2; AX D;  
CBR at 9;Tr. 76-78 
1.g Credit card $302 Duplicate of SOR ¶ 
1.a (same account 
number) 
GX 9 at 1; CBR at 2 
1.h Credit card $1,837 Unresolved GX 9 at 1; CBR at 3 
1.i State tax lien $3,425 Unresolved GX 7 at 2; CBR at 13 
1.j Penalty for lease 
termination 
(judgment) 
$1,283 Being paid by  
garnishment 
GX 6 at 4; AX A 
1.k Utility bill 
(collection) 
$190 Paid GX 6 at 4; AX C 
1.l Child support $2,806 Same debt as SOR 
¶ 1.b 
AX B; GX 2 at 7; CBR at 7; 
Tr. 56-59 
1.m State tax lien $4,939 Duplicate 
of SOR ¶ 1.i 
GX 7 at 2; CBR at 13 
 
 Applicant consulted with a debt management agency but concluded that he 
paying an agency was a waste of money. He decided to resolve his debts himself. (Tr. 
93-94.) 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant submitted a consolidated credit report from all three credit reporting agencies, dated January 
3, 2011, with his Answer to the SOR. It is listed as “CBR” in this table. 
 
4 
 
 
 In July 2000, while Applicant was in the Air Force, he was disqualified from 
aviation service for “failure to maintain or attain professional aircrew qualification.” This 
action is alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a. (GX 4.) He testified that he was disqualified because his 
security clearance was revoked. (Tr. 30-31, 48.) There is no documentation in the 
record reflecting the factual basis for his disqualification or a revocation of his clearance. 
He answered “No” to question 26b on his security clearance application, asking if he 
had ever had a clearance denied, suspended or revoked. (GX 1 at 9.) He testified that 
his clearance was restored when he joined the Air National Guard. (Tr. 48.) 
 
 In August 2000, Applicant received nonjudicial punishment under the provisions 
of Article 15, Uniform Code of Military Justice, 10 U.S.C. § 815, for violating two “no-
contact” orders, one to have no contact with the woman to whom he was then married 
and another to have no contact with a woman to whom he was not married. His 
punishment was a reduction in rank, a reprimand, and suspended forfeitures of pay. He 
did not appeal his punishment. (GX 5.) This action is alleged in SOR ¶ 2.b. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
 
5 
 
 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges 13 delinquent debts. Applicant denied all the debts in his 
answer to the SOR, but the debts are established by his credit reports and other 
documentary evidence presented by Department Counsel. The concern under this 
guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Applicant’s financial history raises two disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c) “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.” Thus, the burden shifted to him to mitigate 
the security concerns raised by his financial history. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing, 
numerous, and did not occur under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant was divorced twice and 
incurred child support obligations, and his child support obligations from his two 
marriages appear to be current. His current child support obligation arose from a 
voluntary relationship after his second divorce, which was a situation under his control. I 
conclude that this mitigating condition is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
enrolled in a debt management program but abandoned it. There is no evidence that he 
has received financial management counseling. His financial situation is not under 
control. I conclude that this mitigating condition is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999).  
 
 A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a 
procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) An applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant 
need only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008).  
 
 Applicant encountered some accounting problems with his child support 
payments when he moved from one state to another, but those problems appear to be 
resolved. The judgment to collect a penalty for early lease termination, alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.j, is being collected by garnishment rather than voluntary payments. He paid the 
delinquent utility bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) is established for 
 
7 
 
 
the child support alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.l, and the utility bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k, 
but not for the other debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
denied all the debts in his answer to the SOR and disputed several at the hearing. He 
provided documentation showing the basis for the disputed child support payments and 
the utility bill, but he produced no documentation of the basis for the disputes regarding 
the other debts. I conclude that this mitigating condition is established for the child 
support payments alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.l and the utility bill alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k, 
but not for the remaining debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
 When the same conduct is alleged twice in the SOR under the same guideline, 
one of the duplicative allegations should be resolved in Applicant=s favor. See ISCR 
Case No. 03-04704 (App. Bd. Sep. 21, 2005) at 3 (same debt alleged twice). The same 
credit card debt is alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.g; the same child support obligation is 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.l; and the same tax lien is alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.m. I 
will resolve the duplication by resolving SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.i, and 1.l in Applicant’s favor.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant was disqualified from aviation service duty while 
in the Air Force (SOR ¶ 2.a) and was punished for disobeying an order (SOR ¶ 2.b). 
The documentary evidence establishes both of these allegations. 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15: “Conduct involving 
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules 
and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and 
ability to protect classified information. . . .” 
 The evidence establishes that Applicant was disqualified from aviation service 
duty, but there is no evidence that the disqualification was based on conduct having 
security significance. Applicant testified that his disqualification was based on 
revocation of his security clearance, but the record contains no documentation of a 
revocation and no indication of the basis for a revocation. I resolve SOR ¶ 2.a in 
Applicant’s favor.  
 
 On the other hand, the record of Applicant’s nonjudicial punishment reflects 
misconduct sufficient to raise a security concern. The following disqualifying conditions 
under this guideline are relevant: 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
 
8 
 
 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations; and  
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
 Applicant’s disobedience of a no-contact order was a single incident that 
happened 11 years ago. As such, it does not reflect a “pattern” of rule violations, but it 
does suggest an unwillingness to follow rules. In light of the low quantum of proof 
required by the Directive to raise a disqualifying condition, I conclude that AG ¶ 16(d) is 
raised by his punishment for disobedience. 
 Applicant’s professional reputation in the military community might have been 
adversely affected at the time of his punishment, but it is unlikely that a military 
disciplinary action would affect his reputation 11 years later in the civilian community. 
However, the underlying conduct, an inappropriate extramarital relationship, might affect 
his reputation among civilians. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 16(e) is raised. 
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). I conclude 
that this mitigating condition is raised because the conduct was an isolated episode that 
happened 11 years ago. No other enumerated mitigating conditions are relevant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
9 
 
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in 
AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult with a long record of military and civilian service. He 
has held a security clearance for many years. While he has a history of multiple 
marriages and relationships, he appears devoted to his children. On the other hand, he 
also has a long history of financial neglect. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and E, and evaluating all the evidence in the 
context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the personal conduct 
concerns, but he has not mitigated the security concerns based on financial 
considerations. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.c-1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h;     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.k-1.l:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
