                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-03911 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations and Personal Conduct 
concerns. He is indebted to four creditors for over $16,000 and failed to show that his 
financial problems are under control. He falsified his security clearance application by 
failing to disclose his debts that were in collection status. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 8, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
made a preliminary determination to deny Applicant access to classified information. 
DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which set forth the security concerns of 
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct), as the 
basis for its decision.1  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 On December 10, 2010, Applicant submitted his initial Answer to the SOR. He 
admitted all the allegations under Guideline F, but failed to respond to the Guideline E 
allegations. On January 13, 2011, Applicant submitted his second Answer to the SOR, 
wherein he admitted all the allegations in the SOR. He affirmatively waived his right to a 
hearing and requested that a decision be made on the administrative record.  
 
On February 7, 2011, Department Counsel filed its File of Relevant Material 
(FORM). The FORM contains Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10. Applicant filed a 
Response to the FORM (Response), which was received by DOHA on March 15, 2011. 
Neither side objected to the other’s submissions. Accordingly, GE 1 – 10 and 
Applicant’s Response are admitted.2 The case was assigned to me on May 18, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 54 years old. In 2007, his wife passed away. He has two adult 
children. From 1981 to the present, he has primarily worked as a security guard. In 
1992, he received certification as an emergency medical technician. He was first 
granted a security clearance in 1995. He has been with his present employer since May 
2009 and has been renting a room at $600 per month since September 2009.3 
 
 On February 12, 2010, Applicant completed and certified as “true, complete, and 
correct to the best of [his] knowledge and belief” a security clearance application (SCA). 
Section 26 of the application asked Applicant to disclose his derogatory financial 
information, including debts that had been “turned over to a collection agency” or were 
“currently over 90 days delinquent”. Applicant denied he had any bad debts to report. 
On February 25, 2010, the government secured a credit report. This report revealed that 
Applicant had several accounts in collection status, including the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.i. The dates of last activity on these four accounts range from 
April 2007 to November 2009.4  
  
 On March 16, 2010, Applicant was interviewed by an agent from the Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant denied he had intentionally failed to disclose 
his delinquent debts on his SCA. Applicant explained his bad debts and failure to 
disclose these debts as follows: 
 
Subject attributed his collections accounts to his lack of steady full-time 
work. Subject has worked in the security field for the past thirteen years, 
2 The Government requested that I take administrative notice of GE 10, which is the Equifax 
Training Brochure that “explains how to read Equifax credit reports.” (FORM at 4). Department Counsel 
failed to cite to any authority for this position, and I find that GE 10 is not suitable for administrative notice. 
See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at n. 1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007) (examples of matters that are proper for 
administrative notice). However, I have admitted GE 10 as evidence. 
 
3 GE 5; GE 8. 
 
4 GE 5 (SCA, at 45 and Signature Page); GE 6 at 5-8; GE 8 (3/10 Subject Interview); GE 10. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
but has work (sic) primarily part-time over the years. Subject has made 
efforts to pay his collections accounts as he can based on his income. 
Subject estimated that he has been late on his accounts for the past 
thirteen years, but had always managed to make the payments before 
they were sent to collections agencies. In 01/2007, Subject wife passed 
away and Subject became overwhelmed with her passing. Subject ignored 
correspondences from his creditors who eventually sent his accounts to 
collections agencies. Subject acknowledged that he has received 
correspondences from the collections agencies over the years . . .5 
 
At the end of the interview, Applicant noted he had hired a private company to dispute 
several of the bad debts appearing on his credit report and promised to resolve his 
financial delinquencies.6 
 
In his Response, Applicant again denied intentionally omitting his adverse 
financial information from the SCA. Applicant claims he was being rushed to complete 
the application by his employer and negligently failed to disclose the adverse financial 
information. He was also rushing to complete the SCA because the job he was applying 
for was a full-time job versus the part-time jobs he had primarily held in the past.7 
 
 The SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts totaling $19,756. Applicant submitted proof 
that he disputed seven of the debts with the credit reporting agency and they were 
deleted from his credit report.8 The remaining four accounts, SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 
1.i, total $16,558. Applicant has filed disputes with the credit reporting agency as to 
each of these debts. The medical debt in ¶ 1.c for $11,377 and the delinquent phone bill 
in ¶ 1.i for $4,844 make up the largest portion of the total amount outstanding. Applicant 
did not submit any proof to substantiate his dispute as to these debts or any document 
showing that he has addressed these four debts directly with the creditors. The debts in 
¶¶ 1.c, 1.d and 1.e are still listed on his February 2011 credit report. No evidence was 
submitted as to why the debt in ¶ 1.i is no longer being reported.9 
 
5 GE 8 (3/10 Subject Interview at 1-2). 
 
6 Id. at 2. 
 
7 Response [“At the time of when I was doing my (SCA) I was under pressure to hurry up and get 
my (SCA ) done so I could go to work . . . at the time of doing the (SCA) I was rushing thew (sic) as fast 
as I could and didn’t mean to answer these questions (in Section 26 with a negative response) . . . in no 
way would I have on perpose (sic) lied I was just hurried and pressured by [ ] security to hurry up and get 
it done or (I) would not be getting to work . . .”].  
 
8 Compare, GE 6, Trade Section, at 5-7, with, GE 3 (12/10 Credit Report at 1-3) ( credit agency 
removes debts alleged in SOR ¶¶1.a, 1.b, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, and 1.k). See also, GE 8. 
 
9 GE 9. See also, GE 3; GE 4; GE 8. 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19. Applicant 
owes over $16,000 in delinquent debt. He is unable or unwilling to satisfy his debts. AG 
¶ 19(a) and (c) are established.10 
 
 Guideline F also lists a number of mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20. I have 
considered all the mitigating conditions, and find that the following are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due 
debt and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute. 
 
 Applicant disputed the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, 1.j, and 1.k 
with the credit reporting agency and these debts have been deleted from his credit 
report. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to these debts, and I find in favor of Applicant as to these 
10 “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and (c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
debts. However, Applicant failed to submit any evidence to substantiate his dispute as 
to the remaining four debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.i, which total 
$16,558.11 AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to these four debts. 
 
 In analyzing an applicant’s debts vis-à-vis the concern of Guideline F, the Appeal 
Board has held that: 
 
[A]n applicant is not required to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for 
paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is 
that an applicant act responsibly given his circumstances and develop a 
reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by ‘concomitant conduct,’ 
that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.12  
 
Applicant failed to establish that he has acted responsibly under the 
circumstances and that his financial problems are under control. His wife’s passing in 
2007 and his inability to gain full-time employment until 2009 were clearly matters 
beyond his control that contributed to his financial situation. However, Applicant 
admitted during his background interview that he would regularly ignore notices from his 
creditors and has not presented any evidence that he has satisfied or contacted the 
creditors for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.i. The collection accounts in SOR 
¶¶ 1.d and 1.e are for past-due utility bills and together total just $337. Applicant failed 
to explain why he could not satisfy these relatively minor debts when he has been 
employed full time since 2009. Although he is apparently living a somewhat frugal 
lifestyle, he has not taken a financial counseling course and failed to demonstrate that 
his financial problem is under control. Applicant failed to establish any of the mitigating 
conditions under Guideline F, except for those debts removed from his credit report, as 
noted above. Applicant failed to mitigate the Guideline F concern. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information.  
 
 The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern under AG ¶ 16. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions and find that 
the following warrants discussion:  
 
11 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. July 30, 2008) (an applicant is expected to present 
documentation to substantiate their claim about the debts at issue). 
 
12 ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 9, 2009). 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or 
award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 The security clearance process is contingent upon the honesty of all applicants 
seeking access to classified information, and begins with the answers provided in the 
security questionnaire. An applicant should err on the side of over-inclusiveness and, 
when in doubt, disclose any potential derogatory information that is responsive to a 
question in the questionnaire. However, the omission of material, adverse information 
standing alone is not enough to establish that an applicant intentionally falsified their 
security questionnaire. Instead, an Administrative Judge must examine the facts and 
circumstances surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.13 
 
 Applicant intentionally falsified his SCA when he omitted his delinquent debts that 
were in collection status. Applicant admitted that he would regularly ignore delinquency 
notices from his creditors. During his March 2010 interview, he admitted that he was 
aware that he was at least 13 months late on several debts. This is just a month after 
completing his SCA where he failed to disclose any derogatory financial information in 
response to the detailed questions in Section 26. Applicant has previously been granted 
a clearance and, thus, should have been aware of the importance of providing truthful, 
complete, and accurate information on a security questionnaire. I did not find his 
explanation of purportedly being rushed by his employer credible. He failed to list any 
derogatory financial information on his SCA because he needed a full-time job.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 sets forth several conditions that could potentially mitigate the Personal 
Conduct security concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 
17, but only the following is relevant:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the fact. 
 
 Applicant continues to deny he falsified his SCA. His dishonesty on the SCA and 
continued failure to admit his dishonest conduct calls into question his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. Applicant failed to establish 
AG ¶ 17(a) and to mitigate the Personal Conduct security concern.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
13 ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (“In the case of an omission in a SCA or 
some other document, the Government’s burden of production requires more than merely showing that 
the omission occurred. Rather, the Government must present substantial evidence that the omission was 
deliberate.”). 
 
8 
 
 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Applicant has been faced with several challenges that have affected his ability to 
meet his financial obligations. It appears that he has started down the right path, but he 
failed to address even the most minor debts that are still outstanding. Applicant’s 
favorable whole-person factors do not mitigate the serious security concerns raised by 
his conduct, not the least of which was his decision to deliberately falsify his SCA.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h,1.j, and 1.k: For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.c, 1.d, 1.e, and 1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
 
