                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-06025 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant used marijuana twice in 2008, while working for a Government 
contractor in a foreign country, and after he was granted access to classified information 
at the secret level in 2002. His behavior is not recent, it was an isolated incident, and it 
occurred under circumstances that make it unlikely to recur. He acknowledged his 
questionable behavior, reduced his vulnerability to exploitation, and submitted a written 
statement of intent with automatic revocation of his security clearance for any future 
violation. His questionable behavior does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
judgment, and his ability and willingness to comply with the law and follow rules. He 
mitigated the Guidelines H and E security clearance concerns. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on October 13, 2009. 
After reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
On March 14, 2011, DOHA issued Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR) 
alleging security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and E (Personal 
Conduct) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2  
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on March 23, 2011. He requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2011. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 23, 2011, convening a hearing on June 8, 
2011. At the hearing, the Government offered four exhibits (GE 1 through 4). Applicant 
testified and presented one exhibit (AE 1), post-hearing. All exhibits were received 
without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on June 13, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR factual allegations with explanations. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence of record, his answers to the SOR and interrogatories, and his demeanor and 
testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old certified electrician working with a Government 
contractor since June 2008. He graduated from high school in May 2000, and 
completed his electrician certification in May 2005. Applicant married his wife in October 
2005, and they were divorced in 2010. He has no children.  
 
Applicant has worked with several Government contractors since July 2000. He 
submitted his first SCA around October 2000. He was granted access to classified 
information at the secret level in April 2002. There is no evidence to show that he has 
ever compromised or caused others to compromise classified or proprietary information.  
 
In December 2008, Applicant was working with his current employer, performing 
electrician duties in a U.S. Government facility located in Amsterdam. While off duty, 
Applicant visited an Amsterdam coffee shop where he purchased and smoked two 
marijuana cigarettes. At the time, he possessed access to classified information at the 
secret level.  
 
Applicant testified he never used marijuana, or any other illegal drugs, before or 
after December 2008. He experimented with marijuana in Amsterdam because he 
believed the use of marijuana was legal in that country. The marijuana was sold, and he 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DoD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
used it, in a public establishment. He testified that he has never associated with, and 
does not currently associate with, people who use illegal drugs. 
 
Applicant submitted an SCA in October 2009. Section 23 of the SCA asked 
whether in the last seven years he had: (a) illegally (emphasis added) used any 
controlled substance (including marijuana); (b) ever illegally used a controlled 
substance while possessing a security clearance; (c) been involved in the illegal 
possession or purchase of an controlled substance; and (d) received counseling or 
treatment as the result of his use of drugs. Applicant answered “No” to the above 
questions, and did not disclose his December 2008 use of marijuana in Amsterdam 
while possessing a security clearance.  
 
In May 2010, Applicant participated in a security clearance background interview. 
During the interview, he was asked whether he had illegally used marijuana. He 
answered “No.” The investigator then asked Applicant whether he used marijuana 
during his 2008 trip to Amsterdam. Applicant answered “Yes,” and he disclosed his 
marijuana use as described above.  
 
Applicant believed that his December 2008 use of marijuana in Amsterdam was 
not wrongful or illegal because the use of marijuana is legal in Amsterdam. He 
purchased and used the marijuana in a public place. He did not disclose his 2008 
marijuana use in his SCA, because Section 23 asked whether he had illegally 
(emphasis added) possessed, purchased, or use marijuana. Applicant believes he 
truthfully answered the SCA questions. He also was truthful and forthcoming with the 
investigator when he disclosed he used marijuana in 2008. 
 
At his hearing, Applicant acknowledged that he knew marijuana is a controlled 
substance, and that it is illegal to purchase and use marijuana in the United States. He 
also acknowledged knowing that the use of marijuana, or any illegal drug, is a concern 
to the U.S. Government because of the drug activity and drug use questions asked in 
the several SCAs he completed since 2000.  
 
Applicant testified that he finally realized it was not smart for him to use 
marijuana in Amsterdam. He also acknowledged that he should have disclosed in his 
October 2009 SCA, that he used marijuana while in Amsterdam in 2008. He apologized 
about his questionable behavior in 2008, and for not disclosing his marijuana use in his 
2009 SCA. Applicant testified he is committed to never using any illegal drugs ever 
again. He submitted a written statement of intent with automatic revocation of his 
security clearance for any future violation. (AE 1) He disclosed his marijuana use to his 
parents, friends, and supervisors as a result of the pending security clearance hearing. 
Applicant believes that his performance during the last 10 years, and his honesty 
through the security clearance process, including his disclosure of marijuana use to the 
Government investigator, demonstrate his integrity and that he is trustworthy.  
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole-person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant used marijuana twice during his 2008 trip to Amsterdam, after he was 
granted access to classified information at the secret level in 2002. Although marijuana 
use is legal in Amsterdam, marijuana is a controlled substance and a mood and 
behavior altering substance. Applicant knew that the use of marijuana was illegal in the 
United States, and that the Federal government is concerned about the abuse of any 
drug by personnel possessing a security clearance.  
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Three drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise a security concern and are disqualifying in this particular case: AG ¶ 
25(a) “any drug abuse,”3 AG ¶ 25(c) “illegal drug possession . . . purchase, sale, or 
distribution,” and AG ¶ 25(g) “any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance.”  
 
Applicant’s use of marijuana was limited to two isolated incidents in Amsterdam 
in December 2008. There is no evidence to show that Applicant used any illegal drugs 
prior to, or after December 2008, or that he has ever associated with any illegal drug 
users. As such, his use is not recent, and it could be considered an isolated incident. 
His use of marijuana occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. He 
 
3  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: (1) Drugs, 
materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
6 
 
 
is no longer assigned to Amsterdam. Moreover, Applicant now understands that even if 
his use of marijuana was legal in another country, it still creates a security clearance 
concern that could make him ineligible for a security clearance. He submitted a written 
statement of intent with automatic revocation of his security clearance for any violation.  
AG ¶¶ 26(a): “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on 
the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;” and 26(b): “a 
demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) disassociation 
from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or avoiding the environment 
where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed 
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation,” apply. The 
two remaining mitigating conditions are not raised by the facts in this case. 
Considering the evidence as a whole, Applicant’s past questionable behavior 
does not cast doubts on his current reliability, judgment, and his ability and willingness 
to comply with the law. Applicant mitigated the Guideline H security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant was 26 years old when he used marijuana in Amsterdam in 2008. He 
had been working for Government contractors since 2000, and he was granted access 
to classified information at the secret level in 2002. He became a certified electrician in 
2005. Although Applicant believed his marijuana use was legal in Amsterdam, he knew 
that marijuana use was illegal in the United States, and that the use of marijuana would 
create security concerns with the U.S. Government. 
Applicant’s behavior triggered the applicability of disqualifying condition: AG ¶ 
16(e): “personal conduct . . . that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another country, engaging 
in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is legal in that country but illegal in the 
United States and may serve as a basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign 
security or intelligence service or other group.”  
 For the same reasons discussed under Guideline H (incorporated herein), I find 
that Applicant mitigated the Guideline E security concerns. Applicant’s use of marijuana 
 
7 
 
 
in Amsterdam was legal. His use was limited to two isolated incidents in 2008. There is 
no evidence to show that Applicant used any illegal drugs prior to or after December 
2008, or that he has ever associated with any illegal drug users. As such, his use is not 
recent, and could be considered an isolated incident.  
 
Moreover, Applicant now understands that even if his use of marijuana is legal in 
another country, it still would create a security clearance concern that could make him 
ineligible for a security clearance. He has acknowledged his questionable behavior and 
promised never to use marijuana again. He submitted a written statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of his security clearance for any future violation. He also reduced 
his vulnerability to possible exploitation when he disclosed his use of marijuana to his 
parents, friends, and supervisors. Applicant’s questionable behavior occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. Applicant’s 2008 marijuana use does not 
cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment, or in his ability and 
willingness to comply with the law, rules, and regulations. AG ¶¶ 17(c), (d), and (e) 
apply. 
 
  SOR ¶ 2.a alleged that Applicant falsified his SCA when he failed to disclose his 
2008 marijuana use in his answer to Section 23b (asking: “Have you ever illegally used 
a controlled substance while possessing a security clearance”). (emphasis added) 
Applicant’s 2008 marijuana use was legal in Amsterdam. Thus, he believed he did not 
have to disclose his 2008 marijuana use. Applicant answered the question that was 
asked, and he did not intend to falsify his SCA. 
 
  In reaching this conclusion, I considered that during his May 2010 interview 
Applicant was honest and forthcoming with the Government investigator. Applicant was 
asked whether he had illegally used marijuana, and he answered “No.” Then, he was 
asked whether he used marijuana during his 2008 trip to Amsterdam, and Applicant 
answered “Yes.” Applicant then cooperated with the investigator and disclosed his use 
of marijuana as described above. Applicant also was forthcoming at his hearing. He 
made the mistake of using marijuana, but I find that he did not intend to falsify his SCA. 
SOR ¶ 2.a is decided for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated in my whole-
person analysis my comments on the analysis of Guidelines H and E. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s marijuana use while 
holding a security clearance violated the trust placed in him by the U.S. Government. It 
shows a lack of reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
Applicant is a technically proficient and valuable employee with over 10 years 
working for Government contractors. He receives credit for disclosing his marijuana use 
during his 2010 background interview, and for cooperating in the security clearance 
process. He expressed regret for his questionable behavior, and promised to remain 
abstinent. His marijuana use is a remote, isolated incident that occurred under 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur. His past questionable behavior does not cast 
doubt on his current ability and willingness to comply with the law, rules, and 
regulations. On balance, the record evidence convinces me of Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
