 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 10-00413 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Bradford  Westin III, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guidelines B (foreign 
influence), E (personal conduct), and H (drug involvement). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 13, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1
 
 On June 28, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guidelines B (foreign influence), E (personal conduct), and H (drug 
involvement) for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs after 
September 1, 2006.  
                                                          
1 Applicant had previously submitted an e-QIP dated January 30, 2008. (GE 1.) 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on July 17, 2010. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on August 31, 2010. The case was assigned to me on 
September 1, 2010. On September 20, 2010, DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
scheduling the hearing for October 14, 2010. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant did not offer any exhibits, but did testify on 
his own behalf. I held the record open until October 28, 2010 to afford the Applicant an 
opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted Applicant 
Exhibits (AE) A through F, which were received without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 22, 2010. The record closed on October 28, 2010. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning 
Afghanistan. Department Counsel provided supporting documents to show detail and 
context for those facts. Applicant did not object, and I granted Department Counsel’s 
request. (Tr. 26-28, Exhibit I (1-7).) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government 
reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing 
fifteen types of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations.  
 
I note that English is Applicant’s second language and as his counsel 
explained, “.  . . my client speaks English relatively well. He understands it less well.” 
(Tr. 25.) When Applicant was specifically queried on that point by his counsel, i.e. 
whether he understood English “relatively well enough” to be understood in the 
hearing, he answered in the affirmative. (Tr. 30.) I further note that Applicant had 
difficulty responding to questions and on occasion his answers were non-responsive 
or difficult to understand requiring further clarification. I did not detect that he was 
being intentionally non-responsive or deceptive, but rather was experiencing difficulty 
comprehending the questions or was having difficulty providing verbal responses. 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old linguist, who has been employed by a defense 
contractor since February 2009. Before being recruited as a linguist, he was employed 
as a tow truck driver at his brother’s tire store from April 2008 to February 2009. 
Applicant speaks four languages – Pashto, Farsi, Urdu, and English. He seeks a 
security clearance which is a condition of his employment. (GE 7, Tr. 55-57, 76-77, 
144-145.) Applicant is currently driving a taxi for a living pending his prospective job as 
a linguist. (Tr. 101-102.) 
 
 Applicant completed the equivalent of high school in Afghanistan and 
graduated in September 1977. He immigrated to the United States in 1986 in a 
refugee status, and joined his parents and other siblings who were already residing in 
the United States. (GE 9, Tr. 41, 61, 63-64.) He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 
August 1996, and his most recent U.S. passport was issued in June 2007. Applicant 
married his wife in the United States in April 1994. She, like him, was born in 
Afghanistan. She became a naturalized U.S. citizen in November 2007. Applicant and 
his wife have four minor children. All of his children are U.S. citizens. (GE 7, Tr. 57-60, 
62-63.) 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 Several security issues were identified under this concern based on Applicant’s 
immediate Afghan family connections, his having a relative in Afghanistan, that a 
purported former Taliban member was residing in his father’s home in Afghanistan, 
and that he was eligible to inherit a potentially large interest in property located in 
Afghanistan. As the evidence developed, these concerns were either mitigated or 
refuted. 
 
Applicant comes from a large Afghan family consisting of his parents and ten 
children. The SOR alleged that Applicant had two brothers who are citizens of 
Afghanistan and reside in the United States. (SOR ¶ 1c.) (SOR Response, GE 9.) His 
father passed away in June 2010, four months before his hearing. Foreign influence 
concerns as they pertain to Applicant’s father are no longer pertinent. (SOR ¶ 1a.) (GE 
1, Tr. 33-34, 60.)  
 
Applicant, his parents, and his siblings were all born in Afghanistan. The 
majority of Applicant’s siblings spent their formative years in Afghanistan. (GE 4, Tr. 
17.) Applicant’s parents immigrated to the United States approximately 28 years ago 
in 1983. His father was a mechanic and his mother was a homemaker during her adult 
life. Although Applicant’s mother is still living, she is 70 years old and in poor health. 
(GE 1, Tr. 33, 80-81.) His parents did not become U.S. citizens after immigrating to 
the United States, but did hold valid “green cards.” After immigrating to the United 
States, Applicant’s parents returned to Afghanistan only one time for a one-month 
family visit in “1995 or 1996.” (GE 9, Tr. 34.) All of Applicant’s siblings live in the 
United States. (GE 9.) 
 
4 
 
 
 
The SOR correctly states that two of Applicant’s brothers are citizens of 
Afghanistan and residents of the United States. (SOR ¶ 1c.) However, of the ten 
siblings, eight are U.S. citizens. (SOR Answer, Tr. 72, 94-97.) One of Applicant’s 
brothers (B1) has been serving as a linguist in Afghanistan with U.S. Special Forces 
since April 2008. B1 holds a “high clearance” and has been in-country since April 2008 
except for two-week vacations every six months. B1 did return to the United States for 
a brief visit in June 2010 to attend his father’s funeral. B1 owns a tire store and a 
younger brother (B2) manages B1’s tire business, discussed infra. (Tr. 65-71.) 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant has a “friend,” who is a citizen and resident of 
Afghanistan. (SOR ¶ 1e.) Applicant stated that he is at a loss to respond to this 
allegation because he does not know what “friend” the SOR refers to. He added that 
any friend he might have is loyal to the United States. He surmised that the SOR may 
be referring to his mother’s brother (his uncle), who Applicant and his family in the 
United States send “a couple of hundred dollars each year.”(SOR ¶ 1d.) Applicant 
described his uncle as elderly and destitute and the money his family sends him is for 
food and shelter. (SOR Answer, Tr. 38-40, 83.) 
 
Applicant’s grandfather used to own property in Afghanistan before he died. To 
the best of Applicant’s knowledge, several different groups in power may have lived on 
the property. In any event, Applicant had no control over who occupied the property 
nor did he have control over the duration of their stay. Applicant described his 
grandfather’s house as “not large and not on 6,000 acres and not worth $36,000,000.” 
Furthermore, Applicant has no inheritance rights to the property that his grandfather 
owned nor does he own any property in Afghanistan. (Tr. 83-94.) 
 
The SOR alleges that a former Taliban member resides in Applicant’s father’s 
home in Afghanistan and that Applicant may possibly inherit an interest in 6,000 acres 
in Afghanistan valued at approximately $36 million. (SOR ¶¶ 1f and 1e.) The source 
document that formed the basis of these allegations is a Counterintelligence (CI) and 
Security Screening Questionnaire and Expansion of Information of SF85/86 prepared 
in January 2008. (GE 2, GE 3.) The originator of these forms is unknown. The forms 
purport to provide answers that Applicant gave in response to questions; however, 
they do not bear the identity of the person or persons responsible for preparing the 
forms nor do they have any authenticating signatures. Their probative value is of 
limited application given the fact that Applicant has submitted credible evidence 
countering the accuracy of material contained in the forms. 
 
Applicant’s father did not own a home in Afghanistan before he died. No 
member or former member of the Taliban lived or lives in a home belonging to 
Applicant’s father in Afghanistan because his father did not own a home there. 
Applicant further stated that no one lives with his grandfather in Afghanistan. (SOR 
Answer, Tr. 35-37.)    
 
 
5 
 
 
Before immigrating to the United States, Applicant fought with the Mujahedeen 
“Freedom Fighters” from 1977 to 1986 against the Soviet Union. (GE 9, Tr. 41-42, 73.) 
He stated he was a commander with “150 people under (his) command.” Applicant 
described his method of fighting as a Mujahedeen as “guerilla war, guerilla fight” in 
which his forces wintered over in Pakistan and brought the fight against the Soviets to 
Afghanistan during the warmer weather months. (Tr. 141-144.) 
 
All of Applicant’s assets are in the United States. He owns three separate real 
properties and conducts all of his banking in the United States. (AE A – F, Tr. 102-
103.) He is registered to vote in the United States, and exercises all of his rights as a 
U.S. citizen. Although Applicant was born in Afghanistan, he considers the United 
States to be his home.   
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR lists five separate falsification allegations. First, Applicant is alleged to 
have falsified his January 2008 e-QIP when asked whether he had ever been charged 
with or convicted of any offenses related to alcohol or drugs. He answered “no” to this 
question. The Government produced credible evidence, i.e. FBI arrest record, which 
indicated that: (1) Applicant had been arrested in January 1989 and charged with 
unlawful possession of marijuana; and (2) Applicant had been arrested in September 
1993 and charged with possession of a narcotic controlled substance and the charge 
was dismissed for lack of sufficient evidence. (SOR ¶¶ 2a and 2b.) (Tr. 117-118, 131-
133.) 
 
 Regarding the January 1989 arrest, Applicant explained the circumstances 
surrounding this purported arrest. He stated that the police found “a little piece of 
marijuana” in the uniform he had been issued as a security guard. He also stated the 
police had a warrant for his arrest for a speeding ticket and remembered being placed 
in handcuffs, but adamantly asserted that he was not arrested. (Tr. 43-48.) His SOR 
Answer provided a similar explanation, but added that he retained a private attorney 
who enrolled him in a “Deferred Entry of Judgment” program and the charge was 
dismissed. (SOR Answer, Tr. 113-115.) 
 
 Regarding the September 1993 arrest, Applicant again explained the 
circumstances surrounding this purported arrest. He stated that he was driving a tow 
truck at the time and was pulled over for a defective turn signal. When stopped, he 
informed the police that he left his driver’s license at home. The police would not allow 
him to drive without a license and gave him a ride to the police station. The police 
searched the tow truck and found “marijuana or something.”  Applicant testified that 
there were other tow truck drivers who drove that truck and adamantly asserted that 
he was not arrested. (Tr. 48-54.) His SOR Answer provided a similar explanation. 
However, with regard to this arrest, Applicant provided an official court record from the 
county where the arrest purportedly occurred, i.e., Criminal Record Search Request, 
indicating that a record search on behalf of the Applicant was conducted in July 2010. 
 
6 
 
 
The record search confirmed that no arrest record was found pertaining to Applicant, 
thus corroborating his assertion. (SOR Answer, Tr. 116-118, 134-135.) 
 
 Second, Applicant is alleged to have falsified his January 2008 e-QIP when 
asked whether he had ever illegally used a controlled substance such as marijuana in 
the last seven years. He answered “no” to this question. (SOR ¶ 2b.) He indicated in 
his SOR Answer that he did not think that question included a single use of marijuana. 
Knowing what he knows now, he would have disclosed his single marijuana use. 
(SOR Answer.) When queried by Department Counsel on this point, Applicant stated, 
“my reading is not that much good [sic].” He added on redirect examination that he 
knew that he had already disclosed his marijuana use at the December 2007 
Christmas party stating, “Yeah. Because I – I don’t write that second batch because 
already they know my file there [sic].” (Tr. 111, 136-138.) 
 
 Third, the SOR alleges that Applicant falsified material facts when he initially 
reported that his first marijuana use in the United States occurred in December 2007 
in a January 2008 interview and purportedly later stated in the same interview that he 
uses marijuana approximately every two months. (SOR ¶ 2c.) See discussion supra, 
which discusses concerns regarding the contents of this interview. Applicant indicated 
in his SOR Answer that he admitted to the investigator that he had used a small 
amount of marijuana in December 2007. He added that he has not smoked marijuana 
in several years and does not intend to ever do so again. (SOR Answer.) He testified 
that he was at a Christmas party in December 2007 and had “one hit.” During 
questioning by Department Counsel, Applicant clarified that he did not smoke 
marijuana every two months and that the person who interviewed him in January 2008 
misunderstood him. Applicant added that he would not have passed his drug test for 
his current employer had he been smoking marijuana every two months. He further 
reiterated on cross-examination that his most recent drug use was limited to smoking 
marijuana, i.e.  single use, at a Christmas party in December 2007. (Tr. 108-110, 118-
123, 126-127, 136.) Applicant stated that he has not used drugs since then nor does 
he intend to use drugs in the future. 
 
 Fourth, Applicant is alleged to have falsified his February 2009 e-QIP when 
asked whether he had ever been charged with or convicted of any offenses related to 
alcohol or drugs. He answered “no” to this question. (SOR ¶ 2d.) See discussion 
under “First” paragraph supra. 
 
 Fifth,  Applicant is alleged to have falsified his February 2009 e-QIP when 
asked whether he had ever illegally used a controlled substance such as marijuana in 
the last seven years. He answered “no” to this question. (SOR ¶ 2e.) See discussion 
under “Second” paragraph supra. He added in his SOR Answer that he had already 
disclosed his marijuana use that he did not think he needed to disclose it again. (SOR 
Answer.) 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
 Applicant’s drug use is limited to a one-time marijuana use that occurred at a 
December 2007 Christmas party, discussed supra. 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 Applicant’s younger brother (B2) testified on his behalf. He manages his older 
brother’s (B1) tire store, who has been serving as a linguist for the U.S. Army in 
Afghanistan since 2008, discussed supra. B2 immigrated to the United States from 
Afghanistan when he was approximately two years old. B2 described his family as 
being very loyal to the United States. He discussed B1’s service in Afghanistan and 
corroborated the Applicant’s testimony and statements regarding family members. (Tr. 
149-160.) 
 
Afghanistan  
 
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia. It is approximately the size of 
Texas (249,935 square miles). Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran 
borders it on the west and Russia to the north. It is a rugged and mountainous country 
which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. In 2009, the population 
was about 28 million people with about 3,000,000 Afghans living outside Afghanistan.  
 
Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic with a democratically elected 
president. Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by 
the Soviet Union in 1979. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union 
withdrew from the country, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan and 
religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% of 
the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies.  
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, 
terrorists, including al-Qaida and the Taliban, continue to assert power and 
intimidation within the country. Safety and security are key issues because these 
terrorist organizations target United States and Afghan interests by suicide operations, 
bombings, assassinations, car-jackings, assaults, or hostage takings. At this time, the 
risk of terrorist activities remains extremely high. The country’s human rights record 
remains poor and violence is rampant. According to recent reports from the U.S. 
Department of State, insurgents continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of 
Americans and other Western nationals. Travel warnings are ongoing. No section of 
Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence. 
 
 
  
 
 
8 
 
 
The United States-Afghan relationship is summarized as follows: 
 
After the fall of the Taliban, the U.S. supported the emergence of a 
broad-based government, representative of all Afghans, and actively 
encouraged a [United Nations] role in the national reconciliation process 
in Afghanistan. The U.S. has made a long-term commitment to help 
Afghanistan rebuild itself after years of war. The U.S. and others in the 
international community currently provide resources and expertise to 
Afghanistan in a variety of areas, including humanitarian relief and 
assistance, capacity-building, security needs, counter-narcotic programs, 
and infrastructure projects. 
 
During his December 1, 2009 speech at West Point, President Barack 
Obama laid down the core of U.S. goals in Afghanistan, which are to 
disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al-Qaeda and its safe havens in Pakistan, 
and to prevent their return to Afghanistan. . . . The United States is 
willing to support fully the ambitious agenda set out by the recently re-
elected Afghan president, focusing on reintegration, economic 
development, improving relations with Afghanistan regional partners, 
and steadily increasing the security responsibilities of the Afghan 
security forces. 
 
U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, Mar. 26, 2010 (HE 4, 
enclosure I at 13). The United States has more combat troops deployed to 
Afghanistan than to any other foreign country. This extraordinary commitment to 
Afghanistan is balanced against the inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in 
Afghanistan to citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
 
9 
 
 
judge’s adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines B (foreign influence), E (personal conduct), and H 
(drug involvement). 
 
 
  
 
 
10 
 
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation 
to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire 
to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. Applicant, his parents, his wife, his siblings, and his 
uncle were all born in Afghanistan. His uncle, who is elderly, lives in Afghanistan. Two 
of his brothers are still citizens of Afghanistan, as well as his mother. Applicant and his 
family members send a modest amount of money to their elderly uncle living in 
Afghanistan on an annual basis. Applicant has frequent contact with his mother and 
siblings and to a lesser extent with his elderly uncle in Afghanistan. Applicant’s 
relationship with his family members, particularly with his brother serving as a linguist 
in Afghanistan, creates “a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion.”   
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in 
Afghanistan, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR 
Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
 
11 
 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations 
against the United States. The relationship of Afghanistan with the United States, 
places a significant, but not insurmountable, burden of persuasion on Applicant to 
demonstrate that his relationships with his family members living in Afghanistan do not 
pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be 
forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a family 
member living in Afghanistan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Afghanistan seek or 
have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his family, 
nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. International 
terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively as capable 
state intelligence services, and Afghanistan has an enormous problem with terrorism. 
Applicant’s relationship with family members living or residing in Afghanistan creates a 
potential conflict of interest because this relationship is sufficiently close to raise a 
security concern about his desire to assist family members in Afghanistan by providing 
sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence 
of Applicant’s contacts with his brother serving as a linguist and to a lesser extent his 
uncle and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. 
Also, there may be some overlap of Applicant’s brother serving as linguist in 
Afghanistan at the same time. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is 
necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions. Applicant 
successfully refuted the accuracy of allegations regarding a “friend,” who is a citizen 
and resident of Afghanistan, as well as allegations regarding a former Taliban member 
residing in his father’s home in Afghanistan, and his possible inheritance of property in 
Afghanistan. Further discussion of these allegations is not warranted. 
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns including: 
 
 
12 
 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business 
or are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats 
from persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant, along with other family 
members in the United States, send a modest amount of money to an elderly uncle in 
Afghanistan and Applicant’s brother is temporarily serving as a linguist in Afghanistan 
with the U.S. Army. Because of these connections to Afghanistan, Applicant is not 
able to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships 
with his relatives who are Afghanistan citizens or residents] could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has 
established that “[he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interest.” In 1986, Applicant emigrated from Afghanistan to the United States. He 
became a U.S. citizen in 1996. Applicant’s wife because a U.S. citizen in 2007. His 
four children are U.S. citizens. Applicant has strong family connections to the United 
States. Eight of the ten siblings in Applicant’s family to include him, are U.S. citizens 
and all ten siblings, as well as their mother, reside in the United States. Applicant 
owns three separate real properties in the United States and conducts all of his 
banking in the United States. In contrast, he has no assets in Afghanistan. Applicant 
 
13 
 
 
and his family are fully vested in the United States. Most importantly, Applicant wants 
a clearance so that he can again assist U.S. Armed Forces in Afghanistan in a combat 
zone.  He is willing to risk his life to support United States’ goals in Afghanistan. He 
has shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States.  Applicant has a 
brother, who has been serving as a linguist in Afghanistan since 2008. 
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with uncle living in Afghanistan 
and his brother who is serving as a linguist in Afghanistan. There is no evidence, 
however, that terrorists, criminals, the Afghan Government, or those conducting 
espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or his family in Afghanistan to 
coerce Applicant or his family for classified or sensitive information.2
 
 Applicant, his 
brother serving in Afghanistan, and his uncle are clearly targets for improper coercion, 
exploitation, and violence.    
It is important to be mindful of the United States’ huge investment of manpower 
and money in Afghanistan, and Applicant and as well as his brother, who is a linguist 
working for the U.S. Government, have and are supporting U.S. goals and objectives 
in Afghanistan. Applicant and his brother serving as a linguist in Afghanistan are 
potential targets of terrorists and the Taliban for their own activities and support for the 
United States, and Applicant’s potential access to classified information is unlikely to 
add significantly to the risk they already face from lawless elements in Afghanistan.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in Afghanistan. Applicant is not 
required to report his contacts with family members living in Afghanistan. Lastly, AG ¶ 
8(f) does not apply as the evidence does not support the assertion that Applicant has 
any assets in Afghanistan. All of Applicant’s assets are in the United States. 
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to family living in Afghanistan are less 
substantial than his strong connections and ties to the United States. His connections 
to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome the foreign 
influence security concerns under Guideline B. Even if concerns are not mitigated 
under Guideline B, they would be mitigated under the Whole-Person Concept, 
discussed infra. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
                                                          
2 There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from Applicant because 
she has not had access to such information.   
 
14 
 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case in regard to the allegation Applicant provided false or 
incomplete information on his security clearance applications: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts 
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, 
or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
Five separate allegations of falsification trigger application of AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 
16(b) because Applicant provided incorrect answers about his arrests and past drug 
use during the security clearance vetting process. Further review is necessary. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate personal conduct 
security concerns in this case: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice 
of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information, the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior 
is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
 
15 
 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
   
Applicant consistently stated when he completed his e-QIPs that he had not 
been arrested and that his drug use was limited to a one-time use of marijuana during 
a December 2007 Christmas party. His submission of primary source evidence 
rebutting the Government’s allegation that he was arrested for drug use in September 
1993 significantly enhanced his credibility as it pertains to his January 1989 purported 
arrest. Furthermore, after observing Applicant, I found him to be a credible witness. 
His difficulty with English manifested itself throughout the hearing. He evidently 
became confused when responding to questions. Furthermore, he self-reported his 
single marijuana use in December 2007, which would have been difficult to discover 
had he not disclosed this incriminating, derogatory information. 
 
Applicant’s assertions were subsequently corroborated, in whole or in part. 
Applicant acknowledged his answers were incorrect, but added that there was no 
intent on his part to deliberately falsify his e-QIPs or information provided during his 
January 2008 interview. Furthermore, the accuracy of the source documents that 
formed the basis of Applicant’s purported falsification, particularly the results of his 
January 2008 interview, were seriously undermined. Of note, he disclosed or revealed 
his sole marijuana use in December 2007 when he could easily have denied it. Such 
self-reporting, albeit not consistent, put the Government on notice that he had used 
marijuana in December 2007.  
 
A statement is false when it is made deliberately. An omission of relevant and 
material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about it, 
inadvertently overlooked it or misunderstood the question. Applicant was candid and 
forthright at his hearing about his purported arrests and marijuana use. In evaluating 
his testimony, I note his memory has faded somewhat over time and his English 
comprehension, both oral and written, is far from fluent.  
 
Applicant’s testimony and demeanor strongly support the notion that he is an 
honest individual. Also persuasive was the testimony of his younger brother, who 
corroborated Applicant’s testimony regarding their family. I conclude Applicant’s 
alleged falsification of his e-QIP is mitigated. Although he provided incorrect 
information, AG ¶ 17(f) fully applies. The falsification allegations are not substantiated. 
I am satisfied he did not deliberately and intentionally fail to disclose his past drug use 
 
16 
 
 
with intent to deceive. His arrests were either not substantiated or he did not 
understand he was being arrested.3
 
  
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 The Government cross-alleged this allegation with SOR ¶ 2c, supra. 
Discussions referencing this allegation previously discussed are incorporated under 
this heading. 
  
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern concerning drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both 
because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions about a 
person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
The Government established that Applicant used marijuana one time at a 
December 2007 Christmas party.  A review of the evidence supports application of two 
drug involvement disqualifying conditions. AG ¶ 25(a): “any drug abuse (see above 
definition);”4
Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, I find application of 
drug involvement mitigating conditions AG ¶ 26(a) “the behavior happened so long 
ago, was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;” and AG ¶ 26(b): “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the 
future, such as: (1) disassociation form drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation.”  
 and AG ¶ 25(c) “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution, or possession of drug paraphernalia.” 
                                                          
3The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating: 
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden 
of proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or 
prove an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a 
Judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is 
direct or circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at 
the time the omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to 
conclude Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E 
and the burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to 
explain the omission. 
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 
9, 2004)). 
 
4 AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medication direction. 
 
17 
 
 
Concerning AG ¶ 26(a), there are no “bright line” rules for determining when 
conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the record within the parameters set by the Directive.” ISCR Case No. 02-
24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board determined in 
ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last use of 
marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. If the 
evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”5
 
 
AG ¶ 26(a) applies. Applicant’s last drug use was December 2007, about 46 
months before his hearing. His illegal drug use occurred spontaneously at a Christmas 
party at a time before Applicant ever contemplated applying for a security clearance. 
Applicant realizes his behavior was wrong and not consistent or compatible with 
holding a security clearance. The absence of evidence of more recent or extensive 
drug use, and his promise not to use illegal drugs in the future eliminates doubts about 
his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment with respect to abstaining 
from illegal drug use.6
   
   
                                                          
5 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the 
absence of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge 
excessively emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug 
use, and gave too little weight to lifestyle change and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal 
Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, 
compel the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a 
matter of law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided 
not to apply that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the 
case) with ISCR Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative 
judge articulated a rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of 
Applicant's efforts at alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history 
of improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the 
security clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three 
times a year from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing].  It also 
included the illegal purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a 
security clearance. 
 
6 In ISCR Case No. 02-08032 at 8 (App. Bd. May 14, 2004), the Appeal Board reversed an unfavorable 
security clearance decision because the administrative judge failed to explain why drug use was not 
mitigated after the passage of more than six years from the previous drug abuse. 
 
 
18 
 
 
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate his intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. Applicant does not associate with individuals who use drugs 
nor does he frequent environments were drug activity occurs. He is a responsible 
husband and father, who seeks to serve his country and is willing to place himself in 
harm’s way in Afghanistan as a linguist. Of particular note, he has abstained from drug 
abuse for about 46 months and has had no problem in doing so. AG ¶ 26(b) applies.  
 
At his hearing, Applicant acknowledged that future drug abuse is incompatible 
with his future career and family plans, and manifested a steadfast commitment to 
continue lifestyle changes consistent with total abstinence of marijuana or any other 
drugs.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines B, E, and H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting a foreign influence security concern because 
of Applicant’s connections to Afghanistan. Applicant, his parents, and siblings were all 
born in Afghanistan. Applicant has an uncle in Afghanistan with whom he maintains 
somewhat frequent contact by participating as a family to send him modest amounts 
of money each year. Applicant’s brother is serving as a linguist in Afghanistan.   
  
A Guideline B decision concerning Afghanistan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.7
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion). 
 Afghanistan is a dangerous place because 
 
19 
 
 
of violence from the Taliban and terrorists. The Taliban and terrorists continue to 
threaten the Afghan Government, the interests of the United States, U.S. Armed 
Forces, and those who cooperate and assist the United States. Applicant recognizes 
his work with the U.S. Armed Forces will endanger him and expose him to 
considerable risk. The United States and Afghan Governments are allies in the war on 
terrorism. The United States is committed to the establishment of a free and 
independent Afghan Government. Afghanistan and the United States have close 
relationships in diplomacy and trade.      
 
The circumstances tending to support approval of a clearance for Applicant are 
more substantial than the factors weighing towards denial of his clearance. Since 
1987, Applicant has made the United States his home. He has embraced his life in the 
United States, gotten married in the United States, and has made a good living in the 
United States. Applicant’s closest family members to include his mother, wife, and four 
children live in the United States and well as his nine other siblings and their families. 
His four children are enrolled in school and are spending their formative years in the 
United States. Applicant has substantially greater contacts or connections with the 
United States than with Afghanistan. Applicant does not own property in Afghanistan. 
When he was naturalized as a U.S. citizen, he swore allegiance to the United States. 
   
Applicant is willing to risk his life as part of his duties on behalf of the U.S. 
combat forces in Afghanistan. His past experience after serving nine years as a 
Mujahedeen commander waging war against the Soviets provides him with unique 
regional insight. Applicant is fully aware of the risks to himself, and he is also aware 
that his brother serving as a linguist in Afghanistan is at risk from terrorists and the 
Taliban. All these circumstances demonstrate that Applicant will recognize, resist, and 
report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or 
exploit him. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). Applicant’s 
strong connections to the United States and especially to his U.S. family, community, 
and his desire for employment as a translator in a combat zone establish “such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., [he] can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” See Discussion of AG ¶ 
8(b), supra at pages 12-13. 
 
Applicant’s incomplete and incorrect descriptions of his past drug use placed 
his credibility into question. The Government relies on each applicant for a security 
clearance to thoroughly and accurately respond to questions asked on a security 
clearance application. Information applicants provide forms the basis to grant or deny 
security clearances. Applicant’s failure to provide accurate and complete information 
required further costly and time-consuming inquiries that could have been avoided. 
Fortunately for Applicant, his lack of due diligence was not imputed to be intentional or 
deliberate. 
 
Applicant has been and is willing to maintain conduct expected of one entrusted 
with a security clearance. His family fully supports him. He has a history of a strong 
work ethic. This support and self-introspection should ensure his continued success. 
 
20 
 
 
Applicant demonstrated the correct attitude and commitment to remaining drug-free. 
Considering his demeanor and testimony, I believe Applicant has learned from his 
mistakes, and his questionable behavior is unlikely to recur. In sum, I find Applicant 
has presented sufficient evidence of rehabilitation. Applicant is living a lifestyle 
consistent with someone who wishes to remain drug free. He remains committed to 
his family and is a responsible and contributing member of society.  
 
After weighing all the facts and circumstances in this decision, including 
Applicant’s demeanor and sincerity at his hearing, I find his statements to be credible, 
and I conclude he has carried his burden of mitigating the foreign influence, personal 
conduct, and drug involvement security concerns. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole-person factors”8
 
 
and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible 
for access to classified information. 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 1a - 1g:  For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
   Subparagraphs 2a – 2e:  For Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 3, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 Subparagraph 3a:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
8See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
21 
 
 
 
