1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 10-03974
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se   
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows he has a history
of drug abuse, which ended in late 2009, when he graduated from college. He has since
abstained from drug abuse, and he does not intend to abuse any drugs in the future. He
presented sufficient evidence to mitigate the drug involvement security concerns.
Accordingly, this case is decided for Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 Tr. 43. 2
 Tr. 49–50. 3
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on November 30,1
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a complaint, and
it endeavored to set forth Applicant’s history of drug abuse under Guideline H.    
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me February 9, 2011. The hearing took place March 29, 2011. The hearing
transcript (Tr.) was received April 6, 2011. 
At the close of evidence, I kept the record open until April 12, 2011, to allow
Applicant to present additional documentary evidence. His timely post-hearing
document was marked and admitted as Exhibit B without objections.      
Findings of Fact
In response to SOR ¶¶ 1.a–1.d, Applicant admitted, without qualification, the
following: (1) using cocaine, with varying frequency, from about March 2007 to about
November 2009; (2) purchasing cocaine; (3) using marijuana, with varying frequency,
from about July 2001 to about July 2008; and (4) using prescription drugs without a
prescription in about January 2006 and April 2007. His admissions are accepted as
findings of fact. In addition, the following findings of fact are supported by substantial
evidence.  
Applicant is a 24-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He is seeking to
obtain a security clearance for the first time. His educational background includes a
bachelor’s degree in mechanical engineering technology, with a grade point average of
3.6.  He was awarded the degree in December 2009, and then relocated to his current2
state of residence to begin his job with a company engaged in defense contracting. 
Applicant has worked as an entry-level systems engineer since January 2010.
Before beginning this employment, he took and passed a drug test in about December
2009.  His job-performance report for 2010 is highly favorable; it notes that he3
 Exhibit A. 4
 Exhibit 1. 5
 Exhibit 2. 6
 Tr. 33-34; 44. 7
 Tr. 33. 8
 Tr. 35–37. 9
 Exhibit B. 10
3
“distinguished himself amongst his peers as an outstanding performer with a bright
future.”  Describing him as a valued asset and exceptional performer, the report also4
states that he often performed at a level above his salary grade. He has already
received an increase in salary to his present level of $58,000, and he anticipates a
promotion from his entry-level position during this year. His intention is to continue
working for the same company for the foreseeable future and to seek advancement
opportunities, including graduate-level education. 
Applicant has a history of drug abuse, as described in first paragraph of the
findings of fact, which he does not dispute. He disclosed his drug abuse in some detail
when he completed his security clearance application in January 2010.  He provided5
additional information about it during a  background interview in March 2010.  At6
hearing, he explained that he was introduced to marijuana in high school, and then used
cocaine periodically during 2007-2009, when he was in college. He made two small
buys of cocaine for $40 to $60. His last incidence of drug abuse was in about November
2009, when he used cocaine. He was in the presence of cocaine in March 2010, but
departed when he learned cocaine was present.  
Applicant realized he was “an idiot” and was “screwing up” when confronted with
the security clearance application and disclosing his drug involvement.  He7
acknowledged his past conduct was “reckless, immature, and completely
irresponsible.”  He has no intention to engage in drug abuse again, he prefers a drug-8
free lifestyle, and he is glad he no longer has dealings with people who engage in drug
abuse.  His post-hearing submission is a one-page signed statement wherein he stated9
the following: (1) he pledged no use of any illegal substances or misuse or abuse of
legal substances; (2) he pledged no involvement with the possession, cultivation,
processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution of illegal drugs; and (3) he
acknowledged that any violation of his statement would result in automatic revocation of
any clearance granted to him.10
I found Applicant’s demeanor throughout the hearing was serious, sincere, and
contrite. I found his testimony, in all respects, was credible and worthy of belief.
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to11
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.12
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 13
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 14
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).15
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.16
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.17
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.18
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 19
4
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As11
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt12
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An13
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  14
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting15
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An16
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate17
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme18
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.19
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).20
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.21
 AG ¶¶ 24–26 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 22
 AG ¶ 24(b). 23
5
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.20
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it21
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline H,  the security concern is that the use of an illegal drug, or22
misuse of a prescription drug, raises questions about a person’s judgment, reliability,
and trustworthiness. In this context, the term drug abuse means “the illegal use of a
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from the approved medical
direction.”  The guideline also expresses a concern that drug involvement may call into23
question a person’s ability or willingness to follow laws, rules, and regulations.
Here, the evidence is more than sufficient to establish concerns based on
Applicant’s history of drug abuse. The evidence shows Applicant was a youthful user of
both marijuana and cocaine, with a few instances of misuse of prescription drugs. His
last incidence of drug abuse took place in about November 2009, around the time he
was finishing college and before beginning his career. Based on the evidence as a
whole, the following disqualifying conditions under Guideline H are raised:
AG ¶ 25(a) any drug abuse; and 
AG ¶ 25(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing,
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug
paraphernalia. 
There are several mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline H. The
following mitigating condition is most pertinent: 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9). 24
6
AG ¶ 26(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future,
such as:
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were
used;
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; or 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation.
After considering the relevant disqualifying and mitigating conditions, the central
issue is whether Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate and overcome the
security concerns under the guideline. I conclude that he has done so. Indeed, the
evidence shows he has satisfied all four components of ¶ 26(b), thereby demonstrating
an intent not to abuse drugs in the future. Among other things, his relocation to another
state a great distance away from where he attended college satisfies both subpart (1)
and (2). His last incidence of drug abuse took place about 18 months ago, which is not
recent and satisfies subpart (3) as an appropriate period of abstinence. His signed
statement of intent pledging no further drug involvement satisfies subpart (4). Moreover,
Applicant persuaded me during the hearing that he has insight into his past misconduct,
and he now understands that drug abuse is incompatible with access to classified
information. 
I have also considered this case in light of the evidence as a whole and the nine-
factor whole-person concept.  In particular, I considered the nature, extent, and24
seriousness of the conduct; the circumstances surrounding the conduct; the frequency
and recency of the conduct; his age at the time of the conduct; the presence of
rehabilitation and other positive changes; and the likelihood of recurrence. 
With those factors in mind, a thoughtful balancing of the evidence persuades me
that Applicant’s drug abuse is safely in the past and will not recur. I reach this
conclusion because the evidence shows that his drug abuse was largely a product of
the youth, immaturity, and inexperience typical of high school and college students. He
received a wake-up call when he completed the security clearance application for his
first job with a rather large company engaged in defense contracting. He heard and
understood the message, and he truthfully disclosed his drug abuse. He disclosed
further detail about it during his background investigation. He has abstained from drug
abuse for about 18 months and has no intention of further drug abuse. Although it was
justified and proper to question his suitability in light of his past drug abuse, the
evidence shows he is now on the right path to a drug-free lifestyle.  
7
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to mitigate and overcome
the security concerns, and I am persuaded that he will exercise the required good
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Accordingly, I conclude that Applicant met his
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is
decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.d: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.           
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
