 
 1 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )   ISCR Case No. 10-01359 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
 In March 2009 Applicant and his second wife filed a joint Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
petition. They listed among unsecured priority claims a $1,282.90 child support debt 
owed by him to his first wife that has been satisfied through monthly payments to the 
bankruptcy trustee. Non-priority unsecured claims totaled $143,536.56 and included 
$23,723.71 for his military reenlistment bonus that is not being repaid through the 
bankruptcy plan. It is too soon to conclude that his financial problems are behind him, 
given his liability for the military bonus is likely to survive the bankruptcy, and he and his 
spouse are in divorce proceedings that have already been shown to adversely affect his 
finances. Clearance denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On August 25, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations, which provided the basis for its preliminary 
decision to revoke his eligibility for a security clearance, and to refer the matter to an 
 
 
 
 2 
administrative judge. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense Regulation 
5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987) as amended; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 On September 9, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR allegations and requested 
a hearing. The case was assigned to me on November 3, 2010, to conduct a hearing 
and to determine whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant continued eligibility for a security clearance. On November 15, 2010, I 
scheduled a hearing for December 16, 2010. 
 
 I convened the hearing as scheduled. Eight Government exhibits (Ex. 1-8) and 
14 Applicant exhibits (Ex. A-N) were admitted into evidence without objection, and 
Applicant testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) received on December 23, 2010. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
On May 18, 2011, I reopened the record to clarify the date of Applicant‟s 
reenlistment, which was relevant to determining whether the debt in SOR 1.b is likely to 
survive a Chapter 13 bankruptcy discharge. Applicant was also given the opportunity to 
update the record concerning the progress of his bankruptcy and divorce proceedings. 
On May 20, 2011, Applicant timely offered eight potential exhibits. Along with his 
forwarding correspondence, which was marked as Exhibit O, the documents were 
admitted without objection as Exhibits P through W. 
 
 In rebuttal to the new exhibits, Department Counsel submitted on June 6, 2011, a 
record of nonjudicial punishment proceedings. The document is admissible as an official 
record of Applicant‟s military service and relevant to the issue of the reenlistment bonus. 
Accordingly, the document was marked and admitted as Exhibit 9. 
 
Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
 The SOR alleges that as of August 25, 2010, Applicant owed collection debt of 
$200 for child support (SOR 1.a) and $18,264 to the Department of Defense (SOR 1.b). 
Applicant was also alleged to have filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy in March 2009, which 
was still pending as of August 25, 2010 (SOR 1.c). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer, Applicant denied that he owed back child support. The debt was 
incurred because of a retroactive increase in his child support payment starting in 2009, 
and it was paid off through his bankruptcy in June 2010. Applicant admitted that he 
owed around $18,264 to the Department of Defense because he chose to separate 
 
 3 
from the U.S. military in 2005. Since the Government was notified of his bankruptcy and 
filed no claim, he cannot be pursued for the debt. As for his bankruptcy, Applicant cited 
the approval of his plan and payments made to the trustee as evidence it was not 
pending. After considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following 
factual findings. 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old systems administrator for a defense contractor. He 
assumed that position in October 2010 after working as an industrial security specialist 
for the company since commencing his employment in November 2005. Applicant has 
held a top-secret security clearance since 1993. (Tr. 79.) 
 
 Applicant served at the enlisted ranks in the U.S. military from June 1993 to 
August 2005. (Ex. P.) He was married to his first wife from August 1991 to October 
2001. They had two children, a daughter born in June 1996 and a son born in 
November 1997, for whom Applicant was ordered to pay child support in their divorce. 
In June 2002 Applicant married his current spouse. She had a two-year-old son and a 
one-year-old daughter from a previous relationship. (Ex. 1.) Child support payments 
from her ex-husband were sporadic, and she had medical issues that led her not to 
seek employment. (Ex. 1; Tr. 38) 
 
At the rank of staff sergeant, Applicant reenlisted in the U.S. military on June 19, 
2003, agreeing to serve for four years and 17 months in return for a four-year re-
enlistment bonus of around $32,000. Applicant was advised of, and agreed to, 
conditions that might terminate his continued entitlement to unpaid bonus installments, 
and cause a portion of advance bonus payments to be recouped or terminated. (Ex. Q.) 
He received half up-front with the rest to be paid to him in annual increments. (Tr. 70.) 
 
In September 2003 Applicant received nonjudicial punishment for off-duty 
assaults of his spouse between July 2002 and August 2003. He was ordered to forfeit 
$912 pay per month for two months and to perform 30 days of extra duty. A reduction in 
grade was suspended through March 1, 2004, to be remitted without further action. 
Applicant acknowledged at that time that he understood that the military may be entitled 
to recoup a portion of the bonus money he received if he separated before completing 
his active duty service obligation. (Ex. 9.) 
 
In April 2005 Applicant decided to separate early (“Palace Chase”) from the 
military. (Ex. R; Tr. 69.) He was misinformed by military personnel that he would not 
have to repay his enlistment bonus. After his discharge on August 15, 2005 (Ex. P, R.), 
Applicant learned that he had to refund that portion of the enlistment bonus covering the 
enlistment time he did not serve. Applicant appealed the decision several times into 
early 2006 without success. (Tr. 46, 70.) He then made $50 or $100 payments on the 
debt when he could afford to do so, and repayment was also deferred for up to six 
months based on hardship. (Tr. 47.) Around August 2008 a debt balance of $18,264 
was referred for collection. (Ex. 7.) 
 
 
 4 
Between April 2006 and February 2008 Applicant‟s spouse took out student loan 
debt in both her and Applicant‟s names for her education. Although deferred, the loans 
totaled around $49,000 as of March 2009, presumably due to accumulating interest. 
(Ex. 2, 3, 7; Tr. 66.) In November 2007 Applicant‟s spouse opened a high-interest cash 
loan account in Applicant‟s name to pay for Christmas gifts. (Ex. 2, 3; Tr. 65.) High 
credit on the account was $5,075 with monthly repayment at $294 for seven years. (Ex. 
7.) In May 2008 Applicant and his spouse financed the purchase of two new cars 
through six-year loans of $21,470 and $21,124. Applicant planned on replacing his 
vehicle for one with better gas mileage, but his spouse wanted a new car also. He and 
his spouse each applied for a loan in their own names with the other as cosigner. 
Applicant and his spouse made their monthly car payments of $417 for his car and $410 
for her car on time. (Ex. 7; Tr. 60.) 
 
On April 28, 2008, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing to renew his top-secret clearance. (Ex. 1.) In 2008 Applicant 
learned that his ex-wife was pursuing through the court a significant increase in his 
monthly child support. Despite annual income of $64,880 from his first job, $461.70 from 
part-time employment, and $11,460 in veteran‟s disability pay (Ex. 2, K), Applicant could 
not easily afford the increase. His spouse worked in a succession of jobs early in 2008, 
earning about $5,531 total, before she started with a bank. She earned about $19,345 
in that job. (Ex. K.) While looking into his finances, Applicant discovered that his current 
spouse had apparently opened some accounts with him as a cosigner and that some 
debts were not being paid. (Tr. 37, 50-51.) He took over handling the family‟s finances. 
(Tr. 78.) Compounding their financial stress, the father of Applicant‟s stepchildren 
stopped paying child support.1 (Tr. 50.) Feeling he had no alternative to bankruptcy, 
Applicant consulted with an attorney in September or October 2008 about a possible 
bankruptcy filing. Based on legal advice, Applicant stopped paying on his debts pending 
the bankruptcy, except for the car loans, which he continued to pay on time. (Ex. 2, 3, 7, 
M, N; Tr. 47.) These debts included a line of credit he had held since December 2004, 
on which he owed around $14,615; $305 still owed for a computer he bought in March 
2005; a credit card debt of $8,594; a joint cash loan of $2,572; and some joint credit 
card debts that were “maxed out.” (Ex. 2, 3, 7, K; Tr. 58, 63-64.) Despite their mounting 
delinquencies, Applicant took on a $6,695 student loan debt of his own in November 
2008. (Ex. 3, 7, K; Tr. 66.) 
 
On January 26, 2009, Applicant was ordered to pay child support at $224.93 per 
week, to rise to $250.46 per week when his son turned 12 in November 2009. (Ex. L.)   
In March 2009, Applicant and his spouse filed a joint Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition, 
listing unsecured priority claims of $1,845.05, consisting of past-due child support of 
$1,292.90 and guardian ad litem fees totaling $552.15. Of the $143,536.56 in 
unsecured non-priority claims listed on Schedule F, $60,337.15 was for student loans 
and $23,723.71 was for the enlistment bonus. (Ex. 2, K.)  Applicant‟s spouse had quit 
her job and received only $200 per month in child support. Based on their expenses, 
                                            
1
Applicant and his spouse reported on their joint Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition that she received 
$11,787.34 in child support in 2007 but only $7,354.93 in 2008. (Ex. K.) 
 
 5 
they reported $100 in discretionary monthly income. On April 10, 2009, they proposed a 
Chapter 13 plan under which they would pay $100 per month for 36 months starting 
April 24, 2009, and would remit to the trustee any annual tax refunds in excess of 
$1,200. Applicant‟s child support arrearage, the guardian ad litem fees, and the Chapter 
13 trustee‟s fees, were to be paid in full under the plan. The unsecured creditors with 
approved claims were each to be paid a prorated amount at 4.43% of the approved 
claim. Applicant and his spouse were to continue paying their car loans outside of the 
bankruptcy. (Ex. 2, 3, K.) The plan was approved on May 15, 2009. The Department of 
Defense filed no claim for the enlistment bonus. However, approved student loan debts, 
including non-dischargeable student loan debts of $34,844, were to be paid through the 
bankruptcy at 4.43%. (Ex. K.) 
 
 On November 2, 2009, Applicant was interviewed about his finances by an 
authorized investigator for the Office of Personnel Management (OPM). Applicant 
discussed the bankruptcy, which was scheduled to be “paid off” in 2012. As for the 
enlistment bonus, Applicant explained that it was not being paid through the bankruptcy 
and he indicated he planned to pay the debt when he is able to do so. His spouse had 
no earned income, but she was being paid $717 per month in child support from her ex-
husband. Estimated monthly expense and debt payments should have given them $402 
in discretionary income each month. Yet Applicant reported no assets other than $100 
in a savings account. (Ex. 3.) 
 
Applicant and his spouse received credit counseling as required for the 
bankruptcy filing. Applicant paid $100 per month to the bankruptcy trustee as required 
under the plan through at least May 9, 2011. (Ex. W.) On April 26, 2010, his and his 
spouse‟s federal income tax refund of $3,438 for 2009 was turned over to the 
bankruptcy trustee. (Ex. 3, A, K.) 
 
Applicant‟s spouse looked at the bankruptcy as an opportunity to start spending 
anew, and disagreements over money led to a marital separation in April 2010. She 
filed for divorce. (Tr. 58, 77-78.) Applicant continued to make timely payments on both 
car loans. (Ex. 4-7, U, V; Tr. 37.) In July 2010, Applicant was ordered to pay $300 per 
month for five months in temporary alimony to his spouse. (Tr. 56, 58.) At a hearing in 
January 2011 her request for additional alimony was denied. However, Applicant was 
still obligated to make the monthly payments on the vehicle in her possession pending 
final dissolution of their marriage. (Ex. S; Tr. 53, 60-61.) As of May 2011 the balance of 
each car loan was around $13,000. (Ex. U, V.) On May 18, 2011, Applicant and his ex-
wife entered into a partial permanent stipulation agreement, which they requested be 
incorporated into their final divorce decree. Under the stipulated agreement, Applicant 
and his soon-to-be ex-wife agreed to be solely and individually responsible for all 
consumer credit card, medical, or other debts in their respective names. They agreed to 
let the court determine repayment liability for her student loans and for the $100 monthly 
payment to the bankruptcy trustee. (Ex. T.) Applicant has paid between $6,000 and 
$8,000 in legal costs related to the divorce proceedings. (Tr. 71.) As of December 2010 
he owed about $1,000 to his divorce attorney. (Tr. 71-72.) He carries veterinary 
insurance for his two dogs at $69 per month. (Tr. 56.) 
 
 6 
Applicant has not discussed the enlistment bonus debt with the bankruptcy 
trustee. (Tr. 45.) His bankruptcy lawyer informed him that since the Department of 
Defense did not respond to the bankruptcy there was “nothing [he] could do.” Applicant 
believes the debt is dischargeable in the bankruptcy, but he does not know for certain. 
(Tr. 73.) He understands from his lawyer that he cannot make any payments to creditors 
other than what was provided for under the bankruptcy plan. (Tr. 37, 47-48.)  If the debt 
is not discharged, Applicant intends to make payments on it. (Tr. 48, 75.) After he pays 
his bills, he has about $400 remaining each month for groceries and miscellaneous 
expenses. (Tr. 57.) He no longer uses any personal credit cards. (Tr. 76.) 
 
Applicant has not allowed his personal financial problems to negatively affect his 
work for the defense contractor. Applicant shared with his supervisor that he made 
some bad financial decisions that led to a bankruptcy, and he kept him informed of the 
bankruptcy‟s progress. Applicant‟s supervisor and his coworkers do not believe that he 
is a risk to national security. Applicant had been dependable and conscientious in 
fulfilling his work responsibilities. (Ex. E-I.) 
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a „right‟ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant‟s suitability for a 
security clearance, the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant‟s eligibility for access to classified 
information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge‟s overall adjudicative 
goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire 
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
 The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that reasonable, logical, and based on 
the evidence of record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present 
evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, 
the Applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department 
Counsel. . . .” The Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable 
security decision. 
 
 7 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be 
“in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concern about finances is set out in AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one‟s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual‟s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 Despite his annual salary of almost $65,000 from his defense contractor 
employment and an additional $11,460 in veteran‟s disability benefits, Applicant and his 
spouse were clearly financially overextended in 2008. They owed consumer credit card 
or loan debt of more than $52,000, in addition to $18,723.71 to the DoD for his 
enlistment bonus, and about $42,500 for their cars. When faced with an increase in his 
court-ordered child support, they had to resort to bankruptcy because they could not 
afford to keep paying on all their credit obligations. Potentially disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or  unwillingness to satisfy debts,” AG ¶ 19(e), “consistent 
spending beyond one‟s means, which may be indicated by excessive indebtedness, 
significant negative cash flow, high debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis,” 
and AG 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 Concerning potential factors in mitigation, Applicant‟s financial problems are too 
extensive and recent to apply AG ¶ 20(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual‟s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  
AG ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person‟s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted 
 
 8 
responsibly under the circumstances,” applies in limited part. The increase in his child 
support obligation, which apparently was applied retroactively, put unexpected stress on 
Applicant‟s budget. Applicant also had no control over the amount of child support his 
spouse received from her ex-husband. Applicant‟s spouse opened some accounts with 
him as a cosigner without his knowledge, but he also ran up some debt (e.g., $14,615 
on a line of credit and $8,594 on a credit card). Applicant‟s repayment of the 
reenlistment bonus was sporadic even before the bankruptcy. (Tr. 57.) He indulged his 
spouse and took on $827 in car payments for two new vehicles in May 2008 when he 
had not satisfied the reenlistment bonus. Then, after he decided to file for bankruptcy, 
and he and his spouse stopped repaying all but their car loans, Applicant took on his 
own student loan debt in November 2008. He has not always handled his personal 
financial obligations responsibly. 
 
 Applicant‟s Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing is a legal means to address burdensome 
debt where the court and trustee agree on a plan to repay his debts. The DOHA Appeal 
Board has indicated that even a Chapter 13 wage-earner plan is insufficient to fully 
implicate AG ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.”2 Most of Applicant‟s and his spouse‟s unsecured 
non-priority debts are being paid only at 4.43% of the approved balance. The DoD is 
recouping nothing of the reenlistment bonus in the bankruptcy, albeit presumably 
because the Government did not file a claim. Furthermore, repayment of a small 
prorated amount through Chapter 13 is not entitled to the same weight in mitigation than 
had Applicant contacted his creditors and established a record of timely repayments. 
 
 Applicant‟s bankruptcy filing, especially where he has made 24 of the 36 
payments required under the plan, could nonetheless implicate AG ¶ 20(c), “the person 
has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” He paid off the child 
support delinquency identified in SOR 1.a. However, as already noted, the sizeable 
enlistment bonus identified in SOR 1.b is not being repaid. Applicant was led to 
understand from his bankruptcy attorney that he can only make payments to the trustee 
in accord with his plan, and that since the DoD failed to assert its claim during the 
                                            
2
The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6 
[currently AG ¶20(d)], an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith 
effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the 
applicant‟s debts. The Directive does not define the term „good-faith.‟ However, the Board 
has indicated that the concept of good-faith „requires a showing that a person acts in a 
way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or 
obligation.‟ Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she 
relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of 
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
 9 
bankruptcy proceedings, there is nothing he can do to resolve the debt. Department 
Counsel provided general information about bankruptcy discharge in Exhibit 8, which 
indicates that debts for most government-funded or guaranteed educational loans or 
benefit overpayments are not dischargeable. Pertinent federal statutes were not 
provided for my review, but they were consulted in an effort to ascertain whether 
Applicant‟s obligation to repay the enlistment bonus is likely to survive the bankruptcy. 
 
 Title 11, Section 1328 of the United States Code pertinent to a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy, provides that as soon as practicable after completion by the debtor of all 
payments under the plan, the court is to grant a discharge of all debts provided for by 
the plan or disallowed except for certain debts statutorily exempt from discharge. The 
obligation to repay educational benefit overpayments or loans made, insured, or 
guaranteed by a governmental unit, is not dischargeable in bankruptcy, unless failure to 
discharge would work a hardship on the debtor and debtor‟s dependents. See 11 U.S.C. 
§ 523(a)(8). The obligation to refund that percentage of his reenlistment bonus that 
represents the unexpired part of the additional obligated service is not an educational 
loan of the type contemplated in 11 U.S.C. §523(a)(8). 
 
 Section 523(a)(7) of the United States Code specifically excepts from discharge 
“a fine, penalty, or forfeiture payable to and for the benefit of a governmental unit, and is 
not compensation for actual pecuniary loss, other than a tax penalty. . . imposed with 
respect to a transaction or event that occurred before three years before the date of the 
filing of the petition.” As to whether the debt may be considered a forfeiture or penalty 
for failure to complete his obligated enlistment, and non-dischargeable on that basis, the 
event triggering the obligation would have been his premature separation from the 
military in August 2005, although available credit reports show the debt was incurred 
(i.e., matured) in December 2005. (Ex. 6; 7.) Clearly, the DoD had a valid, pre-petition 
claim against Applicant, and Applicant listed the debt on his Schedule F. Since the DoD 
had notice and did not respond, Applicant seemingly would not be legally responsible 
for the debt in the event of a discharge unless it is considered a forfeiture. 
 
 However, since October 2000, federal law has required repayment of retention 
bonuses for failure to complete the term of enlistment for which a bonus was paid, even 
in the case of bankruptcy, if the bankruptcy discharge was entered less than five years 
after the termination of the enlistment agreement.3 The current law on this issue is 
                                            
3
 37 U.S.C. §323, effective October 2000, provided in pertinent part: 
 
(a) Retention Bonus Authorized.—An officer or enlisted member of the armed forces who 
is serving on active duty and is qualified in a designated critical military skill may be paid 
a retention bonus as provided in this section if---- 
(2) in the case of an enlisted member, the member reenlists or voluntarily extends the 
member‟s enlistment for a period of at least one year. 
 
(g) Repayment of bonus.—If an officer who has entered into a written agreement under 
subsection (a) fails to complete the total period of active duty specified in the agreement, 
or an enlisted member who voluntarily or because of misconduct does not complete the 
term of enlistment for which a bonus was paid under this section, the Secretary of 
 
 10 
promulgated in Section 373 of Title 37 of the United States Code, which specifically 
addresses repayment of unearned portions of bonuses, incentive pay, or similar 
benefits. This statute, effective as of January 2008, provides in pertinent part: 
 
(a) Repayment and termination. Except as provided in subsection (b),4 a 
member of the uniformed services who is paid a bonus, incentive pay, or 
similar benefit, the receipt of which is contingent upon the member‟s 
satisfaction of certain services or eligibility requirements, shall repay to the 
United States any unearned portion of the bonus, incentive pay, or similar 
benefit if the member fails to satisfy such service or eligibility requirement, 
and the member may not receive any unpaid amounts of the bonus, 
incentive pay, or similar benefit after the member fails to satisfy such 
service or eligibility requirement. 
 
(c) Effect of bankruptcy. An obligation to repay the United States under 
this section is, for all purposes, a debt owed the United States. A 
discharge in bankruptcy under title 11 does not discharge a person from 
such debt if the discharge order is entered less than five years after— 
(1) the date of the termination of the agreement or contract on which the 
debt is based; or  
(2) in the absence of such an agreement or contract, the date of the 
termination of the service on which the debt is based.5 
 
 Applicant has made enough timely payments to the bankruptcy trustee for me to 
conclude that he is likely to continue with the plan through discharge. If Applicant makes 
all his scheduled payments under the plan, he will be entitled to a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy discharge around April 2012. Applicant separated from the U.S. military in 
August 2005, after over 12 years on active duty. He testified that he received the bonus 
on his reenlistment in 2002, and that he decided to separate early after serving 2.5 to 3 
                                                                                                                                            
Defense, and the Secretary of Transportation with respect to members of the Coast 
Guard when it is not operating as a service in the Navy, may require the member to repay 
the United States, on a pro rata basis and to the extent that the Secretary determines 
conditions and circumstances warrant, all sums paid under this section. 
 
(2) An obligation to repay the United States imposed under paragraph (1) is for all 
purposes a debt owed to the United States. 
 
(3) A discharge in bankruptcy under title 11 that is entered less than 5 years after the 
termination of a written agreement entered into under subsection (a) does not discharge 
the member from a debt arising under paragraph (2). 
 
4
 37 U.S.C. §373(b) provides for exceptions to the general requirement to repay any unearned portion of 
the bonus, including special rules for deceased service members or those with a combat-related 
disability. Although Applicant receives a 50% veteran‟s disability benefit, there is no evidence that it was 
combat-related. 
 
5
This federal law is implemented within DoD by regulation, DoD Financial Management Regulation (DoD 
7000.14-R), Volume 7A, Military Pay Policy and Procedures—Active Duty and Reserve Pay. 
 
 11 
years of the 4 years required. (Tr. 69-70.) However, post-hearing submissions (Ex. P, 
Q) confirm that he reenlisted on June 19, 2003, and received a bonus based on four 
years of additional service time. The agreement or contract would ordinarily terminate 
on the fulfillment of the enlistment term. So, under current law, the operative date for 
determining whether his enlistment bonus debt is dischargeable in bankruptcy would be 
five years after June 18, 2007, the end date covered by his enlistment bonus and not 
his separation date of August 15, 2005. So he could well owe $23,723.71, if not more, 
to the DoD after the bankruptcy. 
 
 Applicant testified credibly that he will repay the enlistment debt if it survives the 
bankruptcy. However, it is unclear whether he will have the means to repay that debt in 
the foreseeable future. The termination of temporary alimony in January 2011 freed up 
$300 per month in funds, but he also owed his divorce attorney $1,000. According to the 
partial permanent stipulation agreement of May 18, 2011, he and his spouse agreed 
that she will receive no alimony from him upon their divorce, and that they would be 
solely and individually responsible for all consumer credit card, medical, or other debts 
which stand in their respective names. However, repayment of Applicant‟s spouse‟s 
student loan debt was yet to be determined by the court. (Ex. T.) Applicant is listed as a 
cosigner on the loans. Given that Applicant did not consent to some of the loans, the 
judge overseeing the divorce may make Applicant‟s ex-wife solely responsible for 
repaying the student loan debt that is not dischargeable, but that remains to be seen. 
He also has his student loan debt that is currently in deferment but will have to be 
repaid. At this juncture, it would be premature to fully apply AG ¶ 20(c), even though 
Applicant‟s timely payments to the bankruptcy trustee and on the car loans are viewed 
favorably. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant‟s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the conduct 
and all the relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed 
at AG ¶ 2(a).6 Applicant testified that he relied to his detriment on advice that he would 
not have to repay any of his reenlistment bonus if he separated before completing his 
military service obligation. However, when he accepted the reenlistment bonus, he 
consented to the withholding from his pay, or any other money due him, to satisfy the 
unearned portion of his reenlistment bonus. He knew as of early 2006 that the DoD was 
                                            
6
The factors under AG ¶ 2(a) are: 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding 
the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the 
conduct; (4) the individual‟s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other 
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
 
 12 
seeking recoupment of around $18,264 in government funds overpaid to him because 
he did not complete his enlistment term. His payments on the debt were sporadic at 
best, and he continued to take on new debt (most notably the new cars) when that debt 
was going unpaid. He also exercised financial irresponsibility in not properly monitoring 
his and his spouse‟s spending habits, which led to them being financially overextended. 
 
 In his favor, Applicant continued to be a dedicated employee for a defense 
contractor while experiencing financial and marital problems at home. He has taken a 
credible step through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy to resolve most of his outstanding debts. 
Yet his liability for the enlistment bonus may well survive the bankruptcy. His neglect of 
this obligation at times between 2006 and September 2008, when he decided to file for 
bankruptcy, was clearly inconsistent with his obligations as a defense contractor 
employee with a top-secret clearance and as a veteran drawing disability pay from the 
military. As of his hearing in December 2010, he had not raised the issue of that debt 
with the bankruptcy trustee. It is unclear whether his pending divorce will help or further 
hinder his financial situation. The financial concerns are not sufficiently mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.b:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
  
 In light of the record in this case, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
  
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
 
