                                                                
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     )  ISCR Case No. 10-07088 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: David Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Phillip Cave, Esq.  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline E, Personal 
Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 21, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 In an undated answer to the SOR, Applicant requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 13, 2011. DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing on April 28, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 1, 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant offered exhibits (AE) A and B. They were admitted 
into evidence without objections. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 8, 
2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied SOR allegation ¶ 1.a and admitted ¶1.b. His admissions are 
included in the findings of facts. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is 28 years old. He is not married and has no children. He has been 
employed by his present employer, a federal contractor, for about two years. Before 
then he worked for another contractor. He has held a secret security clearance for about 
three years.1  
 
Applicant completed a security clearance application on February 4, 2010, at the 
request of his employer, so he could upgrade his secret security clearance to a top 
secret security clearance. As part of the background investigation he was interviewed 
by a government investigator (GI) on March 17, 2010. He provided information that he 
had attended college from September 2000 to December 2005. When specifically asked 
if he experienced any suspensions, expulsions, or any other academic or non-academic 
difficulties while in attendance, he answered “No.” When asked if there were any 
records that might be reviewed or any persons that would offer information which would 
tend to contradict anything that he told the investigator during the interview, he 
responded that he was not aware of anything to the best of his knowledge.2   
 
In February 2001, Applicant received a written counseling from the Associate 
Dean of Students for violating the university’s responsible computing policy. Applicant 
admitted he committed this violation, but did not disclose it to the GI when asked. He 
stated he did not recall the violation when he was asked and had blocked out his 
college experience. Applicant’s testimony was not believable.3 
 
In May 2003, Applicant was accused of academic dishonesty for cheating on an 
exam in violation of the University’s Code of Conduct. In June 2003, he had a hearing 
before the Undergraduate Student Judicial System committee. He pled not guilty to the 
offense and was found guilty. He appealed the decision. His appeal was 19 pages long 
and included photographs. The appeal was denied. In July 2003, Applicant was placed 
on a deferred suspension from the university until the spring semester of 2004. He 
initially received the grade “X/F” for the course, which means failure due to academic 
1 Tr. 20, 31. 
 
2 Tr. 29. 
 
3 Tr. 56-57, 63-67. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
dishonesty, but was allowed to submit a petition to remove the “X” designation, upon 
completion of a non-credit seminar on academic integrity. He took the course from 
September 2003 through December 2003 and completed it. Applicant did not disclose 
this information to the GI even though he was specifically asked if he had any academic 
difficulties. When asked later during another interview, he told the GI that he could not 
recall what punishment he received. His explanation for failing to disclose this 
information was that he did not recall this incident and he had totally blocked out of his 
mind his college experience. Applicant’s testimony was not believable.4 
 
To complete an English paper at college in February 2004, Applicant was 
required to provide photocopies of the source material for the paper. He tore the source 
material pages out of library books he had obtained from the university library, and 
submitted the pages as his source material because he could not find a working copy 
machine to make copies. When asked by his professor about where he obtained the 
hard copies of the source materials, he said he obtained them from books purchased 
online, which was false. He also said that he did not have the books because they were 
stolen or possibly at his parents’ house. In May 2004, he had a judicial hearing for 
violating the misuse of property and false information policies of the University’s Code of 
Conduct. He was found guilty at the hearing. He appealed the ruling in June 2004. His 
appeal was denied in July 2004, and Applicant was suspended from the university and 
banned from its campus until the first summer session of 2005. He received the 
suspension through the Undergraduate Student Judicial System. When asked at his 
hearing why he did not disclose this information to the GI, he stated he had totally 
blocked his college experience from his mind and did not recall it. He stated he did not 
recall saying he had purchased the books. He did not recall saying the books had been 
stolen. He stated he possibly said they were at his parents’ house. He did not recall that 
he appealed the judicial committee’s decision. He did not recall if he pled guilty at the 
judicial hearing. Applicant’s testimony was not believable.5  
 
On May 14, 2010, Applicant was contacted by the GI for a follow-up interview. He 
did not volunteer the information about his past school suspensions and violations, but 
when specifically asked by the GI, he then acknowledged them. He stated he 
completely forgot about the incidences. When asked how he could forget about the 
incidents, he stated that he never brought it up to others because it made him look bad, 
so he forgot about it. He disputed this statement in his interrogatory stating that this was 
not an accurate account “of the meaning I was attempting to convey.” He confirmed in 
his interrogatory that he “simply forgot about these events since they occurred many 
years ago, and I did not have to recall, recount, discuss or revisit the events since the 
time of occurrence till now.”6 He explained he blocked out the time from 2000 to 2005. 
Applicant also stated in his interrogatory that “these incidents occurred when I was 19, 
4 Tr. 54-56, 60-64. 
 
5 Tr. 39-53, 68. 
 
6 GE 2. 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
20, and 21 years of age. I feel I am a vastly different person than I was then.” He stated 
his past actions really have not hindered his life and at the time it was not a big deal.7 
 
Applicant explained at his hearing that he “more or less” forgot about all of these 
incidences. He looked at college as one big block of time and stated “nothing really 
jogged my memory” when he was asked about his college experiences. He reiterated at 
his hearing that he forgot about all of the above events and continued to maintain that 
position. When talking with the GI he did not recall any the issues that arose during 
college.8  
 
Applicant stated he is a changed person from when he was in college. He stated 
that, back then, he was immature and did not take life seriously. He feels he learned a 
lesson.9 
 
Applicant provided numerous character letters. He is considered honest and 
truthful and has a reputation for being so. He is considered an asset to his company. He 
is organized, punctual, and follows the rules when it involves safeguarding classified 
material. I also considered Applicant’s performance evaluation.10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
7 Tr. 36-39, 49-50, 57-60, 69-70. 
 
8 Tr. 34-39. 
 
9 Tr. 27-28. 
 
10 AE A, B. 
 
5 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other government representative; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; and  
  
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 I have considered the above disqualifying conditions and carefully considered all 
of the evidence presented. I conclude all of them apply. Applicant knowingly, 
deliberately, and repeatedly lied to the GI when asked if he had any past suspensions, 
expulsions, academic, or non-academic issues while at school. He continued to lie 
throughout his hearing. He engaged in a pattern of dishonest conduct and rule 
violations while attending college, to include cheating and misuse of university property. 
I find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
under AG ¶ 17. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant’s deliberate falsifications to the GI are serious and reflect directly on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. His conduct of cheating on an exam and 
misuse of university property are not minor and cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. He does not acknowledge 
his behavior nor has he sought counseling to change his behavior. Instead, he 
continued his course of conduct during his hearing by providing false statements. 
Applicant has a long history of dishonest conduct and falsifications. His conduct during 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
college shows he repeatedly violated the school’s honor code. He cheated on an exam; 
he tore pages out of library books to complete a paper and then lied about it. He was 
counseled and suspended from college for his actions. He knowingly and deliberately 
lied to a GI during his background investigation when he denied he had any issues 
during college. There is no evidence to conclude that his behavior is unlikely to recur. 
His college transgressions involve rules violations, false statements, and cheating. He 
continued his dishonest conduct by providing false statements to the GI. He then 
continued to extend his dishonest conduct by providing false statements at his hearing, 
which shows he has not taken positive steps to reduce his vulnerability or that he 
acknowledged his behavior and has taken steps to change it.11 The evidence supports 
that he has a long pattern of dishonesty and rules violations which he continues to lie 
about. I find AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant is 28 
years old and has been steadily employed since he graduated from college in 2005. His 
performance evaluation reflects a valued and successful employee. He lied to a GI 
during his background interview when he was specifically asked if he had suspensions, 
expulsions, or other academic or non-academic problems in college. It is unfathomable 
that Applicant did not recall he was suspended from college for an academic year after 
receiving a hearing and appealing the findings based on his actions of tearing pages 
from school library books and then lying about it. It is not believable that he did not 
11 I did not consider his false statements at his hearing for disqualifying purposes, but I did consider when 
analyzing the whole-person and considering Applicant’s credibility. 
 
8 
 
 
recall being accused of cheating, going before a judicial board, appealing its decision, 
and then taking a semester-long seminar to have removed from his transcript the “X” 
from his “F” grade. Unfortunately during his hearing, Applicant continued to provide 
false statements and repeatedly lied. Although he stated that he is a vastly different 
person today than he was in college and his past conduct has not hindered him, sadly 
that is not true. His dishonest behavior continued throughout his hearing. He claims the 
conduct happened so long ago and he blocked it from his memory, which is not 
believable. Applicant has a long history of being dishonest and untrustworthy. I am not 
convinced that he would be honest if he was confronted by any investigator about 
security issues. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with serious questions and 
doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Personal Conduct security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a (1)-(3):    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
