 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 10-01130 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Richard A. Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Daniel T. Dedeo, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 30, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 1, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) for Applicant. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within 
the Department of Defense for SORs after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 28, 2010, and DOHA received his 
answer on November 1, 2010. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
January 13, 2011. The case was assigned to me on February 1, 2011. DOHA issued a 
 
2 
 
 
notice of hearing on February 11, 2011, scheduling the hearing for March 2, 2011. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through D, 
which were received without objection; called one witness; and testified on his own 
behalf.  
 
I held the record open until March 16, 2011, to afford the Applicant the 
opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE E through H, 
which were received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
March 17, 2011. The record closed on March 17, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all of the SOR allegations except for SOR ¶ 1i. His answers 
are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make 
the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old physical security officer, who has been employed by 
a defense contractor since July 2005. He seeks to retain his secret security clearance, 
which is a condition of his continued employment. Applicant has continuously held a 
security clearance since 1980. He was granted his first security clearance when he 
enlisted in the U.S. Navy, discussed infra. During the past 21 years, he has held a 
security clearance; he has never had a security violation. (GE 1, Tr. 24, 27-29.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1978. He has no formal 
education beyond high school. Applicant has, however, attended various Navy service 
schools and job-related training courses. (GE 1, Tr. 25-26.) Applicant served in the 
Navy from October 1980 to October 1984, and was honorably discharged as a 
radioman third class (pay grade E-4). (GE 1, 25-26.) Applicant has never married and 
has no dependents. (GE 1, Tr. 27.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges nine separate allegations. The first eight allegations 
include six credit card-related debts and two condominium mortgage-related past-due 
debts. These eight debts total $72,526. The ninth allegation is a January 1997 chapter 
7 bankruptcy with a May 1997 discharge. (SOR ¶¶ 1a – 1i.) (Tr. 12.) 
 
Applicant encountered financial problems in the late 1990s when he was 
working as physical security officer, living in a high-cost area, and was laid off. Unable 
to locate work, he fell deeper and deeper into debt and after consulting with a 
bankruptcy attorney, he filed chapter 7 bankruptcy in January 1997 and was awarded 
 
3 
 
 
a discharge in May 1997. (SOR ¶ 1i.) Per his 1997 summary of schedules, $24,415 in 
debt was discharged. (GE 5.) 
 
After his 1997 chapter 7 bankruptcy, Applicant reestablished himself financially 
and remained current on his debts for nine years. However, in August 2008, he lost 
overtime opportunities that reduced his annual income by $5,000 to $8,000. As before, 
Applicant was living in a high-cost area and the loss of income on his then-salary 
impacted him significantly.  His financial situation continued to deteriorate and he 
again fell deeper and deeper into debt. Applicant was unsuccessful when he 
attempted to work with his creditors. He initially consulted a credit counseling firm and 
later he consulted with a bankruptcy attorney. Applicant filed chapter 7 bankruptcy in 
July 2010 and was awarded a discharge in November 2010. Per his 2010 summary of 
schedules, $163,766 in debt was discharged. (GE 6, Tr. 13-18, 30-31.)  The erratic 
increases in condominium association fees also led to Applicant’s financial difficulties. 
He had purchased a condominium in 1999 for $27,000. When several other units were 
unable to pay their association fees, the association doubled the dues of the other 
residents “to make things work.” (Tr. 31-35.) Applicant lost his condominium after filing 
chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2010. (Tr. 35-37.) 
 
All of the debts alleged in the SOR were discharged in Applicant’s 2010 chapter 
7 bankruptcy. (SOR ¶¶ 1a – 1h., GE 6.) In conjunction with filing bankruptcy, Applicant 
completed mandatory consumer credit counseling in March 2010. (AE G, AE H.) 
Currently, Applicant’s annual gross salary is $35,040. He submitted a budget that 
reflects he is living a very modest lifestyle in a high-cost area. His net monthly 
remainder after he has paid all of his monthly bills is $513. (AE E.) Since his 
November 2010 bankruptcy discharge, he has been able to regain financial stability. 
(Tr. 37-44.) Applicant is also undergoing financial counseling through his employee 
assistance program. (AE F, Tr. 48-49.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
 A long-time friend testified on Applicant’s behalf. He served on both active duty 
and the reserves as a commissioned officer and held several positions of significant 
responsibility. Most recently, he worked as a special agent for the Defense Security 
Service and as an investigator with the Office of Personnel Management conducting 
background investigations on applicants. He currently is employed by the U.S. 
Marshall’s Service as a Court Security Officer. (Tr. 52, 54-55.) He has never worked 
with Applicant, but has known him socially for 13 years. He described Applicant as, 
“honest, loyal to a fault, would do anything for you.”  (Tr. 53.) He corroborated the 
circumstances that led to Applicant’s financial situation as beyond his control. (Tr. 53-
55.) 
 
Applicant submitted three reference letters: (1) a former security manager, who 
has known Applicant since 1996; (2) a former work associate and long-time friend 
since the “early 1980s;” and (3) his current supervisor. All of these individuals spoke of 
Applicant’s integrity, honesty, loyalty, and trustworthiness. All individuals strongly 
 
4 
 
 
recommend Applicant for a security clearance. Lastly, Applicant submitted his most 
recent employee performance review covering the period of March 2010 to March 
2011. This evaluation documents Applicant’s above average performance as a 
defense contract employee. (AE A – D.) 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
 
5 
 
 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude that a relevant security concern exists under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).  
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems, “Failure 
or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may 
indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.” 
 
  AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by the evidence presented. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a)-(e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
 
6 
 
 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. It 
was not until November 2010 when he was awarded his bankruptcy discharge that his 
debts were resolved. Therefore, his debt is “a continuing course of conduct” under the 
Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 
2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). He receives partial 
credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because the debt “occurred under such circumstances that it 
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  Under AG ¶ 20(b), he receives full credit because 
the downfall in the economy and loss of overtime were largely beyond his control. 
When faced with shortfalls of income, he acted responsibly under the circumstances 
by attempting to work with his creditors and consulting a credit counseling service.1
 
  
AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable because Applicant did seek financial counseling in 
conjunction with his 2010 chapter 7 bankruptcy and more recently through his 
employee assistance program. He has produced evidence in the form of a current 
budget that reflects he is living within his means and has regained financial 
responsibility. Furthermore, AG ¶ 20(d) is partially applicable given the fact Applicant 
attempted to work with his creditors and consulted with a credit counseling service 
before he filed chapter 7 bankruptcy. Albeit, this was not his first choice, but the only 
choice he had after evaluating his options.2
                                                          
1“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep his debts current. 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable because 
Applicant did not dispute the legitimacy of any of his debts.  
 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. The SOR lists eight 
debts totalling $72,526 that were at one time or another in various states of 
delinquency. Furthermore, Applicant filed two chapter 7 bankruptcies in 1997 and 
2010. His financial track record raises sufficient security concerns to merit further 
inquiry.   
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s record of military service and good employment weighs in his favor. There 
is no evidence of any security violation during the 21 years that Applicant has held a 
security clearance. Circumstances beyond Applicant’s control led to both of his 
bankruptcy filings. He is a law-abiding citizen. All of his SOR debts are resolved. His 
monthly expenses are current.  
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
Applicant is making a significant contribution to the national defense. His 
company fully supports him and recommends him for a security clearance. He made 
mistakes, and his debts became delinquent. His evidence strongly supports the notion 
that he is a trustworthy individual and his past financial difficulties were caused by 
conditions truly beyond his control. His track record of debt payments was only 
interrupted when faced with those conditions. Collectively, these factors show 
responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. After weighing the disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole-
person, I conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1a. to 1i:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
