                                                              
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 10-01846 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s spouse and three children are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
He cares about his spouse and children and provides financial support to them. He 
admits they are at serious risk for injury or death if terrorists discover their identity or 
relationship to Applicant. Foreign influence security concerns are not mitigated. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 24, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) (SF-86) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On September 
7, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to him, alleging security concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence) 
(Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005. The 
SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding 
under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
 
2 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
continue a security clearance for him, and recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked. 
 
On September 20, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. (HE 3) On November 12, 2010, Department 
Counsel was prepared to proceed. On December 1, 2010, DOHA assigned the case to 
me. Department Counsel and Applicant were communicating about setting the hearing 
for several weeks because Applicant was deployed to Afghanistan, and the hearing was 
delayed until Applicant would be in the United States. (Tr. 23) On March 9, 2011, DOHA 
sent notice of the hearing. (Tr. 12) Another hearing notice was mailed on March 17, 
2011 and sent by email to Applicant on March 22, 2011 to delay the hearing to April 6, 
2011, at Applicant’s request. (Tr. 13-14, 34-35) Applicant left Afghanistan and arrived at 
the hearing location on March 24, 2011. (Tr. 16) On March 25, 2011, he found an 
attorney in the telephone book. (Tr. 21) He telephoned the attorney on March 25, 2011; 
however, he talked to the attorney for seven or eight minutes and the attorney told 
Applicant that he was unable to represent Applicant on such short notice. (Tr. 20-22) 
Applicant agreed to proceed with the hearing on April 6, 2011, provided he received 30 
days after the hearing to submit additional documents. (Tr. 24-25) He is familiar with 
legal matters, as he has a master’s degree from a well-known U.S. university, and he 
has studied law. (Tr. 24)  
 
On April 6, 2011, Applicant’s hearing was held using video teleconference. I was 
located in Arlington, Virginia and Applicant and Department Counsel were at Applicant’s 
location. I received the transcript of the hearing on April 18, 2011. The record closed on 
May 6, 2011. (Tr. 150)   
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel offered eight exhibits (GE 1-8) (Transcript 
(Tr.) 46-47), and Applicant offered 35 documents (AE A-LL). (Tr. 80-98) Department 
Counsel did not object to my consideration of Applicant’s exhibits, and I admitted AE A-
AE LL. (Tr. 98)  
 
Applicant did not object to GE 1, 2, 8. (Tr. 48, 52, 76-77) Applicant objected to 
admissibility of GE 3-7 based on the accuracy of the information in those documents. 
(Tr. 47-77)1 Department Counsel and Applicant agreed that I could accept Applicant’s 
 
1 Applicant said the following information in GE 3-7 was incorrect: (1) in GE 4, the date of birth for 
Applicant’s brother (Tr. 60); (2) in GE 5, the date he started working in Afghanistan’s Diplomatic Service; 
(3) in GE 5, the date he surrendered his Afghan diplomatic passport; (4) in GE 5, any conclusion that he 
was disloyal to the United States; (5) in GE 5 at page 14, the author of the document wrote the incorrect 
name of the country where Applicant had important deployment employment (Tr. 63); (6) in GE 5, any 
explicit or implicit conclusion that he worked for a foreign intelligence service or worked with those in a 
foreign intelligence service (Tr. 64); (7) in GE 5, the year he started working in the Afghan diplomatic 
office (Tr. 64); (8) in GE 5, the report incorrectly said that Applicant said “90” members of his family were 
killed by poison gas when he actually said “19” (Tr. 64); (9) in GE 6, he left Afghanistan and not Iraq in 
2006, and he did not describe himself as “defective” or any similar word (Tr. 66); (10) in GE 6 at page 7, 
that he left his position in 2000 under adverse circumstances or was fired when he actually left with an 
 
3 
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                            
statements of fact in connection with his objections to GE 3-7 as substantive evidence. 
(Tr. 78-79) I accept Applicant’s corrections to the record as fact. (Tr. 54, 58-59, 61, 62, 
65) I overruled Applicant’s objections to admissibility of GE 3-6, indicating his objections 
went to the weight, rather than the admissibility of GE 3-7. (Tr. 58-60, 61, 62, 65, 73, 76) 
I specifically give no weight to the conclusions of the counter-intelligence personnel 
about Applicant’s lack of credibility, and I have independently drawn my own credibility 
conclusions. 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice (AN) of facts concerning 
Afghanistan. (Tr. 13-14; HE 4, AN Request) Department Counsel provided supporting 
documents to show detail and context for those facts. (HE 4, Ex. I to VII) Applicant did 
not object, and I granted Department Counsel’s request. (Tr. 77-78) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government reports. 
See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types 
of facts for administrative notice).    
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant’s response to the SOR admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 
1.h. (HE 3). His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant was born in 1943, and he is 68 years old. (Tr. 99) A Department of 
Defense contractor employs him as a linguist and cultural advisor. He currently holds a 
secret security clearance.  
 
Applicant married in 1955, and his three children were born in 1977, 1978, and 
1984. (GE 1) Applicant, his spouse, and three children were all born in Afghanistan. 
Applicant attended college and university in Afghanistan where he studied law and 
political science. (Tr. 100) He attended a large U.S. university for about one year in the 
 
excellent recommendation (Tr. 66-68); (11) In GE 6, the investigator made a mistake about his Afghan 
passport (Tr. 68); (12) in GE 6, Applicant clarified how his family came to the United States in the 1990s 
and why they returned to Afghanistan (Tr. 69); (13) in GE 6, he reiterated his lack of connection with 
Afghan intelligence services (Tr. 70); (14) in GE 6, he corrected the dates of his employment at the 
Afghan Diplomatic Service (Tr. 70); (15) in GE 6, he said that he was “forcibly brought” into the Afghan 
Diplomatic Service (Tr. 70); (16) in GE 6, he explained why he was upset with the Afghan Diplomatic 
Service in the 1990s (Tr. 71); (17) in GE 6, the report said he was from a high-class Afghan family (Tr. 
71); (18) in GE 7, he cooperated with an FBI agent that questioned him and the inference that there was 
something derogatory about his contact with the FBI was incorrect (Tr. 75-76).  
 
2 The facts in this decision do not specifically describe employment, names of witnesses, names 
of other groups or locations in order to protect Applicant and his family’s privacy. The cited sources 
contain more specific information.  
 
4 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
late 1960s. He served one year in the Afghan military. (Tr. 100) He was then employed 
in the Afghan Government from 1967 to 1978. (Tr. 100-101) He purchased an 
apartment in Afghanistan in 1971. (Tr. 101) From about 1979 to 1980, he was 
unemployed. (Tr. 101) Applicant said he was forced to take a government job in 
Afghanistan from 1980 to 1995 working for the Afghan Diplomatic Service. (Tr. 44; SOR 
¶ 1.g) His diplomatic position was particularly important during a 3-year-period in the 
1980s and during a 2-year-period in the 1990s. (Tr. 44, 102-103; SOR ¶ 1.h) 
 
In 1995, he entered the United States on a tourist visa. (Tr. 103; GE 2 at 15-21) 
He received threatening letters from the Afghan Government, and he applied for asylum 
in the United States. (Tr. 103; GE 2 at 21) On May 22, 1996, Applicant, his spouse, one 
of his daughters, and his son received political asylum in the United States. (Tr. 39) His 
older daughter’s asylum was delayed until December 31, 1998. (Tr. 40) Applicant’s two 
daughters, his wife and his son left Asia and lived in Canada until they moved to the 
United States. (Tr. 69, 104) His 18-year-old daughter needed to reapply for asylum, and 
she received her visa to come to the United States on December 31, 1998. (Tr. 69) 
Applicant’s family went back to Afghanistan in 2000 to be with his older daughter, who 
was alone in Afghanistan to “safeguard her honor and prestige.” (Tr. 105-06) In July 
2004, Applicant was naturalized as a U.S. citizen. (GE 2 at 16, 21) 
 
At his hearing, Applicant said he has not seen his family since 2000, even though 
he was deployed to Afghanistan as a contractor in 2004-2006 and 2009-2011. (Tr. 107-
08, 118-119) He said he did not talk to his wife in more than one year. (Tr. 108)3 Later 
he said his contact with his family in Afghanistan was, “When I was here, after a couple 
of months, and something like that, so–more or less.” (Tr. 112) His family was afraid to 
go out and show themselves because “they will be captured, and they press them to call 
me over there too.” (Tr. 109) He did not think his son and daughters were employed in 
Afghanistan. (Tr. 109) He sends his family living in Afghanistan $200 to $300 every 
couple of months to pay their bills. (Tr. 109; SOR ¶ 1.b) His son is afraid to accept 
employment because “they will put him in some prison to bring [Applicant] back, their 
father, over there.” (Tr. 144) His oldest daughter was getting married; however, he 
claimed he did not know when they would marry “because he is not in touch.” (Tr. 110) 
 
 
3 Applicant’s October 14, 2004, SF 86 indicates he lives in the United States and his spouse and 
one son and one daughter live at his address in the United States. (GE 8) His other daughter lives in 
Afghanistan. (GE 8) His October 18, 2004 counter-intelligence questionnaire indicates he had daily 
contact with his spouse and children, who are living in the United States, and he had not had contact with 
his daughter L, who is in Afghanistan, since 2002. (GE 7 at 15) His September 28, 2006 counter-
intelligence questionnaire indicates he had contact with his spouse and children living in Afghanistan four 
to five times per year. (GE at 38) His wife left the United States more than two years previously. (GE 6 at 
10) His wife only lived in the United States from 1998 to 2000. (GE 6 at 11)  
 
His April 23, 2009 counter-intelligence questionnaire indicates his frequency of contact with his 
spouse and three children is approximately once a month. (GE 2 at 36) On May 15, 2009, an Office of 
Personnel Management (OPM) investigator interviewed Applicant (OPM PSI). (GE 2 at 4-6) His PSI 
indicates he communicates with his wife, his daughter, who was born in 1977, his son, who was born in 
1978, his other daughter, and his niece three to seven times a year. (GE 2 at 4-6)  
 
 
 
5 
                                                                                                                                             
When Applicant is in the United States, he lives with his niece, who is the 
daughter of his older sister. (Tr. 112-113) His brothers and his father-in-law work for the 
Afghan Government. (Tr. 113) He expected his spouse and children to return to the 
United States when they get a U.S. visa. (Tr. 115) His spouse, children, and one niece 
are not U.S. citizens. (Tr. 117; SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d) They are solely Afghan citizens 
and live in Afghanistan. (Tr. 117; SOR ¶ 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d)      
 
Applicant said there is no law in the United States and that is why Applicant’s 
wife, daughters, and son returned to Afghan. (Tr. 69) His daughter is waiting for her 
green card and intends to return to the United States. (Tr. 69) It was very important to 
Applicant that his daughter not sleep with any other person before marriage because 
“she will be so clean and be virgin.” (Tr. 40) This is a very important cultural and tribal 
value for Applicant. (Tr. 4)   
 
Applicant denied that he currently owned an apartment in Afghanistan because it 
was taken by the “law of the gun” and now other people had possession of the 
apartment. (Tr. 41; SOR ¶ 1.e)  
 
Applicant loves the United States of America and Americans. (Tr. 42) He 
respects “the Constitution more than anyone else, with [his] heart, mind, soul and 
blood.” (Tr. 42-43) He is ready to die for the United States. (Tr. 43) He described himself 
as “loyal, trustworthy, patriotic, honest, pure, and proud citizen of the United States.” 
(Tr. 42)  
 
As indicated previously, Applicant’s corrections to GE 3-7 were accepted as fact. 
He vehemently denied being under the foreign influence of the communists “who killed 
19 members of [his] family by poison gas” and looted his house. (Tr. 42, 53-54) He had 
a deep-seated anger towards the communists, “terrorists, extremists, butcher[s], looters, 
destroyers, and mad groups.” (Tr. 43, 53-54) Applicant was sincere and credible on 
these points and I find that the communists are not able to influence Applicant because 
he is adamantly opposed to them. (Tr. 53)  
 
Applicant was unhappy with the conduct of the counter-intelligence interviewer. 
(Tr. 44-45) He believed the counter-intelligence report had “a lot of misinterpretation” 
and ultimately the report was a figment of the interviewer’s imagination. (Tr. 45) 
Applicant objected because several exhibits had incorrect dates for his important 
Afghan Diplomatic Service, which was actually from during a 3-year-period in the 1980s 
and during a 2-year-period in the 1990s, and that he held just one passport issued by 
Afghanistan and that was an official Afghanistan diplomatic passport. (Tr. 54-55, 59)  
 
Applicant emphasized that his family was in Afghanistan for the honor and dignity 
of their family, especially his daughter. (Tr. 133-134, 145) They would lose face with 
their tribe if she lived alone in Afghanistan. (Tr. 133-134) His family was in Afghanistan 
despite the terrible things that happen every second and the great danger that they 
face. (Tr. 133-134, 142) 
 
 
6 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
Applicant has earned a substantial income over the last six years serving in 
Afghanistan, and this income is essentially tax free. (Tr. 135-136) He had approximately 
$70,000 to $90,000 in his U.S. checking account. (Tr. 135-136) He denied that he 
provided more than $200 to $300 every couple of months to his family in Afghanistan; 
however, he could not or would not provide a detailed explanation of what he did with 
his income. (Tr. 135-138, 142)4 He said the total payment per year to his family in 
Afghanistan is about $2,500. (Tr. 142) He claimed that the last time he sent them 
money was in 2009. (Tr. 143) As post-hearing evidence, I requested Applicant’s 1040s 
for the past five years and a written explanation for disposition of his income so that I 
could compare his U.S. investments with his investments in Afghanistan. (Tr. 150) In 
2009, his income was $104,788. In 2008, his income was $10,904. In 2007, his income 
was $4,684. In 2006, his income was $73,170. In 2005, his income was $126,404. In 
2004, his income was $13,372. (AE JJ) He did not explain what he did with his income 
other than to state he “lost a good big chunk of my money” in the bad economy, and all 
of his investments were in the United States. (AE B)   
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant provided several unit coins received for his outstanding contributions to 
mission accomplishment. (AE HH, AE LL) He received certificates of appreciation in 
2010 from the U.S. Marine Corps for his service as a linguist and cultural advisor in 
Afghanistan. (AE C) In 2010-2011, he received letters of appreciation from the U.S. 
Marine Corps, International Security Assistance Force, a university-run agricultural 
project, and a Provincial Governor for his service in 2010-2011 in Afghanistan, which 
included his contributions to mission accomplishment and for assuming the risks 
associated with military endeavors. (AE D, AE E, AE F, AE G) His performance 
evaluations as a linguist were superior. (AE H) He earned a letter of commendation a 
letter of appreciation, and a certificate of appreciation from an Army medic, battalion 
surgeon, and a U.S. Army Special Forces unit for being an intelligent, knowledgeable, 
diligent, and outstanding linguist in 2009-2010. (AE I, AE J, AE K, AE L) 
 
Applicant received letters of commendation and certificates of recognition from a 
military police company for outstanding dedication and being a great asset as an 
interpreter from 2004 to 2005. (AE M, AE O, AE P, AE Q, AE R) He received an 
undated certificate of appreciation from a military intelligence task force, a 2003 
certificate for his commitment to service excellence, and a 2002 training certificate. (AE 
N, AE CC, AE DD, AE EE) 
 
Applicant received letters of commendation, dated October 23, 1997 and March 
28, 2000 for his diligence, loyalty, contributions, and trustworthiness from his district 
manager and his parts manager. (AE T, AE U) He also received certificates for his 
contributions to charity and to the Veterans of Foreign Wars. (AE V, AE W, AE X, AE Y, 
AE Z, AE AA, AE BB, AE FF, AE GG) 
 
 
 
4 During his February 6, 2008 counter-intelligence interview, Applicant was unable or unwilling to 
provide detailed information about how he transferred money overseas to his family. (GE 5 at 12)  
 
7 
                                                                                                                                             
Afghanistan 
 
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia. It is approximately the size of 
Texas (249,935 square miles). Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran 
borders it on the west and Russia to the north. It is a rugged and mountainous country 
which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. In 2009, the population 
was about 28 million people with about 3,000,000 Afghans living outside Afghanistan.  
 
Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic with a democratically elected 
president. Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by the 
Soviet Union in 1979. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union 
withdrew from the country, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan and 
religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% of 
the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies.  
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, terrorists 
including al-Qaida and the Taliban continue to assert power and intimidation within the 
country. Safety and security are key issues because these terrorist organizations target 
United States and Afghan interests by suicide operations, bombings, assassinations, 
car-jacking, assaults, or hostage taking. At this time, the risk of terrorist activities 
remains extremely high. The country’s human rights record remains poor and violence 
is rampant. According to recent reports from the U.S. Department of State, insurgents 
continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of Americans and other Western nationals. 
Travel warnings are ongoing. No section of Afghanistan is safe or immune from 
violence.  
 
The United States-Afghan relationship is summarized as follows: 
 
After the fall of the Taliban, the U.S. supported the emergence of a broad-
based government, representative of all Afghans, and actively encouraged 
a [United Nations] role in the national reconciliation process in 
Afghanistan. The U.S. has made a long-term commitment to help 
Afghanistan rebuild itself after years of war. The U.S. and others in the 
international community currently provide resources and expertise to 
Afghanistan in a variety of areas, including humanitarian relief and 
assistance, capacity-building, security needs, counter-narcotic programs, 
and infrastructure projects. 
 
During his December 1, 2009 speech at West Point, President Barack 
Obama laid down the core of U.S. goals in Afghanistan, which are to 
disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al-Qaeda and its safe havens in Pakistan, 
and to prevent their return to Afghanistan. . . . The United States is willing 
to support fully the ambitious agenda set out by the recently re-elected 
Afghan president, focusing on reintegration, economic development, 
 
8 
                                                                                                                                             
improving relations with Afghanistan regional partners, and steadily 
increasing the security responsibilities of the Afghan security forces. 
 
U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, Mar. 26, 2010 at 13. The 
United States has more combat troops deployed to Afghanistan than to any other 
foreign country. This extraordinary commitment to Afghanistan is balanced against the 
inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in Afghanistan to citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
 
9 
                                                                                                                                             
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline B (foreign influence).  
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
10 
                                                                                                                                             
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply. Applicant, his spouse, son, and two daughters were 
all born in Afghanistan. He has frequent contact with his spouse and children, who have 
been living in Afghanistan since 2000. He provides financial support to his family living 
in Afghanistan, and he cares about their welfare. He admitted that his family is a 
probable target of terrorists and the Taliban. Although thousands of U.S. and coalition 
armed forces and civilian contractors serving in Afghanistan are also targets, along with 
Afghan civilians who support the Afghan Government and cooperate with coalition 
forces, his family is not receiving any special protection from these threats from the 
Afghan or U.S. Governments.  
 
Applicant’s connections to his niece living in Afghanistan are too attenuated to 
raise a security concern, and the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.d is refuted. Applicant’s 
apartment in Afghanistan was taken from him in the 1990s, and he no longer has 
ownership. Accordingly, SOR ¶ 1.e is refuted. Applicant’s military service in 1966-1967, 
which was mandatory service, is mitigated because it is remote in time and was 
involuntary. SOR ¶ 1.f is found for Applicant. Applicant’s employment in the Afghanistan 
Government from the mid 1960s to the late 1970s and from the early 1980s to 1995 
(more than 25 years) is considered as a unitary matter.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h raise a disqualifying concern because such extensive 
service in the Afghan Government has made Applicant and his family targets for 
unlawful attacks, as indicated in his statement at his hearing. Additionally, Applicant has 
denied contacts with Afghan intelligence services. I take his statement to mean that 
when he was a diplomat, he occasionally did have contacts with intelligence services; 
however, after leaving the Afghan Diplomatic Service those contacts ended. Some of 
his misstatements may be due to his good faith misinterpretations of the questions. For 
example, he may have thought that the questions concerned his current contacts with 
Afghan intelligence services.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in 
Afghanistan, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, this 
factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, 
persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian 
government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the government or 
the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United 
States. The relationship of Afghanistan with the United States, places a significant, but 
not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his 
 
11 
                                                                                                                                             
relationships with his family members living in Afghanistan do not pose a security risk. 
Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist a family member living in 
Afghanistan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from 
Afghanistan seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through 
Applicant or his family, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the 
future. International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as 
effectively as capable state intelligence services, and Afghanistan has an enormous 
problem with terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with family members living in 
Afghanistan creates a potential conflict of interest because this relationship is 
sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist family members in 
Afghanistan by providing sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel 
produced substantial evidence of Applicant’s contacts with his family living in 
Afghanistan and has raised the issue of potential foreign pressure or attempted 
exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential 
application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
 
12 
                                                                                                                                             
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from 
persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant served in Afghanistan for 
several years from 2004-2011. I do not believe his statement that he never visited his 
family while he was in Afghanistan. His statements about contacting his family are 
inconsistent. I find he has frequent contact with his spouse and children, who live in 
Afghanistan. His loyalty, connections, and financial support provided to his spouse and 
children are a positive character trait. He did not believe they were employed because 
of risks that others might discover their connection to Applicant. Applicant appears to be 
their sole means of financial support. However, for security clearance purposes, those 
same connections to his family living in Afghanistan negate the possibility of mitigation 
under AG ¶ 8(a), and Applicant failed to fully meet his burden of showing there is “little 
likelihood that [his relationships with his relatives who are Afghanistan citizens] could 
create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) partially applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has significant 
connections to the United States, having lived in the United States for more than 15 
years. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2004. Most importantly, Applicant wants 
his security clearance to be reinstated so that he can return to Afghanistan and assist 
U.S. Armed Forces. He has offered to continue to risk his life to support the United 
States’ goals in Afghanistan. He has shown his patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the 
United States.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationships with his family living in 
Afghanistan, and indirectly, his family’s relationships with other Afghan citizens living in 
Afghanistan. He frequently communicates with his family living in Afghanistan. He 
served in the Afghan Government for many years and was an important Afghan 
diplomatic official. There is no evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Afghan 
Government, or those conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant 
or his family in Afghanistan, during the last ten years, to coerce Applicant or his family 
 
13 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
for classified or sensitive information.5 As such, there is a reduced possibility that 
Applicant or his family would be specifically selected as targets for improper coercion or 
exploitation. On the other hand, Applicant has conceded that his family living in 
Afghanistan is already at risk from terrorists. 
 
While the Government does not have any burden to prove the presence of such 
evidence, if such record evidence were present, Applicant would have a heavier 
evidentiary burden to mitigate foreign influence security concerns. It is important to be 
mindful of the United States’ huge investment of manpower and money in Afghanistan, 
and Applicant has supported U.S. goals and objectives in Afghanistan. Applicant and 
his family living in Afghanistan are potential targets of terrorists and the Taliban because 
of Applicant’s own activities and support for the United States, and Applicant’s potential 
access to classified information is likely to add some risk to Applicant and his family 
from lawless elements in Afghanistan.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in Afghanistan. Applicant is not 
required to report his contacts with family members living in Afghanistan. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has limited application because there is no evidence that Applicant has 
any interest in property or bank accounts in Afghanistan. However, this mitigating 
condition can only fully mitigate the disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 7(e), which 
provides, “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” All of Applicant’s assets are in the 
United States. As indicated previously, Applicant lost the real estate he owned in 
Afghanistan.  
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to family living in Afghanistan are very significant 
and greater than his connections to the United States. His Afghan Government 
employment (more than 25 years) is more significant than his employment related to the 
U.S. Government (four or five years). He does not have any immediate family living in 
the United States. His connections to the United States taken together are insufficient to 
fully overcome the foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
 
5 There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from an applicant 
before that applicant has access to such information or before they learn of such access.   
 
14 
                                                                                                                                             
                                           
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
   
There are substantial factors weighing towards reinstatement of Applicant’s 
security clearance; however, they are insufficient to warrant reinstatement of his 
security clearance. There is no evidence that Applicant has engaged in criminal activity, 
abused alcohol or illegal drugs, or committed any security violations. Applicant wishes 
to return to Afghanistan and serve with U.S. Armed Forces as a linguist and translator. 
He is willing to continue to risk his life as part of his duties on behalf of the U.S. combat 
forces in Afghanistan. He is fully aware of the risks to himself, and he is also aware that 
other family members in Afghanistan are at risk from terrorists and the Taliban. All these 
circumstances increase the probability that Applicant will recognize, resist, and report 
any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or exploit 
him. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). The circumstances 
tending to support approval of a clearance for Applicant are less significant than the 
factors weighing towards denial of his clearance. Applicant does not own property in 
Afghanistan. When he was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 2004, he swore allegiance to 
the United States. His desire for employment as a translator and past evaluations, 
certificates, letters, and recommendations document his outstanding performance as a 
translator and weigh heavily in his favor. His character evidence tends to support 
reinstatement of his security clearance.  
 
There are substantial unmitigated security concerns arising from Applicant’s 
spouse and children’s continued Afghan citizenship and residence in Afghanistan.  
Applicant, his spouse, and his children were born in Afghanistan. Applicant held a high 
level diplomatic position in the Afghan Government in the 1990s and was employed by 
the Afghan Government for more than 25 years. His Afghan connections are weighed 
against his connections to the United States. I do not believe Applicant’s statement that 
he never visited his family from 2004 to 2011, and that he has not contacted his spouse 
since 2009. Applicant has made inconsistent statements. At his hearing, he said his 
family moved to Afghanistan in 2000. His 2004 SF 86 and his 2004 counter-intelligence 
interview indicate he said his spouse and one son and one daughter lived at his address 
in the United States. See n. 3, supra. I decline to consider any of these allegations as 
disqualifying conditions. However, I consider his inconsistent statements for the limited 
purposes outlined in n. 6.6 He has made several other inconsistent statements about 
 
6 In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five 
circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
 
15 
                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                            
the frequency of his contacts with his spouse and children. I find he frequently 
communicates with his spouse and children and has visited them in the last several 
years while they were all in Afghanistan. His family is at significantly greater risk due to 
Applicant’s position as a linguist and he will receive access to more sensitive and 
classified information if his clearance is reinstated, further increasing the risk to his 
family.    
  
A Guideline B decision concerning Afghanistan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.7 Afghanistan is a very dangerous place 
because of violence from the Taliban and terrorists. The Taliban and terrorists continue 
to threaten the Afghan Government, the interests of the United States, U.S. Armed 
Forces, and those who cooperate and assist the United States. Applicant recognizes his 
work with the U.S. Armed Forces will endanger his family living in Afghanistan, and will 
be personally dangerous. The United States and Afghan Governments are allies in the 
war on terrorism. The United States is committed to the establishment of a free and 
independent Afghan Government. Afghanistan and the United States have close 
relationships in diplomacy and trade.      
 
After weighing all the facts and circumstances in this decision, including 
Applicant’s demeanor and sincerity at his hearing, I find his statements about the 
absence of his contacts with his family not to be credible, and I conclude he has failed 
to carry his burden of mitigating the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude foreign influence concerns 
are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). Consideration of the non-SOR misconduct is limited to these five circumstances.  
 
7 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion). 
  
 
16 
                                                                                                                                             
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d, 1.e, and 1.f: For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.g and 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
