                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01204 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq. 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations concern. She admits 
having 11 debts that are in collection and together total over $38,000. She has been on 
notice of the Government’s concerns for over 18 months and has failed to take any 
action to resolve her financial delinquencies. Applicant did not intentionally falsify her 
security questionnaire. Her request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 2, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR), which sets forth the security concerns of 
Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct), as the basis for its 
preliminary decision to deny Applicant access to classified information.1  
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant submitted her Answer to the SOR (Answer) in a two-page undated 
letter. She affirmatively waived her right to a hearing and requested that a decision be 
made on the administrative record.  
 
Department Counsel submitted its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on October 
26, 2010. The FORM contains Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8.2 A complete 
copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
Applicant received the FORM on January 12, 2011, and was advised that she had 30 
days to submit a response. Applicant did not file a response. The case was assigned to 
me on April 4, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. She is married with three children. During her 
December 2009 background interview, Applicant told the investigator that she was 
pregnant and was expecting her third child any day. She expected to go on maternity 
leave when her child was born, which would result in a decrease in her take-home pay.3 
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the United States Navy from April 1999 to 
March 2001. She received an honorable discharge. In October 2003, she attained a 
Medical Assistant degree. Since separating from active duty, Applicant has worked 
several jobs, including as a foreclosure representative for a national bank from 2005 to 
2007. Applicant has suffered some periods of unemployment over the past 10 years. 
However, she has been with her current employer since June 2009.4 
 
 In 2005, Applicant, with her sister and brother-in-law, purchased her 
grandmother’s home. She did so because neither she, nor her sister and brother-in-law, 
had the financial wherewithal to purchase the home on their own. The home is now in 
foreclosure with a past due balance of over $32,000. This is the largest of the debts 
listed in the SOR (¶1.g). Applicant initially hoped that her brother-in-law and sister would 
be able to secure a loan modification agreement, so they could take over the mortgage 
on their own. However, they were unsuccessful and Applicant is now looking into 
possibly filing for bankruptcy to resolve this debt. Applicant did not submit any 
documentation to show that she had filed for bankruptcy or had otherwise resolved this 
substantial debt.5 
2 Government Exhibit (GE) 5, Applicant’s Interrogatory Response, appears to be incomplete. 
Applicant’s handwritten response at the bottom of the second page indicates with an arrow that she may 
have provided additional handwritten information on a subsequent page that was not provided. Applicant 
failed to object or provide the missing page(s). GE 5, as well as the other exhibits, are admitted. 
 
3 GE 4 and 5. 
 
4 GE 4. 
 
5 GE 5. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 In September 2009, Applicant submitted her security clearance application 
(SCA). In response to relevant questions regarding her financial record, Applicant 
denied she had any adverse financial information to report. The following month, the 
Government reviewed Applicant’s credit report. The credit report revealed a number of 
derogatory accounts. In December 2009, Applicant was questioned by a Government 
investigator about her finances and her failure to list these debts on her SCA. Applicant 
stated that she was either unaware of the debts appearing on her credit report or had 
simply forgotten to list those that she was aware of. In her Answer, Applicant denied 
intentionally falsifying her SCA.6 
 
 In July 2010, Applicant responded to a DOHA interrogatory that, in part, asked 
her for an update regarding her delinquent debts. Applicant did not submit proof of 
payment or otherwise provide an update as to the status of the debts. She did submit a 
personal financial statement (PFS), which shows that she is paying on only one of her 
previously delinquent debts, a student loan account. The PFS also notes that Applicant 
owes the state of California $700 and is not paying on this debt.7 Applicant estimates 
that, after paying expenses, she has over $800 a month left over each month. She 
provided no explanation for why she is not using this money to satisfy her debts.8 
 
 In her Answer, Applicant admits 11 of the 16 debts alleged under Guideline F.9 
These 11 debts total approximately $38,188. They range from an outstanding $32 
medical bill to a foreclosure, where the amount past due is over $32,000. She was 
alerted to some of these delinquent debts during her 2009 background interview.10 
Applicant also claims in her Answer to be repaying two of the debts (¶¶1.h and 1.i), but 
failed to submit any proof to substantiate her claim.  
 
Applicant denies the remaining five debts alleged in the SOR, which total about 
$1,395. Two of these debts (¶¶1.n and 1.p) are duplicative of others already alleged in 
6 GE 3, 4 – 6. 
 
7 This debt was not alleged in the SOR, but will be considered in assessing the mitigating 
evidence, as well as whole-person factors, in this case. ISCR Case No. 09-06770 (App. Bd. Nov. 8, 
2002); ISCR Case No. 01-07656 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2002). 
 
8 GE 5. 
 
9 GE 3 (admits ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1.f – 1.m, and 1.o). 
 
10 Compare GE 5 (discusses debts alleged in ¶¶1.k – 1.o), with, GE 3 (admits she has not 
contacted the creditors holding these debts or will now make arrangements to pay these debt)  
 
 
4 
 
 
                                                          
the SOR.11 The remaining three debts denied by Applicant (¶¶1.a, 1.d and 1.e) appear 
on her recent credit report from October 2010.12  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
11 GE 6 at 5 and 8 (October 2009 credit report corroborates Applicant’s claim that the debt 
alleged in ¶1.n is the same debt alleged in ¶1.j); GE 8 (October 2010 credit report shows that Chase sold 
debt to AAC, a collection company, which corroborates Applicant’s claim that the debt in ¶1.p is the same 
as the debt alleged in ¶1.e). 
 
12 GE 8. 
 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 19. Applicant’s 
accumulation of over $38,000 in delinquent debt and her inability or unwillingness to 
resolve her financial obligations, establishes AG ¶ 19 (a) and (c).13 
 
 Guideline F also lists a number of mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 that may 
mitigate the concern. I have considered all the mitigating conditions, and find that the 
following merit further discussion: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c)  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
13 “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and (c) a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.” 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute. 
 
Applicant established that the debts alleged in ¶¶1.n and 1.p are duplicative of 
other debts already alleged in the SOR. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to these debts and I find in 
favor of Applicant on these two debts. 
 
Applicant’s financial problems are current. She admits to owing over $38,000 on 
11 delinquent debts. She provided no documentation to indicate that she has even 
attempted to resolve these debts. The Appeal Board has previously held that “it is 
reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present documentation about the 
satisfaction of individual debts”, and failure to provide such documentation supports a 
Guideline F finding against an Applicant.14  
 
Applicant has been aware of the Government’s concerns about her finances 
since her 2009 interview. Despite this knowledge, she has not contacted some of the 
creditors brought to her attention during the interview. Although Applicant has suffered 
periods of unemployment during the past 10 years, she has been with her current 
employer for the last 2 years and claims to have over $800 in monthly disposable 
income that she could use to pay these debts. Applicant has not acted responsibly 
under the circumstances, and failed to establish that she has made a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve her debts. Her financial problems continue 
to cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Applicant failed to establish that any of the mitigating conditions under Guideline 
F apply, except for AG ¶ 20(e) as to allegations 1.n and 1.p. She failed to mitigate the 
Financial Considerations concern. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information.  
 
 The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern under AG ¶ 16. I have considered all the disqualifying conditions and find that 
the following warrants discussion:  
14 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. July 30, 2008). 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form 
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or 
award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 The security clearance process is contingent upon the honesty of all applicants 
seeking access to classified information, and begins with the answers provided in the 
security questionnaire. An applicant should err on the side of over-inclusiveness and, 
when in doubt, disclose any potential derogatory information. However, the omission of 
material, adverse information standing alone is not enough to establish that an applicant 
intentionally falsified their security questionnaire.15 Instead, one must look at the facts 
and circumstances surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.16 
 
 In the present case, the Government failed to submit any evidence that Applicant 
was aware that she had delinquent debts, which were either 90-days delinquent at the 
time she filled out her SCA or over 180-days delinquent in the 7-year period prior to 
signing her SCA. I have thoroughly reviewed the evidence submitted with the FORM, 
and it falls far short of establishing that Applicant’s omission of her delinquent debts was 
deliberate. Applicant’s denial in her Answer is consistent with the responses she 
provided during her background interview in December 2009. Thus, I find that Appellant 
did not deliberately falsify her SCA, and find in her favor as to Guideline E.17 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
15 ISCR Case No. 07-16511 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 2009) (“In the case of an omission in a SCA or 
some other document, the Government’s burden of production requires more than merely showing that 
the omission occurred. Rather, the Government must present substantial evidence that the omission was 
deliberate.”). 
 
16 Id. 
 
17 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 09-07551 (App. Bd. Mar. 1, 2011) (Unlike in the present case, the 
Government could point to circumstantial evidence, including inconsistent statements, supporting a 
falsification allegation and adverse Guideline E determination). 
 
8 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the Navy for three years. Since leaving active 
duty, she has worked numerous jobs to support herself and her family. She has pursued 
additional educational opportunities to improve her prospects. However, she clearly 
over extended herself when she purchased a home she could not afford. Applicant has 
failed to resolve even the most minor debts alleged in the SOR, and her financial 
irresponsibility leaves me with serious doubts about her reliability and ability to handle 
classified information. Accordingly, I find that the favorable whole-person factors in this 
case do not outweigh the significant security concerns at issue. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.m, and 1.o:  Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.n and 1.p:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
 
