 
 
1 
 
 
                                                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
 
             
In the matter of: 
          ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05977 
                                                            )                      
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
                       
                                                                        
  
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the written record in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement. Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                    Statement of Case 
 
Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(e-QIP) on April 14, 2010. On January 24, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. DOHA acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant answered the SOR on February 17, 2011.1 With her Answer, Applicant 
requested a decision on the record in lieu of a hearing. The Government compiled its 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on March 22, 2011. The FORM contained documents 
identified as Items 1 through 5. On March 31, 2011, DOHA forwarded a copy of the 
FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional information and/or 
objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on April 4, 2011. She did 
not submit any information or file any objections within the required time period. On 
June 3, 2011, the case was assigned to me for a decision.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains four allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.). SOR ¶ 1.a. alleges: “You used marijuana, 
with varying frequency, from April 2007 to at least December 2009.” SOR ¶ 1.b. alleges: 
“You used mushrooms,2 with varying frequency, from approximately July 2008 to at 
least December 2008.” SOR ¶ 1.c. alleges: “You used ecstasy, with varying frequency, 
from approximately June 2008 to at least September 2008.” SOR ¶ 1.d. alleges: “You 
used cocaine, with varying frequency, from approximately July 2008 to at least August 
2008.” In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the four allegations in the SOR. 
Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact.  (Item 1; Item 3.) 
 
 Applicant is 25 years old, never married, and has no children. She attended 
college from 2003 until 2009, when she graduated and received a degree of Bachelor of 
Science in Mechanical Engineering. Since April 2010, she has been employed as a 
mechanical engineer by a government contractor. She seeks a security clearance for 
the first time. (Item 5.) 
  
 In April 2010, Applicant completed an e-QIP. Section 23a on the e-QIP asks the 
following question: “In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any controlled substance, 
for example, cocaine, crack cocaine, THC (marijuana, hashish, etc.), narcotics (opium, 
morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.), stimulants (amphetamines, speed, crystal 
methamphetamine, Ecstasy, ketamine, etc.), depressants (barbiturates, methaqualone, 
tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), steroids, inhalants (toluene, amyl 
nitrate, etc.), or prescription drugs (including painkillers)? Use of a controlled substance 
includes injecting, snorting, inhaling, swallowing, experimenting with or otherwise 
consuming any controlled substance. “(Item 4 at 48-50; italics in original omitted.) 
 
 
1 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that she was including her 2010 performance review. 
However, that document was not included with her Answer as it appears in the FORM. I contacted 
Department Counsel, and he provided the missing document, which had been inadvertently omitted from 
the FORM. I marked Applicant’s signed interim performance review, which covered the period from July 
6, 2010 to December 9, 2010, as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1 and admitted it to the record.  (Item 3; HE 1.)  
 
2 “Mushrooms” is a commercial or street name for an hallucinogen identified as Psilocybin.  See 
http://www.nida.nih.gov/DrugPages/DrugsofAbuse.html. 
 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
 Applicant responded “Yes” to question 23a and provided additional information. 
Applicant reported that she used marijuana “outside of school and work, around 50 
times” from April 2007 until December 2009.3 Applicant also reported that from June 
2008 until about December 2008, she used mushrooms three times, Ecstasy four times, 
and cocaine twice.  (Item 4 at 49-50.) 
 
 Applicant was interviewed about her illegal drug use by an authorized 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in May 2010.4 In the 
personal subject interview, as summarized by the investigator, Applicant stated that she 
used marijuana “on a casual basis” about 50 times between April 2007 and December 
2009. She stated that she smoked marijuana from a pipe that she shared with her 
friends at parties or weekend gatherings. She further stated that, in social settings, she 
was provided with marijuana, mushrooms, Ecstasy, and cocaine by individuals she 
could not identify, and she asserted that she used the illegal drugs out of curiosity and a 
desire to experiment. She claimed she did not develop any dependency on the illegal 
drugs she used, and she denied any drug use after December 2009. She said she no 
longer associates with the individuals with whom she used illegal drugs, and she stated 
she has no intention of using illegal drugs in the future. (Item 5 at 3-4.) 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant asserted that her drug use was infrequent 
and occurred in the past under circumstances that were unlikely to recur. She provided 
a copy of her employer’s drug and alcohol policy, issued February 1, 2011. Applicant 
stated that she had signed her employer’s drug and alcohol policy, and she further 
stated that she intended her signature on that document to be a statement of her intent 
to abstain from any future drug use, “with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation.”5 Applicant also stated that her past drug use did not cast doubt on her current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. She has not had drug counseling or 
treatment. (Item 3; Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant provided a copy of her interim performance review, which covered the 
period from July 6, 2010 to December 9, 2010. Her manager included the following 
comment: “[Applicant] is new to the organization but coming up to speed very quickly. 
Her performance with manufacturing related tasks, including documentation and 
problem solving are very strong.” The manager’s role overview rating stated: “Met 
expectations.” (HE 1.)  
 
 
3 On her e-QIP, Applicant reported that she was unemployed from August 2006 until September 2007. 
From September 2007 until June 2009, she was employed part-time by a firm as an engineering intern. 
She then worked full-time for the firm from June 2009 until assuming her present position in April 2010. 
(Item 4 at 18-21.)   
 
4 On October 12, 2010, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant confirmed the accuracy of the 
information in the investigator’s report.  (Item 5 at 6.) 
 
5 Applicant did not include a business record of her employer’s drug and alcohol policy containing her 
signature.  (Item 3.) 
 
4 
 
 
                                                     Burden of Proof 
 
 The Government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate 
the Government's case. Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the 
applicant then bears the burden of persuasion. The "clearly consistent with the national 
interest" standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant's 
suitability for access to classified information in favor of protecting national security. 
 
                          Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Id. at 
527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
the administrative judge applies these guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in 
the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a 
fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is 
a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations. AG ¶ 24(a) defines drugs as “mood and behavior altering 
substances.” The definition of drugs includes “(1) drugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), 
and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.” AG  ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as “the 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.” 
 
Through Applicant’s admissions, the record establishes that she used marijuana, 
at least 50 times over a period of approximately 2½ years, from April 2007 until 
December 2009. She also used mushrooms, Ecstasy, and cocaine in 2008.  
 
The record also establishes that Applicant, who is now 25 years old, used 
marijuana in her college years and after she began her professional career.  As recently 
as December 2009, she continued to use marijuana. This conduct casts doubt on her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. It also raises security concerns about 
her ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. I conclude that 
Applicant’s illegal drug use raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c). AG ¶ 
25(a) reads: “any drug abuse [as defined at AG ¶ 24(b)].” AG ¶ 25(c) reads: “illegal drug 
possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale, or 
distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.” 
 
Two Guideline H mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of Applicant’s 
case. If Applicant’s drug use happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on her 
 
6 
 
 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, then AG ¶ 26(a) might be 
applicable in mitigation. If Applicant demonstrated an intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future by (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, (2) changing 
or avoiding the environment where drugs were used, (3) abstaining from drug use for 
an appropriate period, or (4) signing a statement of intent with the automatic revocation 
of her security clearance for any violation, then AG ¶ 26(b) might be applicable. 
 
Applicant claims her last use of marijuana was in December 2009, approximately 
1½ years ago. In May 2010, approximately one year ago, Applicant told an OPM 
investigator of her intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. She said she no longer 
associated with the individuals with whom she had used illegal drugs, and she 
expressed her willingness to sign a statement of intent with automatic revocation of her 
security clearance if she used illegal drugs in the future. She made similar assertions in 
her Answer to the SOR. 
 
However, Applicant provided no information to demonstrate her intent not to 
abuse drugs in the future. She failed to provide documentation establishing that she 
had abstained from drug use for an appropriate period or that she had disassociated 
from those with whom she had used drugs in the past. While she asserted that she had 
changed her conduct to avoid environments where drugs are used, she failed to 
document this change in her conduct. She stated that she had signed her employer’s 
drug and alcohol policy and considered herself bound to comply with it. In her 
statement, she also expressed her understanding that if she were to use marijuana or 
any illegal drugs after being granted a security clearance, the clearance would be 
subject to immediate revocation. 
 
Applicant’s illegal drug use is recent and occurred periodically over a period of 
2½ years. She used illegal drugs as a young adult and after beginning her professional 
career. While her admitted use of mushrooms, Ecstasy, and cocaine occurred within a 
brief period in 2008, her marijuana use continued over a period of more than two years, 
suggesting a lifestyle choice that went beyond curiosity and experimentation.  
Insufficient time has elapsed to demonstrate whether she will carry out her intent to 
abstain from illegal drug use in the future. Additionally, she failed to provide 
documentation to support her assertions about abstinence, disassociation from drug-
using associates, and avoiding environments where drugs were used. I conclude that 
AG ¶ 26(a) and AG ¶ 26(b) do not fully apply in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s 
case. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances. While Applicant was candid in revealing her drug 
abuse when she completed her e-QIP and when she was interviewed by an OPM 
investigator, she failed to credibly demonstrate that she would not return to drug use in 
the future. Additionally, while she expressed an intent not to use illegal drugs in the 
future, she failed to document specific actions to demonstrate her intent. 
 
Applicant requested a decision on the written record. She did not file objections 
or provide additional information in response to the FORM. The written record in this 
case is sparse. Moreover, without an opportunity to question Applicant and to assess 
her credibility at a hearing, I am unable to conclude that she met her burden of 
persuasion in mitigating the Government’s allegations under the drug involvement 
adjudicative guideline.         
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from her relatively 
recent involvement with four illegal drugs. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:                 Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:                        Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:    Against Applicant  
 
  Subparagraph 1.d.:    Against Applicant 
 
8 
 
 
            Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                               
_____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
