1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-02236
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 9, 2011
______________
DECISION
______________
ROSS, Wilford H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP), on October 5, 2009. (Government Exhibit 1.)  On August 17, 2010, the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing
the security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial Considerations) and E (Personal
Conduct) concerning Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 9 and October 6, 2010,
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was
prepared to proceed on December 7, 2010. This case was assigned to me on
December 14, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 3, 2011. I convened
the hearing as scheduled on January 19, 2011. The Government offered Government
Exhibits 1 through 9, which were received without objection. Applicant testified on his
2
own behalf. Applicant asked that the record remain open for the receipt of additional
documents. The Applicant submitted Applicant Exhibit A on February 4, 2011, and it
was admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing on
February 3, 2011. The record closed on February 4, 2011. Based upon a review of the
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 44 and married to his second wife.  There are five children currently
living in the home. He is employed by a defense contractor and seeks to obtain a
security clearance in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he is financially overextended and therefore at risk of having to
engage in illegal acts to generate funds. Applicant admitted all the allegations in the
SOR under this Paragraph. Those admissions are deemed to be findings of fact. He
also submitted additional information to support his request for a continued security
clearance.
1.a. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor on a past due debt for a
cellular phone in the amount of $263. He has not paid this debt and has no plans to do
so. (Tr. at 26.) 
1.b. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor on a past due debt for a
cellular phone in the amount of $42. He has not paid this debt and has no plans to do
so. (Tr. at 28.)
1.c. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor on a past due debt for a
cellular phone in the amount of $738. He has not paid this debt and has no plans to do
so. Allegations 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., and 1.i. are all debts to the same cellular telephone
company. Applicant alleges that these may all be duplicate debts. However, he has not
disputed the accounts in writing, or in any other fashion. (Tr. at 29.) 
1.d. Applicant admits that he is indebted for a repossessed automobile in the
amount of $16,066. This occurred because the Applicant changed jobs and could no
longer afford the payments. He has not paid this debt and has no plans to do so. (Tr. at
29-30.)
1.e. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a utility company on a past due
debt in the amount of $162. He has not paid this debt and has no plans to do so. (Tr. at
30-31.) 
3
1.f. Applicant admits that he owes a creditor $67 on a past due debt. He does
not know for sure what the debt is for, but he admits that he owes the money. He has
not paid this debt and has no plans to do so. (Tr. at 31-32.)
1.g. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for a delinquent debt in
the amount of $33. Applicant has made no payments on this debt, and there is no
evidence that he will do so. (Tr. at 32.)
1.h. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor for a delinquent debt in
the amount of $1,480. Applicant has made no payments on this debt, and there is no
evidence that he will do so. (Tr. at 33.)
1.i. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor on a past due debt for a
cellular phone in the amount of $740. He has not paid this debt and has no plans to do
so. As stated above, allegations 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., and 1.i. are all debts to the same cellular
telephone company. Applicant alleges that these may all be duplicate debts. However,
he has not disputed the accounts in writing, or in any other fashion. (Tr. at 33-34.)
1.j. Applicant admits that he was indebted to a creditor in the amount of $458
on a past due credit card account. Applicant stated that he had successfully paid off this
debt. While he did not provide any documentary evidence to support this contention, his
testimony was credible on this point and this particular allegation is found for Applicant.
(Tr. at 34-37.)
1.k. Applicant admits that he is indebted to a creditor on a past due debt for a
student loan in the amount of $2,637. He has not made any recent payments on this
debt, and has no plans to do so. (Tr. at 37-39.) 
1.l. Applicant admits that he owes a creditor $193 on a past due debt. He
does not know for sure what the debt is for, but he admits that he owes the money. He
has not paid this debt and has no plans to do so. (Tr. at 39.)
1.m. Applicant admits that he owes a creditor $382 on a past due debt. He
does not know for sure what the debt is for, but he admits that he owes the money. He
has not paid this debt and has no plans to do so. (Tr. at 39-40.)
Concerning his failure to pay the vast majority of his past due debts, even the
smallest ones, Applicant states that he cannot make payments because, “I have a lot of
kids at home. Just paying the bills, just barely getting by.” (Tr. at 31.) Applicant also
discussed the fact that his house burned down in 2004, during which time he was also
hospitalized after a heart attack. While he stated these incidents had an impact on his
financial situation, he did not present any supporting evidence showing how his finances
were affected. (Tr. at 31-32, 49.) Applicant’s knowledge of his current, or past, debt
situation was very vague and incomplete. He was given an opportunity to submit a more
accurate financial statement, which he did. The statement shows that Applicant has
basically no financial margin for error. (Tr. at 40-48; Applicant Exhibit A at 5.)
4
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct)
The Government alleges under Guideline E that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he has engaged in conduct which displays questionable judgment,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. Applicant admits all of
the allegations under this paragraph. Those admissions are deemed findings of fact.
Applicant admits being engaged in criminal activity on a fairly frequent basis
between April 1986 and March 2000. (SOR allegations 2.d. through 2.m.) The earliest
charges were for Receiving Stolen Property and Commercial Burglary, and the latest
were two arrests for Possession of Less Than 28.5 Grams of Marijuana. (2.m., 2.l.,
2.d., and 2.e.) Other charges were for such offenses as Inflict Corporal Injury on Spouse
in June 1996; Forgery 1  Degree, Forgery 2  Degree, Giving False Name to Lawst nd
Enforcement and 2 counts of Felony Racketeering in June 1994; and Insufficient Funds,
Grand Theft and Burglary in March 1992. (1.g., 1.i., and 1.k.) There were also traffic
offenses April 1993, September 1996, and October 1996. (2.j., 2.h., and 2.f.) According
to Applicant, most of his criminal offenses occurred because he was hanging out with
the wrong crowd. He has grown older, matured, and wants to be a better role model for
his children. (Tr. at 58, 64-65.)
Applicant filled out an official government questionnaire on October 5, 2009.
(Government Exhibit 1.) Question 22.c. asks the Applicant, “Have you EVER been
charged with any felony offense?” (Emphasis in original.) Applicant answered, “No.”
This was a false answer to a relevant question about his criminal history. In fact,
Applicant had been charged with Forgery 1  Degree in June 1994. Regarding thisst
answer, Applicant testified, “I’m thinking I might have misunderstood. I thought, for one,
that it went back 10 years. And number 2, I thought it was convicted.” (Tr. at 55.)
Question 22.e. of the same questionnaire asks the Applicant, “Have you EVER
been charged with any offense(s) related to alcohol or drugs?” (Emphasis in original.)
Applicant answered, “No.” This was a false answer to a relevant question about his drug
history. In fact, Applicant had been charged with Possession of Less Than 28.5 Grams
of Marijuana in January 1999 and March 2000. Regarding this answer he testified,
“Again, I thought it was convicted. I don’t know what to say. I misinterpreted it.” (Tr. at
56.)
Applicant was interviewed three times by an investigator from the Office of
Personnel Management. In the second interview, on January 4, 2010, Applicant
discussed his two drug charges and the Inflict Corporal Injury charge. He denied any
other criminal activity. (Government Exhibit 3 at 4-6.) As discussed above, this was a
false answer as Applicant had other criminal arrests, which he finally disclosed during
his third interview on January 9, 2010. (Government Exhibit 3 at 6-8.)
5
Mitigation
Applicant maintains that his family size, several career and job changes, his
heart attack, and his 2004 house fire made it impossible for his family to get ahead of
his financial problems. (Transcript at 50-51.)
Applicant Exhibit A, in addition to the financial statement discussed above, also
contained work-related documents concerning Applicant. The documents show
Applicant has the ability to be a good to excellent performer. (Applicant Exhibit A at 2-4.)
Policies
Security clearance decisions are not made in a vacuum.  When evaluating an
applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the administrative judge must consider
the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief introductory explanations for each
guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and
mitigating conditions, which are to be used as appropriate in evaluating an applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.  In addition, the administrative judge may also rely on his or her own common
sense, as well as knowledge of the law, human nature, and the ways of the world, in
making a reasoned decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
6
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Security clearance decisions include, by
necessity, consideration of the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
 
Finally, as emphasized in Section 7 of Executive Order 10865, “Any
determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the national
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access
to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F, Financial Considerations)
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG & 18:      
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and
meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment,
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise
security concerns. The Applicant has approximately $22,803 in past due debts, all of
which have been due and owing for several years. The evidence is sufficient to raise
these potentially disqualifying conditions.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Applicant=s
financial difficulties arose in about 2004 and continue to date, with no end in sight. This
mitigating condition does not have application in this case. 
AG ¶ 20(b) states that the disqualifying conditions may be mitigated where “the
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical
7
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly
under the circumstances.”  Applicant testified that he had a heart attack and his house
burned down in 2004. While these acts may have had an impact on his financial
situation, seven years have passed with no tangible improvement in his financial
situation. This mitigating condition has no application in this case.
The Applicant has not yet made a good-faith effort to pay off his creditors, with
one exception.  There is little to no track record of his making payments for a consistent
period of time.  Accordingly, AG ¶ 20(d) is not applicable.  Finally, at the present time, I
cannot find that “there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control,” as required by AG ¶ 20(c). Paragraph 1 is found against the Applicant.
Paragraph 2 (Guideline E, Personal Conduct)
The security concern relating to Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty or unwillingness to comply with rules or regulations can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide
truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any
other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process
The Applicant’s conduct set forth under Paragraph 2, brings into play the
following disqualifying conditions under Guideline E: 
AG ¶ 16(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine
employment qualifications, award benefits and status, determine security
clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
AG ¶ 16(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information
concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official,
competent medical authority, or other official government representative;
and
AG ¶ 16(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative areas that
is not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information.
8
The following mitigating conditions under Guideline E ¶ 17 may apply to his
conduct:
AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, and
AG ¶ 17(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such
behavior is unlikely to recur.
I have considered Applicant’s explanations for his false answers on the
questionnaire and to a government representative, and find them lacking. Applicant
knew the criminal acts he had committed. He had a responsibility to bring them to the
attention of the government and did not do so. What is particularly egregious under the
circumstances of this case is that it took three interviews for Applicant to be fully
forthcoming about his criminal conduct. By definition AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply.
As for the criminal conduct itself, all of it is over ten years old, and the oldest
incidents happened over 20 years ago. By themselves, they have no current security
significance and subparagraphs 2.d. through 2.m. are found for Applicant. However, he
was under a responsibility to inform the government of these acts, so that a knowing
decision could be made of their importance.
Applicant’s falsifications cannot be mitigated. Paragraph 2 is found against the
Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination
of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense
judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person
concept. The administrative judge must consider the nine adjudicative process factors
listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
9
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The discussion under
Guidelines F and E, above, applies here as well. Applicant has had financial problems
for several years, with no sign of improvement in the foreseeable future. I cannot find
that his financial situation is under control. He was also not candid with the government
on several occasions. Under AG ¶ 2(a)(3), his conduct is recent. I cannot find that there
have been permanent behavioral changes under AG ¶ 2(a)(6). Accordingly, at the
present time, I also cannot find that there is little to no potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress (AG ¶ 2(a)(8)); and that there is no likelihood of recurrence (AG ¶
2(a)(9)). 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial
situation and personal conduct. Accordingly, the evidence supports denying his request
for a security clearance.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m.: Against the Applicant
10
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST THE APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c.: Against the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.f.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.g.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.h.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.i.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.j.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.k.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.l.: For the Applicant
Subparagraph 2.m.: For the Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
WILFORD H. ROSS
Administrative Judge
