 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00926 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 23, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Foreign Preference or Foreign Influence security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 23, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines C, Foreign Preference and B, Foreign Influence. The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 
2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 27, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 1, 2011. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on March 16, 2011, and the hearing was convened as 
 
2 
 
scheduled on April 8, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 and a 6- 
page Administrative Notice document with 15 attachments, marked hearing exhibit (HE) 
I, which were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A through 
C, which were admitted without objection, and testified on her own behalf. The record 
was held open for Applicant to submit additional information until April 20, 2011. 
Applicant submitted AE D, which was admitted without objection, post hearing. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 20, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 61-year-old senior-project engineer for a government contractor. 
Applicant testified she has worked for her current employer a total of 22 years, with 
breaks in service. She is divorced and has one adult son. She currently cohabitates with 
her boyfriend. (Tr. 31-32, 42-43, 51-53.)   
 
 Applicant was born in Iran. She spent the first 25 years of her life in Iran. From 
1968 to 1972 she attended a university in Iran and earned a bachelor’s degree in 
physics. After graduation she worked in Iran, while at the same time earning a master’s 
degree in electronics. In 1975 she moved to the United States to pursue a master’s 
degree in computer science. She intended to return to Iran after she earned this degree. 
However, the 1979 Iranian revolution changed her plans. She decided not to return to 
Iran when the Ayatollah required women to put scarves on their heads. (Tr. 26-27, 30-
35; GE 1.) 
 
 Applicant has substantial ties to the United States. She became a United States 
citizen in November 1985 and has lived continuously in the United States since 1975. 
She has a U.S. passport, issued most recently in 2007 that she has used to travel 
internationally. She has no assets in Iran, but estimates her assets in the United States 
are valued at two-to-three million dollars. Her son lives in the same city as she lives, 
and she intends to retire in the United States. She actively participates in United States 
elections. Applicant has two brothers and several cousins who have also immigrated to 
the U.S. (Tr. 35-36, 38-44; GE 1.) 
 
 However, Applicant’s ties to Iran are also substantial. She has one uncle and 
three aunts, who are citizens of and residents in Iran. She is very close to one aunt in 
particular, and Applicant talks to her via phone approximately once every two months. 
This aunt has cancer but it is currently in remission. Her aunt is retired and supported, in 
part, through a government-paid retirement. Applicant testified: “what’s left of my family 
is trapped in that country and the bonds of my family are strong.” She also has a friend 
and other family members that she visits with when she travels to Iran. However, she 
does not keep in contact with anyone besides her aunt when she is in the United States. 
(Tr. 28, 47-50, 56-59, 67-68; GE 1; GE 2; AE B; AE C.) 
 
 Applicant’s boyfriend, with whom she resides, was also born in Iran and is a 
naturalized United States citizen. He has one brother that still resides in and is a citizen 
of Iran. He also has three sisters that reside in the United States; two are legal 
 
3 
 
permanent residents, and one is a citizen. Applicant met her boyfriend’s brother in 2010 
on her trip to Iran. (Tr. 51-53; GE 2; GE 3; AE B; AE C.) 
 
 Applicant started a non-profit agency to help Iranian artists. She established it in 
2004 to promote Iranian artists in the United States. The non-profit is currently inactive. 
(Tr. 45,74-75.) 
 
 Since leaving Iran in 1975, she has returned to visit family on a number of 
occasions. She traveled to Iran in 1983, after her father passed away. She returned 
again in 1984, after her brother’s wife died. From 2001-2005 she traveled to Iran, 
“frequently,” including trips in February 2002, October 2003, May-June 2004, and 
December 2004-February 2005. On each trip to Iran, Applicant used her Iranian 
passport to enter Iran. In 2005, she applied for a security clearance. She was informed 
that she would need to relinquish her Iranian passport if she desired to obtain a security 
clearance. She willingly gave up her passport by surrendering it to her security officer. 
However, on May 27, 2008, she obtained a new Iranian passport that does not expire 
until May 2013. She used her new Iranian passport to travel on her most recent trips to 
Iran in April 2009 and May 2010. She informed her security office of her decision and 
indicated that she intended to keep her Iranian passport. (TR. 27-28, 36-38, 50, 57-64, 
68, 70-73; GE 1; GE 2; GE 3; AE B; AE C.) 
 
 Applicant is well respected by her Principal Director. He wrote that he is 
“impressed by her work ethic, loyalty, and integrity and have not observed any behavior 
that would cause [him] to question her allegiance to the United States.” In addition, her 
work performance evaluations reflect that she exceeds her objectives and performs 
satisfactorily in the areas of security and safety. (AE A; AE D.) 
 
Iran 
 
Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in 
which the ultimate political authority is vested in a learned religious scholar. The United 
States has not had diplomatic relations with Iran since 1979. In 2009 President Obama 
continued the 1979 Declaration of a National Emergency with Respect to Iran “to deal 
with the unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and 
economy of the United States constituted by the situation in Iran.” The United States 
has defined the areas of objectionable Iranian behavior as: 
 
• Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction (WMD); 
• Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; 
• Its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process; and 
• Its violations of human rights. 
 
The U.S. has designated and characterized Iran as the world’s leading state 
sponsor of terrorism. Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups.  
 
 
4 
 
The government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses 
against the Iranian people. Abuses include: politically motivated violence including 
torture, beatings and rape; severe officially sanctioned punishments, including death by 
stoning, amputation, and flogging; arbitrary arrests and detentions, often holding 
individuals incommunicado; lack of judicial independence and of fair public trials; severe 
restrictions on civil liberties, including freedoms of speech, press, assembly, 
association, and privacy; and monitoring the social activities of citizens, entering homes 
and offices, monitoring telephone conversations and internet communications, and 
opening mail without court authorization. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
 
5 
 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference  
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in AG ¶ 
9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(1) possession of a current foreign passport. 
 
 In 1985 Applicant became a citizen of the United States. She has a United States 
passport and an Iranian passport both of which she uses. She obtained her current 
Iranian passport, after becoming a United States citizen. Further, in 2005 she 
relinquished her Iranian passport to her security officer as a condition for gaining access 
to classified information. However, in 2008, she reconsidered her decision to relinquish 
her Iranian passport and obtained another valid passport from Iran. Her actions 
demonstrate not only that she possesses a current foreign passport, but also that she 
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests 
of the United States. AG ¶ 10 applies. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Preference security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 11. Four are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parent’s citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country;  
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship;  
 
6 
 
(c) exercise of the rights, privileges, or obligations of foreign citizenship 
occurred before the individual became a U.S. citizen or when the 
individual was a minor; and  
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Applicant’s Iranian citizenship is the result of her birth to Iranian parents. 
Therefore, AG ¶ 11(a) applies, regardless of her choice to exercise her dual citizenship 
by using her Iranian passport. However, evidence indicative of Applicant’s Foreign 
Preference may still be considered, despite the applicability of this mitigating condition. 
The Appeal Board has noted that the presence or absence of any given Adjudicative 
Guideline disqualifying or mitigating condition is not solely dispositive of a case.1 
Further, the applicability of AG ¶ 11(a) “does not render irrelevant any other record 
evidence that might be indicative of a foreign preference under Guideline C.”2 Applicant 
has exercised her Iranian citizenship by using her foreign passports, after becoming a 
U.S. citizen, making AG ¶ 11(c) inapplicable. Further, the inquiry about Applicant’s 
Foreign Preference must extend beyond whether she acquired her Iranian citizenship 
and look at her demonstrated preference for Iran through the use of her foreign 
passports. In this instance, after she had been granted access to classified information 
based in part on her decision to relinquish her Iranian passport, she decided to once 
again acquire an Iranian passport. She does not wish to relinquish her Iranian passport 
and expressed no willingness to renounce her dual citizenship. Applicant failed to 
establish that any mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for the Foreign Influence guideline is set out in AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 The guideline notes nine conditions that could raise security concerns under AG 
¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
                                                          
1 ICSR Case No. 03-23806 at 5 (App. Bd. April 28, 2005.) 
2 Id.  
 
7 
 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
 Applicant is close to her aunt in Iran. Further, her boyfriend, with whom she 
resides, has a brother who is a citizen and resident in Iran. She has traveled to Iran on 
numerous occasions to spend time with her family there, including two trips that 
occurred after she was granted access to classified information. Her connections and 
travel, coupled with the Iranian government’s anti-American actions and statements, 
give rise to security concerns. If Applicant continues to have access to classified 
information, she could be subject to a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion by the Iranian authorities.  
 
 AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I considered all 
of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8, including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these people are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
 Iran’s bellicose statements and actions in recent years, and the lack of diplomatic 
relations with the U.S., were a security concern when Applicant traveled there in 2009 
and 2010. Applicant asserts her aunt is elderly, retired, and is not involved with the 
Iranian government. She has no assets in Iran. She speaks with her aunt only every two 
months. She does not communicate with her other relatives or her boyfriend’s brother. 
However, she admits a strong connection to her aunt. Applicant exercised very poor 
judgment when, after obtaining U.S. citizenship and a security clearance, she chose to 
renew her Iranian passport and traveling to Iran in 2009 and 2010 to visit her aunt. It is 
likely Applicant will be placed in a position to choose between the interests of the United 
States, Iran, and her aunt. AG ¶ 8 (a) does not apply.  
 
 
8 
 
Applicant came to the United States in 1975. She has lived here continuously 
since then. Her son, siblings, and boyfriend are all in the United States and are 
naturalized U.S. citizens. All of her assets are in the United States. Applicant has a 
long-standing relationship with the United States. Her familial connections in Iran are 
likely to end when her aunt passes. However, AG ¶ 8(b) does not apply because 
Applicant showed a preference for Iran after becoming a U.S. citizen and after obtaining 
security clearance. When she chose to obtain an Iranian passport after she relinquished 
her previous Iranian passport to her security office, she chose to resolve a clear conflict 
of interest in favor of her self interests in visiting Iran, and Iranian policy requiring an 
Iranian passport for entry into Iran, over the policy of the United States Government 
requiring clearance holders to relinquish such foreign passports. It is unlikely that she 
would choose to resolve future conflicts in the interests of the United States given her 
past choices. 
 
Applicant has no contacts with her boyfriend’s family in Iran. Those contacts are 
casual and infrequent. But Applicant has made two trips to Iran specifically to visit her 
aunt. Applicant has frequent contacts with her aunt in Iran including visits and telephone 
calls every-other month. AG ¶ 8(c) applies partially. But it is so slight it cannot control 
this determination.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines C and B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant’s letter of support and work performance evaluations shows she is a 
valued employee. However, there is a significant risk of terrorism and human rights 
 
9 
 
abuses in Iran. More importantly for security purposes, terrorists are hostile to the 
United States and actively seek classified information. Terrorists could attempt to use 
Applicant’s aunt to obtain such information. Applicant has resided in the United States 
for over thirty-five years. She has little connection with Iran, outside her aunt and distant 
family members. Yet, she will not surrender her Iranian passport and she failed to 
express a willingness to renounce her Iranian citizenship. Further, she has exercised 
extremely poor judgment by expressing a preference for Iran by obtaining a new Iranian 
passport after becoming a U.S. citizen, and more importantly, being granted a security 
clearance so she could work with classified information in the employ of a defense 
contractor. She still maintains her Iranian passport, as of the close of the record. 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the Foreign Preference and Foreign Influence security 
concerns. Overall, the record evidence leaves doubt as to Applicant’s present eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against 
Applicant because of her poor judgment regarding her connections to Iran.   
  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c.:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.d.:   Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
