 
 
 
 
 
1 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
----------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-09158 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 23, 2010, Applicant submitted his electronic version of the Security 
Clearance Application (SF 86) (e-QIP). On February 11, 2011, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on March 2, 2011. Applicant requested 
his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On March 11, 2011, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant on March 18, 2011. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant received the file on March 23, 
2011. Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed that 
would have expired on April 22, 2011. I received the case assignment on May 12, 2011. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied all the allegations in Paragraph 1 listing 14 delinquent debts, 
except Subparagraph 1.m pertaining to a $198 insurance debt. His 13 admissions are 
accepted as factual findings and incorporated herein as such. These debts total 
$51,284. Eight debts are under $500 each. The earliest delinquency of any debt is April 
2005. Several debts were reported delinquent in April 2010 on the May 2010 credit 
report. (Items 1, 3, 6)  
 
Applicant is 57 years old and works for a defense contractor. He was 
unemployed for three months in 2008, and again from July 2009 to April 2010. 
Applicant’s e-QIP indicates that he has been employed by the defense contractor since 
April 2010. Applicant did not provide proof that he has resolved any of the debts or 
entered into debt repayment plans for them. Applicant has been divorced twice and his 
e-QIP does not list any children. (Item 4) 
 
Applicant’s answers to the DOHA interrogatory in January 2011 show he has not 
paid any of the listed debts, which are the same debts as those listed in the SOR. His 
credit score on the January 2011 credit report in the file is 512 as of January 2009. 
Applicant’s May 2010 credit report is in the file and lists the same delinquent debts, 
including the state and federal tax liens. The state tax lien dates from 1994 and the 
federal tax lien from 1992. Applicant’s two credit reports contain the same delinquent 
debts as alleged in the SOR. His written statement in Item 5 and his personal financial 
statement assert he was on unemployment compensation at the time he completed 
these documents. Applicant’s statement asserts he has his disabled son living with him 
at the present time. However, his e-QIP did not list any children. (Items 5 and 6) 
 
Applicant’s statement with his Response to the SOR acknowledges his 
responsibility for his debts. However, he blames his former girlfriend for not using the 
money he earned while working overseas for a defense contractor from 2004 to 2009 to 
repay his debts. Applicant claims he never saw the bank account while he worked 
overseas. Applicant does not explain where the money went that he earned while 
working overseas. He declares his former girlfriend took all his money, emptied the 
bank accounts, and did not pay his debts. Applicant did not submit any documentary 
evidence to support his position. His statement again refers to his disabled son with 
whom he lives, but Applicant did not provide any information about the son’s age, with 
whom he lived previously, or Applicant’s current expenses. Applicant asks for an 
“interim clearance to go back to work for (his defense contractor) for a limited time.” 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
(Item 3) He asserted that “all of the small past due debts will be paid off and steps will 
be taken on the large ones to get my credit back under control.” (Id.) Applicant states he 
wants to pay off his debts. (Item 3)  
 
Applicant did not submit any documentation that he has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. He provided no evidence concerning the quality of his 
job performance. He submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 1992 to the present, Applicant accumulated 14 delinquent debts totaling 
$51,284 that remains unpaid or unresolved.  
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. AG ¶ 20 set forth conditions that could mitigate financial security 
concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Because Applicant’s financial delinquencies have been ongoing since 2005, and 
the tax liens since 1992 remain unresolved and are not isolated, there is insufficient 
evidence to support a finding that the indebtedness is unlikely to recur or continue. 
Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the loss of employment were demonstrated by 
Applicant to have a substantial effect on his ability to repay his debts. In the past 12 
years, Applicant has been unemployed 12 months in two different periods. He claims he 
has been employed since April 2010, but did not provide proof that he paid any debts. 
More importantly, Applicant did not show he acted responsibly under the totality of the 
circumstances. He admits he failed to check his bank account while working abroad for 
several years. Applicant allowed his girlfriend to spend his money in an unfettered 
manner. He does not list any controls he imposed on her or his bank accounts to 
prevent the unauthorized expenditure of his money. Applicant also failed to submit proof 
of his income for the past six years, particularly when he worked overseas. Therefore, 
no determination can be made on the adequacy of that income to resolve his delinquent 
debts or the magnitude of Applicant’s financial loss from his former girlfriend’s actions. 
Nor does he describe any actions he took to recover the money she took without 
authority. Applicant failed to meet his burden of proof. He did not present credible 
evidence to corroborate his assertions that the accumulation of the debt was due to 
conditions beyond his control or that he attempted to responsibly manage that debt 
once as it accrued, as required under AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
Applicant established no mitigation under AG & 20(c) or AG & 20(d). He did not 
submit evidence that he received credit counseling or that he paid or resolved any debt, 
which would indicate that the situation is coming under control. Nor, did he present 
evidence that he made a good-faith effort to pay or resolve any of the 14 debts. 
Applicant did not provide documentation verifying that he formally disputed or 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
investigated any debt, including those that he denied, which evidence is necessary to 
trigger the application of AG & 20(d). There is no evidence to support the application of 
AG & 20(f). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when he 
incurred the debts. He has not taken any action to resolve his delinquent debts. This 
inaction leaves him vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based on 
the magnitude of his financial obligation. His lack of action continues to this day, and is 
obviously voluntary. His inaction will continue based on his past performance. Applicant 
displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts.  Next, he exhibited a continued 
lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on any of his delinquent debts 
during the past seven years. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for 
Financial Considerations. I conclude the “whole-person” concept against Applicant.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
           Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.n:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
