                                                      
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ADP Case No. 10-01176 
                                                                      ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
I have carefully reviewed the administrative file, pleadings, and exhibits in this 
case and conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate trustworthiness concerns under the 
financial considerations adjudicative guideline. Eligibility for access to sensitive 
information is denied. 
 
                                        Statement of Case 
 
Applicant submitted his Public Trust Position Application (SF 85P) on April 17, 
2009. On March 1, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging trustworthiness concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of 
Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated January 1987, 
as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
1 
 
2 
 
                                                          
 On March 23, 2011, Applicant answered the SOR in writing. On April 12, 2011, 
he requested that his case be determined on the record in lieu of a hearing.1 The 
Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on May 5, 2011. The FORM 
contained documents identified as Items 1 through 9. By letter dated May 13, 2011, a 
copy of the FORM was forwarded to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on 
May 27, 2011. His response to the FORM was due on June 26, 2011. Applicant 
submitted additional information within the required time period. The case was assigned 
to me for a decision on June 21, 2011. I marked the materials provided by Applicant in 
his response to the FORM as Item A, and they were entered in the record without 
objection. In addition, Applicant’s employer filed a compelling need letter, dated June 
16, 2011. I marked the compelling need letter as Item B and entered it in the record 
without objection. 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR is comprised of ten allegations of financial delinquency, totaling 
approximately $19,689, which raise trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.j.). In his Answer, Applicant admitted the ten 
allegations in the SOR and provided additional information. Applicant’s admissions are 
admitted as findings of fact. (Item 1; Item 5.) 
 
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and by information provided by Applicant. The record evidence includes Applicant’s 
April 17, 2009 SF 85P; official investigation and agency records; Applicant’s responses 
to DOHA interrogatories; Applicant’s credit reports of October 2, 2010, January 9, 2011, 
and June 3, 2011; and Applicant’s response to the FORM. (Item 1; Items 5 through 9; 
Item A.) 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. When he finished high school, Applicant enlisted in the 
military. He served on active duty from 1995 until 2004.2 After his military discharge, 
Applicant was unemployed for about 15 months, from May 2004 until August 2005.3 
From August 2005 until January 2007, he was employed as an executive assistant by a 
federal contractor. In January 2007, Applicant established a transport business and was 
self-employed until May 2008. The business was not successful, and Applicant then 
took a job with a private firm, where he worked in administration from May 2008 until 
April 2009. Since April 2009, he has been employed as an executive assistant by a 
1Applicant filed two answers to the SOR. His answers to the SOR allegations were the same in the two 
documents. For clarity, when discussing Applicant’s answers to the SOR, I will refer to Item 5, which is 
Applicant’s answer dated April 12, 2011. (Item 3; Item 5.) 
 
2 Applicant stated that during his military service he had been granted a security clearance. (Item A.) 
 
3 While he was unemployed, Applicant attended vocational school and studied aviation maintenance for 
approximately four months. (Item 6 at 2.) 
 
3 
 
                                                          
defense contractor.4 He seeks eligibility for access to sensitive information. (Item 6 at 1, 
3-4.) 
 
 On his SF 85P, Applicant identified his marital status as “married.” He is the 
father of three children, ages 14, 11, and 9. At his personal subject interview in 
November 2009, he explained that he was current in child support payments to his 
former wife for his oldest child, but he had been unable to pay approximately $4,000 in 
arrearages. He stated that he had recently separated from his current wife, had to pay 
rent on his own apartment, and lacked sufficient funds to pay the child support 
arrearages.5 (Item 6; Item 7 at 10.)    
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator about his finances on November 24, 2009. He acknowledged the financial 
delinquencies identified at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.i.6 He attributed his financial 
delinquencies to breaks in steady employment. He stated that he would pay the 
delinquent debts as soon as he had enough money to do so. In November 2010, in 
response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant attributed his financial delinquencies to 
unemployment and unsteady employment. He stated that he intended to pay or settle 
most of his delinquent debts in January 2011, when he expected his financial situation 
to improve. (Item 7, 2-6, 9-12.) 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant asserted he had paid two debts alleged on 
the SOR on March 16, 2011 (a $100 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. and a $396 debt 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.h.). He also asserted that he had paid the $207 debt alleged at SOR 
¶ 1.g. on March 18, 2011. Applicant’s credit bureau report, attached to his response to 
the FORM, corroborated payment of the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.g.  However, he did 
not provide documentation to corroborate payment of the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b. 
and 1.h. (Item 5.) 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that, on March 18, 2011, he had 
negotiated a payment plan for the $1,124 delinquent debt identified at SOR ¶ 1.a. In his 
response to the FORM, he provided a copy of his credit report of June 3, 2011, showing 
that the debt had been paid in full. (Item 5; Item A at 16-17.) 
 
 When he answered the SOR, Applicant admitted that the debt alleged at SOR ¶ 
1.c. had not been paid. In his response to the FORM, Applicant provided a copy of a 
letter from the creditor, dated May 25, 2011, confirming the current balance due of 
4 In his March 23, 2011 Answer to the SOR, Applicant attached a one-page document which he identified 
as his Social Security Earnings Record covering the period from 1994 to 2009. Nothing on the face of the 
Earnings Record identifies it as belonging to or pertaining to Applicant. (Item 3 at 4.) 
 
5 In his response to the FORM, Applicant explained that he and his wife were living in separate 
households from July 2008 until June 2010. During that time, he voluntarily paid her $1,308 each month 
for her support. (Item A.) 
 
6 Applicant told the investigator that he disputed the delinquent accounts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.i. and 1.j. 
However, in his Answer to the SOR, he admitted that the debts were his. (Item 7 at 9-10, 12; Item 2; Item 
5.) 
4 
 
$1,224.86 and stating it would deposit a postdated check from Applicant for $200 in 
partial satisfaction of the debt. (Item 5; Item A.) 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶ 1.f., which alleged that he 
owed $3,083 in child support arrearages. He stated that the arrearages occurred in the 
past when he was unemployed or underemployed. He stated that since he had been 
regularly employed, he had been making his monthly child support payments on time 
and had included additional payments to satisfy the arrearages. In his response to the 
FORM, he provided a document from the state child support agency showing that, as of 
May 2011, he had reduced the child support arrearages he owed from $3,083 to 
$1,373.78. (Item 5; Item A.) 
 
 The SOR alleged at ¶ 1.i. that Applicant owed $7,177 to a federal agency for 
overpayments received during his military service. Applicant admitted the debt, which 
he has known about since 2006. Applicant told the OPM investigator that he had 
refused to pay the debt, pending confirmation by the military of the overpayment. In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant asserted that he had negotiated a payment agreement 
with the agency and had agreed to monthly payments of $202, beginning on April 17, 
2011. Applicant’s credit bureau report showed that one payment of $202 had been 
reported by two of the three national credit reporting agencies in May 2011. (Item 1; 
Item 5; Item 7 at 9-10; Item A.) 
 
 Three debts alleged on the SOR remain unpaid. Those debts are alleged at SOR 
¶ 1.d. ($2,912), ¶ 1.e. ($1,967), and ¶ 1.j ($1,499). (Item 5.) 
 
 During his interview with the OPM investigator in November 2009, Applicant 
reported a net monthly income of $3,849. He reported total monthly living expenses of 
$2,919 and total monthly payments on existing debt of $170. His net monthly remainder 
was $760. Applicant has not had consumer credit counseling. (Item 7 at 9, 12.)    
                                                     Burden of Proof 
 The Government has the initial burden of proving controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. To meet its burden, the Government must establish by substantial evidence a 
prima facie case that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest for an applicant 
to have access to sensitive information. The responsibility then shifts to the applicant to 
refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government's case. Because no one has a right to a 
public trust position, the applicant carries a heavy burden of persuasion. The "clearly 
consistent with the national interest" standard compels resolution of any reasonable 
doubt about an applicant's suitability for access to sensitive information in favor of 
protecting national security. 
   
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
5 
 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, the administrative judge must apply the guidelines in conjunction with 
the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that could 
raise trustworthiness concerns and may be disqualifying in this case. Under AG ¶ 19(a), 
an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying. Under AG ¶ 
19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may also raise trustworthiness 
concerns.   
 
 In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan.7, 2010), the Appeal Board 
explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted.) Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, his SF 85P, his interview with the OPM investigator, and his SOR 
response. Applicant accumulated delinquent debt and was unable to pay or satisfy his 
financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise financial considerations 
disqualifying conditions identified at AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the 
disqualifying condition may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual=s current trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ 
Applicant=s financial delinquencies began in at least 2006, and they have continued to 
the present. It is well-settled that failure to discharge debts over a period of time 
constitutes a continuing course of conduct that raises concerns about an applicant’s 
reliability and trustworthiness. ISCR Case No 07-10575 at 4 (App. Bd. Jul 3, 2008).    
 
7 
 
                                                          
While Applicant is credited with paying down his child support arrearages and 
satisfying the delinquent debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.g., most of his actions to 
resolve his delinquent debts occurred after receiving the SOR in March 2011. Three 
large delinquent debts remain unresolved; he has made one payment of $202 on his 
debt of over $7,000 to a federal agency; and he failed to provide documentation to 
corroborate payment of the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b., 1.c., and 1.h. In determining 
an individual's trustworthiness, the Government cannot rely on the possibility that an 
applicant might resolve his or her outstanding debts at some future date. ISCR Case 
No. 98-0614 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 1999). Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶ 20(a) does 
not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case.  
 
Under AG & 20(b), mitigation can occur where Athe conditions that resulted in the 
financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a 
business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Applicant reported that 
he was unemployed for about 15 months after his military service ended in 2004. 
Additionally, the business he established in January 2007 failed in May of 2008. 
However, the record reflects that Applicant has been steadily employed since June 
2008, and he did not address the majority of his delinquent debts until after he received 
the SOR. He offered no explanation for his failure to resolve or settle his financial 
delinquencies even after he had steady employment. I conclude that while he 
experienced financial problems in part because of his unemployment in 2004 and 2005 
and as a consequence of his business failing in 2008, he failed to act responsibly in 
identifying and timely resolving most of his financial delinquencies. I find that AG ¶ 20(b) 
applies only in part to the facts of Applicant’s case.  
 
Evidence that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ 
is potentially mitigating under AG & 20(c). Similarly, AG & 20(d) applies where the 
evidence shows Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.@ Nothing in the record establishes that Applicant has received 
financial counseling or that he has otherwise developed a plan of action to resolve his 
financial problems. Applicant is credited with a good-faith effort to resolve his child 
support arrearage. However, since the record establishes that his efforts to resolve his 
other delinquent debts are recent, he has failed to establish a track record of good faith 
and timely payment. He has not demonstrated that he can be relied upon to consistently 
satisfy his financial obligations over time. Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶ 20(c) does 
not apply to Applicant’s case, and AG ¶ 20(d) applies only in part to the facts of his 
case.  AG ¶¶ 20(e) and 20(f) are not raised by the facts of this case.7  
 
 
 
 
7 AG ¶ 20(e) reads: “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt 
which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute 
or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(f) reads: “the affluence resulted from a legal 
source of income.” 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. His 
financial delinquencies occurred repeatedly over a period of several years, suggesting 
lack of interest or inability to learn to manage his financial commitments responsibly. 
While his unemployment and business failure impacted his ability to pay his debts for a 
period of time, he has also been steadily employed for three years and only addressed 
the majority of his alleged debts after receiving the SOR in March 2011. During his 
November 2009 interview with the OPM investigator, he stated that he intended to take 
action to pay those delinquent debts. One year later, in November 2010, he responded 
to DOHA interrogatories and asserted that he would begin to address his financial 
delinquencies in January 2011. However, he failed to address even his smaller debts 
until he received the SOR in March 2011. His failure to discharge debts over a period of 
time when he had a monthly net remainder of approximately $760 raises concerns 
about his judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  He failed to demonstrate that his 
financial problems will not continue to be a trustworthiness concern in the future. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns arising from his 
financial delinquencies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraph 1.a.:            For Applicant 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.b. - 1.e.: Against Applicant 
   
   Subparagraphs 1.f. - 1.g.: For Applicant 
 
   Subparagraphs 1.h. – 1.j.: Against Applicant 
 
                                                 Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                           
___________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
