 Exhibits 1 and 2 (commonly known as a security clearance application). 1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 12-07700
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Aubrey De Angelis, Esq., and 
Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for
access to classified information. He did not meet his burden to present sufficient
evidence to explain and mitigate the financial considerations security concern. With that
said, he did not deliberately omit relevant information about his financial problems when
he completed security clearance applications in 2012 and 2015. Accordingly, this case
is decided against Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on March 28, 2012, and again on February 25, 2015.  On1
August 22, 2015, after reviewing the applications and information gathered during a
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,3
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply here. The
AG  were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).     
 Exhibits 1 and 2. 4
 Tr. 50. 5
 Tr. 60–63. 6
2
background investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD)  sent Applicant a2
statement of reasons (SOR), explaining it was unable to find that it was clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified
information.  The SOR is similar to a complaint. It detailed the reasons for the action3
under the security guideline known as Guideline F for financial considerations and
Guideline E for personal conduct. He answered the SOR on September 5, 2015, and
requested a hearing.         
The case was assigned to me on December 1, 2015. The hearing was held as
scheduled on January 20, 2016. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on
January 29, 2016.
The record was kept open to allow Applicant to submit additional documentation.
He made two separate post-hearing submissions, and those matters are admitted as
Exhibits D–N. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 51-year-old shipping and receiving clerk who works in a
warehouse. He has a high school diploma. He has never married, but he has a longtime
fiancee, and they have lived together for many years sharing expenses. He has lived at
the same residential address since 1999. He has worked for his current employer since
February 2015. Before that, he worked the same job for a different company from 1999
to 2015. 
Applicant reported continuous employment since 1999 in his security clearance
applications;  however, at the hearing he discussed two periods of unemployment due4
to health problems. His health problems stem from a kidney transplant he had in 1994.5
The first period of unemployment for about two years occurred during 2002–2005.  The6
 Tr. 57. 7
 Exhibits 3–10. 8
 Tr. 51–52. 9
 Exhibits 4, 5, G, H, I, and J.10
 Exhibits 4 and 5. 11
 Tr. 98. 12
 Exhibits A, B, M, and N. 13
3
second period was during 2011–2013.  During those periods, he received about 60% of7
his income through a combination of short-term and long-term disability payments.  
Under Guideline F, the SOR alleges that Applicant has about $26,000 in
delinquent financial accounts. The 16 delinquent debts fall into the following groups: (1)
six charged-off or collection accounts for $15,350; (2) nine medical collection accounts
for $1,300; and (3) an unpaid judgment for $9,586 obtained by his homeowner’s
association. He admitted owing all the delinquent debts in his answer to the SOR. In
addition to his admissions, the delinquent debts are established by the documentary
evidence.8
Under Guideline E, the SOR alleges that Applicant gave deliberately false
answers when he failed to disclose delinquencies involving routine accounts in the past
seven years when he completed his 2012 and 2015 security clearance applications. In
his answer to the SOR, he admitted he answered the relevant questions in the negative,
but he explained at hearing his omissions were not deliberately false.   9
The available documentary evidence shows Applicant made some effort to
address his delinquent debts.  Most notably, he entered into a debt-management10
program with a credit counseling service in March–April 2015,  but he was unable to11
maintain the $322 monthly payment for long. He presented a 3-in-1 credit report, dated
January 2016, which shows a large number (17, 13, and 21) of derogatory accounts. At
the hearing, Applicant explained that he had concluded that he had no alternative but to
seek relief in bankruptcy court.  He retained the services of a bankruptcy attorney to file12
a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case for him, a petition was filed, and the meeting of creditors
was held in May 2016.  No other information about the bankruptcy case is reflected in13
the documentary evidence.  
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to14
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.15
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 16
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 17
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).18
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.19
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.20
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.21
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 22
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).23
4
Law and Policies
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As14
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt15
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An16
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  17
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting18
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An19
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate20
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  21
In Egan, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a
preponderance of the evidence.  The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s22
reasoning, and a judge’s findings of fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence
standard.23
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.24
 AG ¶¶ 15, 16, and 17 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 25
5
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant and material information, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it24
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Discussion
Personal conduct under Guideline E  is a concern because it asks the central25
question if a person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to
properly handle and safeguard sensitive information. The suitability of an applicant may
be questioned or put into doubt when an applicant engages in conduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with the
rules and regulations. Of special interest is any failure by an applicant to provide truthful
and candid answers during the process or a failure to cooperate with the process. 
Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written
document or oral statement in official governmental matters is a concern. Deliberate
means knowingly and willfully. In other words, the omission, concealment, or
falsification must be done consciously and intentionally. An omission of relevant and
material information, for example, is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about
the matter, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, thought the
information did not need to be reported, or otherwise made an honest mistake.  
Applicant denied the two falsification allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b, which
alleged that he deliberately failed to report numerous delinquent accounts in his 2012
and 2015 security clearance applications. I am not persuaded that his omissions were
deliberately false. My impression of Applicant is that he is not one for details, and that
he failed to disclose the delinquent accounts because he inadvertently overlooked them.
Accordingly, the falsification allegations are decided for Applicant. 
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 26
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant27
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  28
 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c).29
 AG ¶ 20(a)–(f).30
6
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant26
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern is: 27
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  28
The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly
compromise classified information to obtain money or something else of value. It
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified information.    
The evidence supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties as well as an inability to satisfy debts.  That conclusion is29
supported by Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations and the documentary
evidence. With that said, I have given little weight to the nine medical collection
accounts for a total of $1,300. That is not a large sum of money. It is also presumed that
the medical expenses were incurred for necessary medical care as opposed to frivolous
or irresponsible spending, consistent spending beyond one’s means, or financial
problems that are linked to issues of security concern. 
 In mitigation, I have considered the six mitigating conditions under Guideline F,30
and the following are most pertinent:  
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or
separation), and the [person] acted responsibly under the circumstances;
and
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).31
7
AG ¶ 20(c) [t]here are clear indications that the problem is being resolved
or is under control. 
Applicant receives credit under both of the mitigating conditions mentioned
above. Nonetheless, the credit is insufficient to explain and mitigate his history of
financial problems, which is ongoing as reflected by the Chapter 7 bankruptcy case. I
recognize that Applicant underwent a kidney transplant, which is a major medical
procedure, years ago and is still dealing with health issues. But it is also noted that the
nine medical collection accounts for $1,300 is a small portion, about 5 percent, of the
delinquent debt at issue. Moreover, the pending bankruptcy case serves as a clear
warning or caution sign that Applicant’s overall financial situation is unstable. It’s true
that once he obtains a discharge he will be released from further liability on the
dischargeable debts. But even so, it is too soon to tell if Applicant will be financially
responsible after the bankruptcy case is completed.   
Applicant’s history of financial problems or difficulties creates doubt about his
current reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect classified
information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and
considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice
versa. I also gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I31
conclude that he did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified
information. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.e–1.m: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.n–1.p: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 2.a–2.b: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to classified information.  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
