                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 12-06550
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 2, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on February 10, 2012.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  On August 15, 2015, the
Department of Defense (DoD), pursuant to Executive Order 10865 and Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992 (as amended), issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed reasons why the DoD
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative Judge to determine whether
clearance should be denied or revoked.
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on August 26, 2015, and elected to
have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.  Department Counsel
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to Applicant on or about
December 10, 2015.  Applicant received the FORM on December 15, 2015.  Applicant
was instructed to submit information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days
of receipt.  Applicant submitted a reply to the FORM dated December 15, 2015.  This
case was assigned to the undersigned on January 7, 2016.  Based upon a review of the
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.   
2
 FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 58 years old, and is married with one child.  He is employed by a
defense contractor as a Calibration Technician.  He is seeking to obtain a security
clearance in connection with this employment.
The Government opposes Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
Applicant served in the United States Navy in active and reserve status from
August 1977 through August 1980, when he was honorably discharged.
Applicant has filed bankruptcy on three separate occasions: in 1998; 2007; and
2012; and he remains indebted to two creditors for debts incurred after the latest
bankruptcy filing.  Applicant admitted each of the allegations set forth in the SOR,
except allegations 1.d., and 1.e., which he denies, as he believes the two delinquent
debts were included in his Chapter 13 Bankruptcy, and that the creditors waited until
after the Bankruptcy filings to submit their claims.  Credit reports of the Applicant dated
March 20, 2012; December 23, 2013; July 11, 2014; and March 18, 2015, which
includes information from all three credit reporting agencies, indicates that Applicant has
filed bankruptcy on three separate occasions as alleged in the SOR, and that he
remains indebted to the two creditors listed in allegations 1.d., and 1.e of the SOR.
(Government Exhibits 8, 9, 10, and 11.)       
     
In 1998, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy involving $40,695 in liabilities;
and $14,137 in assets.  (Government Exhibit 7.)  Nine years later, his second Chapter 7
bankruptcy involved $446,017 in liabilities and $416,090 in assets.  (Government Exhibit
5.)  Five years later, in March 2012, Applicant filed bankruptcy again, under Chapter 13.
Applicant’s documents indicate that under his most recent bankruptcy, his creditors
have filed approximately $77,995 in claims, including $25,114 in mortgage arrears.
(Government Exhibit 4.)  Applicant states that his most recent Chapter 13 bankruptcy
has not been terminated; rather, it was dismissed in error due to his attorney’s late filing
and remains active.  (Government Exhibit 4.)    
Recently, Applicant attributes his inability to pay is debts due to adoption
expenses, losing overtime hours, and a decrease in his wife’s pay.  (Government
Exhibit 4.)  Back in 2002, in his sworn statement to the DoD, he stated that his financial
problems were caused by a divorce, an IRS bill for $6,000 in which he used a credit
card to pay at 18% interest, a nine month period of unemployment due to a work
relocation, and his parents being terminally ill, which required him to take six months off
to take care of them with no income coming in.  (Government Exhibit 6.)  Applicant has
3
been working for his current employer since June 2001, and currently hold a secret
clearance.  (Government Exhibit 3.)  Applicant mentions the reasons why he could not
pay his bills, but does not adequately explained why when confronted with everyday life
experiences, he was unable to handle his finances in a responsible manner.   
Instead of paying his bills to handle his indebtedness, Applicant has repeatedly
filed bankruptcy since 1998.  This indicates an inability or unwillingness to live within his
means and manage his finances responsibly.  There is no evidence in the record to
show that the Applicant can pay his bills on time, in a systematic method, without having
to file bankruptcy.      
Also noted in this record is the fact that the two remaining debts listed in
allegations 1d., and 1.e., of the SOR, are delinquent accounts that were opened after
the Applicant filed for his most recent Chapter 13 bankruptcy in March 2012.
(Government Exhibits 8, 9, and 10.)  This assumption is based on the fact that they bear
different account numbers than the creditors listed in the Chapter 13 Bankruptcy.  In
regard to allegation 1.d., the debt owed to a creditor for a cell phone/service in the
amount of $1,184, was opened in April 2012, a month after Applicant filed for Chapter
13 bankruptcy protection.  In regard to allegation 1.e., the debt owed to a creditor for a
cell phone/service was opened in April 2014, two years after filing for Chapter 13
bankruptcy and only appears delinquent on his 2014 credit report.  (Government Exhibit
9.)  
While filing bankruptcy is not an unreasonable means of resolving substantial
delinquent debt, repeated filings - absent compelling circumstances indicate a lack of
good judgment.  This results in a clearly established history of not meeting his financial
obligations.  In fact, under these circumstances, absent compelling documentary
evidence that Applicant has acted responsibly and in good faith to repay his financial
obligations, or established a track record of repayment, or otherwise has a
substantiated basis to dispute the legitimacy of the delinquent debt, the allegations in
the SOR have not been mitigated.  Based upon the evidence presented, the Applicant
has a history of not meeting his financial obligations.
 POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
4
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  the frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  the extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  the motivation for the conduct; 
h. the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and
 i.  the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
5
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence that is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the applicant’s conduct and the
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation,
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him or her a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that Applicant
has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor judgment,
unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of Applicant.  Because of the scope and
nature of Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or connection with his security
clearance eligibility.
The evidence presented shows that over the past eighteen years, Applicant has
continued to incur a number of delinquent debts that he has not paid.  Instead of trying
to pay the debts, he has filed for bankruptcy protection; in 1998, 2007, and 2012.
These recurring bankruptcies naturally indicate a serious ongoing problem with his
inability to pay his debts on his own.  In fact, he has consistently turned to the courts for
help.  Furthermore, he has failed to show that the two debts listed in the SOR have
been resolved, as it appears that they were opened after the last bankruptcy filing and
they remain on his credit reports as owing.  Thus, there is no evidence in the record to
show that Applicant has made a good faith effort satisfy his delinquent debts.        
Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying Conditions 19.(a)
inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19.(c) a history of not meeting financial
6
obligations, apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  Applicant has been
working for his current employer since June 2001, over fifteen years.  It is not clear why
he has not been able to pay his debts.  Instead of taking responsibility to pay his debts,
he has chosen to file bankruptcy on multiple occasions.  Although he has received some
financial counseling as part of his first bankruptcy filing requirement, it apparently was
not helpful, as he has continued to file Bankruptcy on two subsequent occasions.  There
is insufficient evidence to show a sufficient ratio of current income to debt and expenses
to avoid future financial delinquencies.  In fact, he has shown that he is not financially
responsible.   
   
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  From the evidence presented, Applicant
has not demonstrated a pattern of financial responsibility, as he has not paid any of the
delinquent debts set forth in the SOR.  Thus, it cannot be said that he has made a good-
faith effort to resolve his past-due indebtedness.  He has not shown that he is or has
been reasonably, responsibly, or prudently addressing his financial situation.  He has
not demonstrated that he can properly handle his financial affairs. 
Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct forth above,
when viewed under all of the guidelines as a whole, support a whole-person
assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, an unwillingness to
comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person
may not properly safeguard classified information.
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualifications
for access to classified information, it must be determined that the applicant is and has
been sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in his everyday life to adequately protect the
Government’s national interest.  Applicant has not met his burden of proving that he is
worthy of a security clearance.  Overall, based upon the seriousness of the conduct
outlined here, the Applicant has not demonstrated that he is sufficiently trustworthy, and
does not meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.
Accordingly, I find against the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented.  It does not mitigate the negative
effects of his history of financial indebtedness and the effects that it can have on his
ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that Applicant
has failed to overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security
clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against Applicant as to the
factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.  
7
    FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1:  Against Applicant.
    Subpara.    1.a. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.b. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.c. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.d. Against Applicant.
Subpara.    1.e. Against Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
