 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-08132 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 12, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD for SORs issued after September 1, 
2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 16, 2014, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On August 13, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the 
 
2 
 
 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, and 
it was received on December 10, 2015. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not 
object to the Government evidence and did not submit any additional information. The 
Government’s documents identified as Items 4 through 8 are admitted into evidence. 
The case was assigned to me on March 31, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all 18 of the delinquent debt allegations in the SOR, but failed 
to admit or deny the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a. I will consider his failure to respond as a 
denial. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. He earned a college degree in 2010. He married in 
2002 and divorced in 2006. He remarried in 2010. He has a 14-year-old stepchild and a 
6-year-old son. He served on active duty in the military from 1999 to 2005 and was 
honorably discharged. He has been employed since August 2010. He indicated he was 
unemployed while he was attending college from November 2007 through August 2010. 
He supported himself and his family during this time through the GI Bill and his wife’s 
income.1  
 
 In May 2012 Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator as part of 
his background investigation. He disclosed to the investigator that after his discharge 
from the military in 2005 he had difficulty finding employment. His security clearance 
application (SCA) does not reflect a period of unemployment, but rather he disclosed he 
was employed from August 2005 when he was discharged from active duty until 
December 2006 with the same employer. Applicant has resided at the same home since 
May 2009. Applicant also attributed mismanagement for causing his financial 
difficulties.2 
 
 Applicant completed an SCA on March 9, 2012. In response to questions about 
financial delinquencies and whether in the past seven years he had bills or debts turned 
over to a collection agency, he answered “no.” The debts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b, 1.c, 1. 
e, and 1.m through 1.t had been turned over to collection agencies at that time. 
Applicant disclosed on his SCA that he had a vehicle repossessed in August 2007, but 
he indicated the debt was resolved in September 2007. No other debts were disclosed.3  
 
The 18 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR total approximately $15,772. During 
his background interview, Applicant denied he was aware he had most of these debts, 
but did acknowledge he was aware of the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.b ($1,020), 1.c ($482) and 
                                                          
1 Items 5 and 6. 
 
2 Items 4, 5 and 6. 
 
3 Item 5. 
 
3 
 
 
1.p ($85), which he incurred for medical services in 2009 when he was unemployed and 
did not have medical insurance. He could not afford to pay the medical bills when they 
became due and indicated he kept putting them aside intending to pay them at a later 
date. They were eventually turned over to a collection company. He told the investigator 
that he does not dispute the debts and intended to contact the collection company to 
pay the debts as soon as he was able. He stated that he forgot about the past-due 
medical bills and had not checked his credit report prior to submitting his SCA, so he did 
not list them on it. Applicant did not provide any evidence that the bills are paid.  
 
Credit reports from March 2012 and February 2014 confirmed the debts in the 
SOR. They listed the earliest date of delinquency as 2006, and most are from 2010.4  
 
Applicant admitted owing the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.r ($3,771). During his 2012 
background interview, he acknowledged the debt and indicated he fell behind on 
payments in 2010, but said the account was paid in full. He failed to provide proof the 
debt was paid.5  
 
Regarding the remaining debts alleged on the SOR, Applicant indicated during 
his background interview that he did not recognize the debts, but intended on contacting 
the creditors and if he was responsible for the debts, he would pay them. He 
acknowledged in his answer to the SOR that the debts belonged to him, but failed to 
show evidence that he has paid or resolved them.6 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
                                                          
4 Items 4, 5, 7, 8. 
 
5 Items 4, 5. 
 
6 Item 5. 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
 
5 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.7 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has 18 delinquent debts that total approximately $15,722. He began 
accruing the majority of them in 2010. His delinquent debts are unpaid and unresolved. 
There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant failed to provide evidence that any of the debts in the SOR have been 
paid or resolved, despite being put on notice in 2012 during his background interview 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
that they posed a security concern. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that his 
financial problems are unlikely to recur. His failure to timely address his delinquent 
debts casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply 
 
Applicant indicated his financial problems were due to unemployment because 
he chose to return to school and also through mismanaging his finances. He told the 
government investigator that he had difficulty getting a job after he left the military, but 
information he provided in his SCA shows he was employed after leaving active duty 
and his only period of unemployment was when he was attending school. Choosing to 
go back to school may have been the right decision for Applicant, but it was not a 
condition beyond his control. He used his GI Bill and his wife’s income to support the 
family during this time. He did not provide other evidence to show his financial problems 
were beyond his control. AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply.  
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that he has received financial counseling. 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude he made good-faith payments to creditors or 
otherwise resolved his delinquent debts. There are not clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are being resolved or under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not 
apply. 
 
Applicant stated in his interview to a government investigator that he paid certain 
debts and also admitted all of the debts in his answer to the SOR. He did not, however, 
provide proof that he disputed them because they were already paid. AG ¶ 20(e) does 
not apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I find the following potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant indicated that when he was unemployed while attending school he did 
not have medical insurance and subsequently was unable to pay his medical bills. He 
was aware these bills were turned over to a collection agency. However, when 
confronted about the delinquent debts during an interview, he stated he failed to 
disclose them because he had forgotten about them. In addition to these delinquent 
debts, Applicant has numerous other delinquent debts that accrued when he was 
attending school. Applicant disclosed on his SCA he had a vehicle repossession that 
was resolved. I did not find Applicant’s explanation for not disclosing the 18 delinquent 
debts to the investigator credible. It is not believable that Applicant acknowledged that 
his unemployment and financial mismanagement caused him financial difficulties, and 
he disclosed he had a vehicle repossessed, but then indicated that he was unaware he 
had other delinquent debts that were turned over to a collection agency because he 
simply forgot them. I find Applicant deliberately failed to disclose he had some 
delinquent debts turned over to a collection agency when he completed his SCA. The 
above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for personal conduct under 
AG ¶ 17 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
 (d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant did not provide evidence to show he made a good-faith effort to correct 
the omissions before being confronted with the facts. Failure to disclose information on 
an SCA is not a minor offense and there is insufficient evidence to conclude it happened 
under unique circumstances. AG ¶ 17(a) and 17(c) do not apply. The evidence does not 
support the application of AG ¶¶ 17(d) and 17(e).  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
8 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 35 years old. He served in the military and was honorably 
discharged. He experienced financial difficulties when he returned to college and was 
unemployed. He and his wife supported their family with the GI Bill and her income. 
Applicant also admitted that he mismanaged their finances. He was aware he did not 
pay his medical debts and they were sent to a collection agency. He deliberately failed 
to disclose that he had delinquent debts turned over to a collection agency. Applicant 
had an opportunity to provide substantiating documentation of actions he may have 
taken to resolve his delinquent debts, but did not provide it. He has failed to meet his 
burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations, and Guideline E, personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
