KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Administrative Judge shall make a written clearance decision in a timely manner
setting forth pertinent findings of fact, policies, and conclusions as to the allegations in the SOR. 
The Judge’s failure to mention Applicant’s 2010 Federal returns contravenes this requirement
and renders the Decision not sustainable.  Favorable decision reversed.
CASE NO: 12-10933.a1
DATE: 06/29/2016
DATE: June 29, 2016
In Re:
------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 12-10933
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
April 26, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On February 18, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Wilford H. Ross granted Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Department Counsel appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and
E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s favorable
findings ran contrary to the weight of the record evidence and whether an evidentiary ruling was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Consistent with the following, we reverse the decision.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
 Applicant’s SOR alleges delinquent credit card debts and failure to file tax returns.  The
Judge found that Applicant has established payment plans for the two credit cards and that he has
filed his state tax returns for 2008 through 2010.  He filed the 2008-2009 returns in 2012 and the
2010 return in 2015.1  The Judge noted Applicant’s SOR answer, in which he stated that he had “no
excuse” for the 2008 and 2009 failure to file state income tax returns.  The Judge did not discuss
Applicant’s 2010 Federal return.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge cited to evidence that Applicant is paying his credit card debts and that he has
filed his tax returns.  He concluded that there are clear indications that Applicant’s problems are
under control and that Applicant had initiated a good-faith effort to pay his debts.2  In the whole-
person analysis, the Judge cited to “permanent behavior changes,” as a result of which Applicant
is not subject to coercion or duress.
Discussion
There is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  The
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate admitted
or proven facts.  The applicant has the burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable decision. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  The standard applicable in security clearance decisions “is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’” Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered
for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”  Directive,
Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
In deciding whether the Judge's rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
1The SOR contains four allegations, two for delinquent credit card accounts and two that alleged (a) failure to
file his state income taxes in 2008 and 2009 and (b) failure to file state and Federal income taxes for 2010. 
2See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶¶ 20 (c), (d).
decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate a
satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment; it
fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  See ISCR Case No. 14-02563 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015).
Department Counsel argues that the Judge’s favorable decision is not supported by the
record, devoting his argument to Applicant’s failure to file his tax returns.  Failure to file tax returns
suggests that an applicant has a problem with complying with well-established government rules and
systems.  Voluntary compliance with these things is essential for protecting classified information. 
ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016).  Someone who fails repeatedly to fulfill his
or her legal obligations does not demonstrate the high degree of good judgment and reliability
required of those granted access to classified information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5
(App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015).  See Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers Union Local 473 v. McElroy, 284
F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961).
In the case before us, Department Counsel notes several things that undermine the Judge’s
favorable findings. First and foremost, the Judge made no findings at all about Applicant’s failure
to file his 2010 Federal tax return, and he did not discuss it in the Analysis, even though this was
alleged as a security concern in the SOR.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.25: “The Administrative Judge shall
make a written clearance decision in a timely manner setting forth pertinent findings of fact, policies,
and conclusions as to the allegations in the SOR[.]”  See also ISCR Case No. 08-07803 at 2 (App.
Bd. Sep. 21, 2009) for the proposition that a Judge must enter findings and conclusions about all of
the allegations in an SOR.  The Judge’s failure to mention Applicant’s 2010 Federal returns
contravenes this requirement and alone renders the Decision not sustainable. 
Department Counsel also argues that the record contains little evidence if any to show that
Applicant’s financial problems are behind him and will not return.  We find this argument
persuasive, in light of evidence that Applicant failed to pay his debts or file his returns despite a
household income of over $170,0003 and despite his status as a retired senior NCO in the U.S.
military, which suggests that he has the education, experience, and judgment to understand his legal
duty to satisfy financial obligations.  
Moreover, there is no evidence in support of the Judge’s conclusion that Applicant has made
permanent behavioral changes, or what his prior deficient behavior had been besides inexcusable
neglect.  In a DOHA proceeding, it is the applicant’s job to present evidence that would mitigate
concerns raised by SOR allegations that he has admitted and/or that the Government has proved. 
Directive ¶ E3.1.15. Applicant did not provide a documentary response to the File of Relevant
Material (FORM), thereby failing to take advantage of his opportunity to supplement the record with
evidence that would demonstrate that his financial problems are under control and that he has
3This figure is drawn from Applicant’s unsigned 2010 Federal income tax return, included in Item 3, Answer
to the SOR.  In his security clearance application (SCA), he stated that he failed to pay the $750 balance due on his 2010
state tax liability due to a decrease in income.  He provided no further information on this.  However, even if true, such
a diminution of income would be entitled to minimal weight in evaluating his failure to file his returns.  
overcome his admitted tendency to neglect important legal obligations such as filing tax returns.
  
Department Counsel argues that the Judge erred by not considering the summary of
Applicant’s clearance interview that was attached to the FORM.  He argues that, by not responding
to the FORM, Applicant forfeited any objection to this document.  We have examined this document
and conclude that, regarding the issues that are raised on appeal, it is cumulative to what is contained
in Applicant’s disclosures in his SCA and in his answer to the SOR.  Its inclusion in the record
would not likely have resulted in a different decision by the Judge or in different analysis by us on
appeal.  Therefore, there is no reason to reach the issue of whether the Judge was required to
consider the document because it would have made no difference.  
  
  The Judge’s decision does not consider relevant factors, fails to consider important aspects
of the case, and offers an explanation for the decision that runs contrary to the weight of the record
evidence.  See ISCR Case No. 14-02563, supra.  The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant has met his
burden of persuasion under the Egan standard is not sustainable. 
Order
The Decision is REVERSED.      
Signed: James E. Moody       
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy           
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Concurring Opinion of Administrative Judge Michael Ra’anan
I concur with the majority on the resolution of this case.  I write separately to expand upon
an issue that this case presents.  The issue has been appearing in various forms for some time now.
Recently, in many cases where Applicant has selected a decision based on the written record,
Department Counsel’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) has included a footnote on the subject of
authentication of the Report of Investigation.4  The footnote might reasonably have been interpreted
as encouraging Applicant to take advantage of his or her opportunity to respond to the FORM. The
footnote pointed out the possibility that a Judge may (or may not) consider a Report of Investigation
contained in the FORM, depending on whether the Judge concluded that Applicant waived their
right to object to the ROI because it lacks authentication.  In accordance with the Directive, the
Judge will normally only consider the ROI if it has been authenticated or if an objection to it has
been waived.  It is generally understood that waivers need to be knowing and intelligent.
In this case, on appeal,  Department Counsel articulates a belief that Applicant’s failure to
respond to the FORM as a whole should reasonably be construed as including a knowing and
intelligent waiver to the ROI because of the footnote.  
When an applicant without legal representation fails to respond to a File of Relevant Material
as a whole, how plausible would it be to believe that they chose to make a knowing and intelligent
waiver to the requirement for authentication of the ROI?  Can we reasonably devise a rule to address
the issue?  How much does language in a footnote, written by a party-opponent (lawyer) contribute
to the analysis?   How much does a specific applicant’s educational level matter?  (In the case before
us, Applicant has no college education reported in his security clearance application.)  Does it matter
that the issue was raised once in the FORM–an eight page document which was part of a sixty page
package?  Does it matter that Applicant is not even obliged to respond to the FORM?  Had the issue
been squarely put before the Applicant in a much shorter document that required a response would
that have been more properly tailored to the problem?  For example, in this case record, I note there
was a one page document for attachment to Applicant’s response to the SOR for selecting a Hearing
or a FORM.  Would all or many the problems posed by the footnote approach have been solved, if
the ROI question had been incorporated into that one page document (that appears more obligatory)
as part of the answer to the SOR?
 I am not sure I know the answers to all the pertinent questions. I do recognize the need to
protect the rights that were put in the Directive and the need for an efficient system for resolving the
question of admissibility ROIs in FORM cases where Applicant has not responded to the FORM.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan  
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
4This is not the place to lay out the history and context of the concern about Reports of Investigation, except
to say that the special procedures accorded them under the Executive Order and the Directive suggest that they were
considered by some to present a heightened problem for the provision of due process in security clearance cases.
