 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-12035  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr. , Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny his 
eligibility for a security clearance. Applicant incurred delinquent debt after his first 
marriage dissolved in 2008. He has demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve his 
delinquent accounts. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 27, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance. 
 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive. 
    
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on January 14, 2016. A complete copy of the file 
of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive was provided to Applicant. He submitted 
a response on February 1, 2016. The case was assigned to me on March 22, 2016. The 
documents appended to the FORM are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 8, without objection. The documents provided by the Applicant are admitted as 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through G, without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 37, has worked for a federal contractor since November 2006. He 
previously served in the U.S. Navy from December 1997 until he was medically 
discharged in June 2006. On his security clearance application, dated August 2012, 
Applicant disclosed two delinquent personal loans. The ensuing investigation revealed, 
as alleged in the SOR, that Applicant is indebted to six creditors for $28,900. Applicant 
admits each allegation.3 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began when his first marriage dissolved in July 
2008. He assumed all of the marital debt in addition to having to pay child support. 
Applicant obtained the four personal loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a -1.b and 1.e -1.f in an 
effort to consolidate his debts. The account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is for a jewelry store 
account. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is for a cell phone. Applicant became 
overwhelmed trying to maintain his living expenses, his loan payments, his child support 
obligations, and the expenses he incurred visiting his daughter every weekend. All of 
the alleged debts became delinquent between 2009 and 2012. Applicant remarried in 
2012. At some point, Applicant was awarded primary custody of his daughter. His ex-
wife does not pay child support. In January 2015, Applicant was involved in a car 
accident, sustaining serious injuries after his car was hit by a drunk driver. He was out 
of work for more than three months recovering from his injuries. Applicant returned to 
work in the spring 2015. In 2015, Applicant also incurred legal expenses as he 
continued to litigate custody issues with his ex-wife.4 
 
 Applicant claims that he began contacting his creditors when he started 
experiencing financial problems, but they were unwilling to work with him. In 2008, 
Applicant began working with a credit consolidation company to resolve his delinquent 
debts.  He was able to consolidate ten accounts under his plan, but was unable to afford 
the $560 monthly payment. In August 2012, he contacted a second credit consolidation 
service, which lowered his monthly payment to $482. He began participating in this 
program in October 2012. It is unclear when and why Applicant stopped participating in 
the program. Recently, Applicant has been able to negotiate payment plans and 
settlements with his creditors. He has negotiated payment plans for SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
($2,876) and 1.c ($2,395) for monthly payments of $89 and $239, respectively. He has 
                                                          
2 GE 3. 
 
3 GE 5-7. 
 
4 GE 2, 4, 8.  
 
3 
 
also paid the cell phone account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d ($135). In addition to these SOR 
debts, Applicant is paying a non-SOR account for $1,751. In May 2015, the creditor 
charged off the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a ($18,113), but provided Applicant with two 
settlement offers. Unable to afford either offer, the debt remains unresolved. The debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e ($2,492) – 1.f ($2,950) were charged off by the creditor in 2009. 
There is nothing to indicate that the creditor is actively making attempts to collect on 
these accounts.5   
     
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
administrative judges apply the guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
                                                          
5 GE 2; AE A-G. 
 
 
4 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”6  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes $28,900 in delinquent debt. The record 
supports a finding that Applicant had a history of not paying his bills and that he had an 
inability to do so.7 However, Applicant provided sufficient information to mitigate the 
financial concerns. Applicant’s financial problems were caused by events beyond his 
control: the dissolution of his marriage; his assumption of all of the marital debt; and, his 
child support obligation. Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances by staying 
in contact with his creditors and attempting to renegotiate repayment terms.8 He also 
attempted to repay his creditors through two debt-consolidation plans in 2012. Applicant 
has also shown that he is making a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts. 
He has established payment plans for the accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c and 
a $1,700 non-SOR account. He has also resolved the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d.9  
 
After reviewing the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also considered the 
whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). While SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.e - 1.f remain unresolved, this 
is not the most important factor in assessing Applicant’s security worthiness. A person is 
not required to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR, to make payment 
on all delinquent debts simultaneously, or pay the debts alleged in the SOR first. He or 
she need only establish a plant to resolve financial problems and take significant actions 
to implement the plan.10 Applicant’s actions show his commitment to resolving his 
delinquent accounts and I am confident he will continue to do so as he is able. 
Furthermore, Applicant financial problems were not the result of irresponsible or 
reckless behavior, but from his efforts to manage his financial responsibilities after his 
divorce. Applicant has not exhibited behaviors that are indicative of an inability to 
properly handle or safeguard classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f:    For Applicant 
 
 
                                                          
6  AG ¶ 18. 
 
7 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
8 AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
9 AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
10 See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Based on the record, it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
                                                
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
