 As defined in Chapter 3 and Appendix 10 of DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, as amended (Regulation).1
 Required by the Regulation, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended (Directive).2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )        ADP Case No. 14-02667
)
)
Applicant for a Position of Public Trust )
Appearances
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the trustworthiness concerns about her financial
problems. Her request for eligibility to occupy a public trust position is denied.
Statement of the Case
On September 17, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for an ADP I/II/III position  for her1
job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background
investigation, adjudicators for the Department of Defense (DOD) were unable to
determine that it is clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant
Applicant’s request for a position of trust.2
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).3
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included six documents (Items 1 - 6) proffered in4
support of the Government’s case.
2
On March 12, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
that raise trustworthiness concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).  Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision3
without a hearing. On July 27, 2015, Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant
Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on August 21,4
2015. The record closed on September 20, 2015, after Applicant did not submit
additional information during the 30 days allowed in Section E3.1.7. The case was
assigned to me on December 10, 2015.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is 49 years old. At the time she submitted her EQIP, she was
unemployed. In August 2013, she was hired for her current job with a defense
contractor. Applicant’s job requires she be eligible for a position of trust because her
employer supports management of the health care system used by members of the
military, and she must be found suitable to be entrusted with personally identifiable
information (PII) associated with the health care system’s constituents. Since 2004,
Applicant has been unemployed four times for a total of 33 months. (FORM, Item 3)
Applicant has been married since July 1999. A previous marriage began in May
1987 and ended by divorce in February 1999. Applicant has four children between 19
and 28 years of age. Applicant’s ex-husband did not pay child support as required. At
one point, he owed her as much as $100,000 for unpaid child support. (FORM, Item 4)
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $39,601 for 26
delinquent or past-due debts (SOR 1.a - 1.z). In response to the SOR, Applicant
admitted the tax debts alleged at SOR 1.b ($10,310) and 1.c ($10,124), claiming that
she had an installment plan to repay both debts. She denied the remaining SOR
allegations. Applicant disclosed several of the alleged debts in her EQIP. All of the
debts are documented in the credit reports obtained during his background
investigation. Additionally, Applicant discussed the alleged debts with a Government
investigator during a personal subject interview on November 18, 2013. (FORM, Items 1
- 6) 
In a March 2014 response to financial interrogatories from DOD adjudicators
(FORM, Item 4), Applicant indicated that she is paying the SOR 1.b and 1.c tax liens. In
support of her claim, she provided a November 21, 2012, letter from the IRS confirming
a $315 monthly payment plan beginning on December 28, 2012 to satisfy a $20,150.35
debt for unpaid taxes from the 2001, 2004, 2009, and 2010 tax years. She provided a
release of the tax lien for taxes due from 2009, but did not otherwise produce a record
of regular payments under the aforementioned IRS agreement.
 Regulation, ¶ C3.6.15. 5
 Regulation, ¶ C6.1.1.1. 6
 Regulation, ¶ C8.2.1. 7
 Directive. 6.3.8
3
Also in her response to interrogatories, Applicant claimed to have paid the debts
alleged at SOR 1.l, 1.p, 1.w, and 1.y. However, she did not provide sufficient information
to corroborate her claims. Of the 26 debts alleged in the SOR, eight (SOR 1.d, 1.e, 1.g -
1.j, 1.q and 1.y) are for less than $100 each. All were addressed by the interrogatories,
but none have been paid or otherwise resolved. Finally, as part of her response to
interrogatories, Applicant provided a personal financial statement (PFS). She declared
therein that after paying her regular monthly expenses, she had approximately $2,827
remaining. (FORM, Item 4)
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I/II/III are classified as “sensitive positions.”  In5
deciding whether a person should be assigned to an ADP position, it must be
determined that his or her loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that it is
“clearly consistent with the interests of national security” to do so.  The Regulation also6
requires that DOD contractor personnel are entitled to the procedural protections in the
Directive before any adverse determination may be made.7
The Directive requires that each decision be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,8
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policies in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific applicable guidelines should be followed whenever a case
can be measured against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or
denial of eligibility for a position of trust.
The Government bears the initial burden of producing admissible information on
which it based the preliminary decision to deny or revoke a position of trust for an
4
applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove controverted facts
alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it then falls to the applicant to
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one is entitled to a
position of trust, an applicant bears a heavy burden of persuasion. A person who has
access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government
based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a compelling interest in
ensuring applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of
one who will protect sensitive information as his or her own. Any reasonable doubt
about an applicant’s suitability for access should be resolved in favor of the
Government.
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Applicant admitted two of the SOR allegations and denied the remaining 24
allegations. As required by section E3.1.14 of the Directive, the Government met its
burden of production to establish the resulting controverted issues of fact. The facts
thus established support all of the SOR allegations and raise a trustworthiness concern
addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history
of not meeting financial obligations).
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
5
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
As required by section E3.1.15 of the Directive, Applicant had the burden of
persuasion to mitigate, extenuate, or refute the SOR allegations. In response to the
SOR and the FORM, Applicant did not present any information to support her claims
regarding resolution of her debts. Although her financial problems may have arisen from
circumstances beyond her control (e.g., unemployment, loss of income, illness, unpaid
child support, etc.), the onus was on her to show that she acted responsibly in the face
of her financial problems. Her responses to the Government’s information did not show
that she has acted to resolve her debts in any identifiable, systematic way. Further, she
has the resources to pay many of her smaller debts outright, but she has not done so.
On balance, Applicant has not mitigated the trustworthiness concerns raised by the
Government’s information.
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the
context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). I conclude that doubts remain
about Applicant’s trustworthiness. Because protection of the national interest is the
principal focus of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against the
Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.z: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of
national security for Applicant to occupy a position of trust. Applicant’s request for
eligibility is denied.
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
