 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --- )  ISCR Case No. 14-06744 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 19, 2013, Applicant applied for a security clearance and 
submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a 
Security Clearance Application.1 On July 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
                                                          
1
 Item 4 (e-QIP, dated September 19, 2013). 
 
2 
                                      
 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations), and detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make an 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, 
continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. On September 4, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.2 A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM), erroneously referring to the case as an 
application for a position of public trust, was mailed to Applicant on January 19, 2016, 
and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the 
FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. In 
addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of the Directive as well as the 
Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the FORM on January 28, 2016. A 
response was due by February 27, 2016. Applicant timely submitted documentation in 
response to the FORM. Department Counsel did not object to the documents. The case 
was assigned to me on May 2, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted with brief comments six of the 
factual allegations pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d., 1.g., and 
1.j.), and denied the remaining allegations, also with brief comments. Applicant’s 
admissions and comments are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, 
I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been a 
gateway operations specialist with his current employer since November 2006. He was 
previously in a different position with his same employer from March 2005 until he was 
promoted in November 2006.3 He is a 1996 high school graduate with a 2005 
associate’s degree in an unspecified discipline.4 Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Army in 
August 1996 and remained on active duty until he was honorably discharged in 
September 2001.5 He was granted a secret security clearance in 2000, a top secret 
(TS) security clearance with access to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) in 
2008, and a renewed TS/SCI in 2013.6 Applicant was married in June 1998. He and his 
                                                          
2
 Item 2 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated September 4, 2015). 
 
3
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 11-12.  
 
4
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 9-10. 
 
5
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 16-17; Item 8 (Personal Subject Interview, dated April 29, 2014), at 2.  
 
6
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 33; Item 8, supra note 5, at 3. It is unclear if Applicant’s access to SCI was 
previously administratively terminated or if it was revoked when his SOR was issued. The file is otherwise silent in 
this regard. If Applicant’s access to SCI was, in fact, revoked in connection with the issues appearing in the SOR, 
 
3 
                                      
 
wife have two sons born in 1999 and 2005, respectively.7 He also has a son from a 
previous relationship, born in 1996.8 
 
Financial Considerations9 
  
It is unclear when Applicant first experienced financial difficulties, but in reviewing his 
comments to an investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) as well 
as his Response to the FORM, it appears that Applicant attributed several factors to 
whatever financial problems may have arisen commencing as early as 2006 or 2007. The 
first such factor occurred during the period April 2005 until January 2006, when Applicant 
was deployed as a civilian contractor to Iraq. He was unaware that (1) income tax was not 
being withheld from his salary; (2) to his surprise, his overseas income was not tax-free, 
and the state taxed the salary of those deployed overseas; and (3) upon his return from 
overseas, his employer erroneously continued to report that he was still overseas. As a 
result of those factors, no state or federal taxes were withheld from Applicant’s salary while 
he was overseas or for a period after he had already returned. The problem was discovered 
when Applicant presented his income tax papers to a professional income tax return 
preparation service. Substantial amounts of income taxes were determined to be owed to 
both the state and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
10
  
 
The resolution process described by Applicant is less than clear. It appears that 
Applicant contacted the state and set up a repayment plan with an unspecified amount to be 
deducted from his salary each pay period; and his income tax refunds were to be applied 
directly to the state. Despite those two methods of purported resolution, the state filed 
income tax liens against Applicant in 2005 ($317), 2010 ($5,201), and 2012 ($190). The IRS 
filed a federal income tax lien in 2011 ($30,986). Applicant contended that as of 2012, $100 
is deducted from his paycheck on a monthly basis, and he claimed that he had 
documentation to support his contention. In reality, Applicant submitted pay stubs from two 
recent consecutive pay periods which reflected an increased withholding of $100 for his 
federal taxes and $50 for his state taxes. He submitted no documentation to support the 
supposed “payments,” and he failed to submit any documentation to support the existence 
of any state or federal installment or repayment plans.
11
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Applicant would also be entitled to a separate security clearance review process under the provisions of E.O. 12968, 
Access to Classified Information, dated August 2, 1995; DOD Reg. 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
January 1987, as amended and modified; and Intelligence Community Directive (ICD) 704, Personnel Security 
Standards and Procedures Governing Eligibility for Access to Sensitive Compartmented Information and Other 
Controlled Access Program Information, dated October 1, 2008. 
 
7
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 22-23. 
 
8
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 22; Item 8, supra note 5, at 2. 
 
9
 General source information pertaining to the financial issues discussed below can be found in the following 
exhibits: Item 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated November 1, 2013); Item 6 
(Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated April 10, 2014); Item 7 (Equifax Credit Report, 
dated January 14, 2016); Item 8, supra note 5; Item 4, supra note 1; Item 2, supra note 2. More recent information 
can be found in the exhibits furnished and individually identified. 
 
10
 Item 8, supra note 5, at 5-6; Applicant’s Response to the FORM, undated, at 1. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
The second factor that Applicant attributed to the financial issues was the expiration 
of the deferment status of his student loans, along with the expectation that he should start 
making his monthly payments. Applicant stated that when that occurred, the interest on the 
loans skyrocketed. Because of an inability to continue making his monthly payments, the 
student loans went into a default status and they were transferred, first to a servicing agent, 
and then to the U.S. Department of Education (DOE), for collection. Applicant claimed he 
made periodic payments, and in August 2013, a repayment plan with an associated 
garnishment was purportedly established. He contended that $394.18 is garnished from his 
wages each month. In his two recent pay stubs, there is an indication of a monthly 
deduction of only $302.33, not the stated $394.18. Applicant also submitted a Form 1098-E, 
Student Loan Interest Statement, for the tax year 2015. It reflected the payment of interest 
in the amount of $2,201.93 only while the loans were in a default status. Other than those 
interest payments, there is no documentation to support Applicant’s contentions that there 
were repayment agreements or repayments before 2015.
12
  
 
The third factor attributed to the financial issues was Applicant’s wife’s unspecified 
period of unemployment.
13
 He failed to indicate either the length of the period or the amount 
of her lost monthly wages.  
 
In April 2014, Applicant described his monthly family finances. He stated that the 
monthly household income was $5,417, with his biweekly salary of $1,600 and his wife’s 
biweekly salary of $900 after taxes. He claimed their monthly expenses, including student 
loan payments and child support, were between $3,481 and $3,581, depending on the 
utilities. He estimated a monthly remainder of between $1,836 and $1,936 available each 
month available for discretionary saving or spending. He indicated the payments for child 
support ($264.55) and his car ($240) would cease in mid-2014, and those funds would 
subsequently be spent to reduce his outstanding bills.
14
 However, according to his January 
2016 pay stub, Applicant was still paying $404.18 for child support, an obligation that 
supposedly ceased in mid-2014.
15
 
  
Applicant professed that he has a repayment plan in place for the eventual resolution 
of his delinquent accounts. Under one segment of that plan, he calculated that his resolution 
of his federal income tax debt would take approximately six years provided he makes a 
“payment” of $100 each pay period. He said he is working with a family friend who is a 
financial counselor, and she gives him unspecified financial guidance “to stay on top of his 
payments.” He contended that funds for three accounts are automatically withdrawn from 
his paycheck, and when one bill is satisfied, the next one in line will start receiving 
payments.
16
 He did not submit any further information pertaining to the financial counselor 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
11
 Item 6, supra note 9, at 5-7; Item 8, supra note 5, at 6; Item 2, supra note 2, at 1; Applicant’s Response to 
the FORM, supra note 10, at 2; Pay Stubs, dated December 17, 2015 and January 28, 2016, attached to Applicant’s 
Response to the FORM. 
 
12
 Item 4, supra note 1, at 36; Item 6, supra note 9, at 15; Item 7, supra note 9, at 2; Item 8, supra note 5, at 
3; Pay Stubs, supra note 11; Form 1098-E, dated January 13, 2016, attached to Applicant’s Response to the FORM. 
 
13
 Item 8, supra note 5, at 3. 
 
14
 Item 8, supra note 5, at 6-7. 
 
15
 Pay Stub (2016), supra note 11. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
or the guidance received, and he did not furnish a written copy of his prioritized list of 
delinquent creditors.  
 
The SOR identified ten purportedly continuing delinquent accounts, totaling 
approximately $98,851. Included in those delinquent accounts are the three state income 
tax liens (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c.), the federal income tax lien (SOR ¶ 1.d.), the student 
loans (SOR ¶ 1.j.), and five other accounts. As noted above, although Applicant repeatedly 
indicated that he was “paying” certain accounts, he failed to submit any documentary 
evidence of those purported payments. There is no documentary evidence as to when 
those “payments” started, to which creditors they were made, or what the present unpaid 
balances might be. Payments were made on the student loans in December 2015 and 
January 2016, but there is no documentary evidence of payments to other creditors. This is 
especially significant since Applicant’s most recent credit report (January 2016) does not 
reflect payments or reduced remaining balances on the tax liens or other listed delinquent 
accounts. Accordingly, I conclude that the tax liens alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.d. are 
not being resolved. There is some evidence that the account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j. is in the 
process of being resolved. The remaining SOR-related delinquent accounts are as follows: 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e. and 1.f. – These are two medical accounts from an unidentified 
medical provider with past-due balances of $55 and $90 that Applicant claimed were for 
medical services for his wife. Applicant said they were copays for which he never 
received a bill. He contended she paid the bills in their entirety once he discovered the 
accounts were considered delinquent. Applicant acknowledged that he did not possess 
documentation to support his claim that the bills were paid, and in April 2014, he 
indicated he would contact the collection agent to verify the bills had been resolved.17 In 
his Answer to the SOR he stated the bills were paid, and he attached receipts from the 
medical provider that both accounts had been resolved and the entries would be 
deleted from his credit reports.18  He also submitted duplicate copies of a check for $15 
claiming that he was refunded his overpayment, but there is no evidence that the check 
was associated with either of the SOR-related accounts.19 Nevertheless, the accounts 
have been resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g. – This is an automobile loan for Applicant’s Volvo in the approximate 
amount of $23,000 for which there was a past-due amount of $23,225. The account was 
charged off in the amount of $10,731, and it was transferred or sold to a debt purchaser 
who then increased the past-due balance to $27,741. Applicant indicated that the 
vehicle was involved in an accident and his insurance carrier kept telling him a 
representative of the company would investigate his claim. No investigation occurred 
and Applicant stored the vehicle. He claimed he had repeatedly contacted the lender 
regarding the situation, but that they kept shuttling him around to various offices. He 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
16
 Item 8, supra note 5, at 7; Pay Stub (2016), supra note 11; Applicant’s Response to the FORM, supra 
note 10, at 1-2. 
 
17
 Item 6, supra note 9, at 8-9; Item 8, supra note 5, at 5. 
 
18
 Item 2, supra note 2, at 1; Letters, dated September 3, 2015, attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
19
 Item 2, supra note 2, at 1; Check, dated August 24, 2015, attached to Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
was purportedly informed in 2010 that he could get out of the loan, initially with a 
payment of $10,000, but subsequently with a payment of $3,000. In April 2014, 
Applicant indicated nothing had yet been agreed to and that he generally received 
collection calls every four to five months, but they refused to permit him to speak with a 
manager. He added that if the delinquent account causes him any problem with his 
security clearance, he will use funds from his 401(k) to pay off the debt. In his more 
recent Response to the FORM, Applicant still had taken no further action to resolve the 
debt.20 The account has not been resolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h. – This is an automobile loan in the amount of $21,248 for Applicant’s 
Infinity with a high credit of $628 and a past-due balance of $366. An unspecified 
amount was charged off. In April 2014, Applicant indicated this automobile loan was 
associated with the purchase of his Volvo, but in his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
acknowledged it was actually associated with his Infinity. He contended this vehicle was 
also “totaled,” and that his insurance company had taken care of the charges. He failed 
to submit any documentation to support his contentions regarding the account or his 
claimed resolution of it.21 The account has not been resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i. – This is a bank credit card with a high credit and past-due balance of 
$403 that was sold to a debt purchaser. In April 2014, Applicant gave a confusing 
scenario regarding the account. Applicant first became aware of the delinquencies in 
2008. He claimed that his wife had made payments on the account and thought she had 
paid it off. He also said that he had paid $403 but not the accrued interest about which 
he claimed to have no knowledge. He said he intended to contact the initial creditor to 
determine the true status of the account, and if it is still an open account, he would pay 
it off and furnish documentation to the OPM investigator.22 Applicant failed to submit 
documentation to support his contentions that he had contacted the creditor or any 
payments had been made to the creditor or the collection agent. The account has not 
been resolved. 
 
Other than his April 2014 comments to the OPM investigator, Applicant failed to 
furnish a more recent and accurate personal financial statement setting forth his net 
monthly income; his monthly household expenses; and his monthly debt payments. In 
the absence of such information, it is impossible to determine if he has any monthly 
remainder available for savings or spending. He previously claimed to have between 
$1,836 and $1,936 available each month available for discretionary saving or spending, and 
he indicated the payments for child support and his automobile would cease in mid-2014, 
enabling him to address his other delinquent accounts. That information was apparently not 
accurate. He also stated he had a retirement account with an unspecified balance. Under 
the circumstances, it is difficult to determine if Applicant’s finances are under control or if 
                                                          
20
 Item 6, supra note 9, at 9; Item 7, supra note 9, at 3; Item 8, supra note 5, at 4-5; Applicant’s Response to 
the FORM, supra note 10, at 1. 
 
21
 Item 6, supra note 9, at 10, 16; Item 8, supra note 5, at 5; Item 2, supra note 2, at 1. 
 
22
 Item 6, supra note 9, at 11, 16; Item 7, supra note 9, at 4; Item 8, supra note 5, at 5; Item 2, supra note 2, 
at 1-2. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
he is still experiencing financial difficulties. Other than some extremely modest payments 
to some delinquent accounts (both alleged in the SOR and others that are not alleged), as 
well as extremely modest increased income tax withholdings, there is little indication that 
Applicant has actually resolved the majority of his delinquent accounts. Accordingly, it 
appears that Applicant’s financial problems are not under control.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”23 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”24   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”25 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
                                                          
23
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
24
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
25
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.26  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”27 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”28 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
                                                          
26
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
27
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
28
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant has had a long-standing problem with his finances which 
started as early as 2006 or 2007, and which is apparently continuing. State income tax 
liens were filed against him in 2005, 2010, and 2012, and a federal income tax lien was 
filed in 2011. Student loans went into default and various other accounts became 
delinquent and were placed for collection. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
    
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”29  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d) minimally apply. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(c) do not apply. The 
nature, frequency, and recency of Applicant’s continuing multi-year period of financial 
difficulties since 2006 or 2007 make it difficult to conclude that it occurred “so long ago” 
or “was so infrequent.” Likewise, his claimed relationship with a family friend who 
supposedly is a financial counselor giving him unspecified financial guidance, in the 
absence of documentation supporting those claims, is insufficient to raise AG ¶ 20(d). 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to the income tax mix-up of 2005 and 2006, 
the expectation to start paying his student loans, and his wife’s unspecified period of 
unemployment. The income tax issue focused on the unpaid balances which evolved 
into tax liens. Two of the state tax liens were for minimal amounts of $190 (2012) and 
$317 (2005). Applicant never addressed why he failed to pay those amounts before 
                                                          
29
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
they turned into tax liens. Likewise, he could not explain why he did not make timely 
payments on his student loans, except to say that the interest on those loan 
skyrocketed. The student loans went into a default status. Other accounts went unpaid 
and were placed for collection. The loss of Applicant’s wife’s salary could reasonably 
have a negative impact on Applicant’s ability to make his monthly payments on his 
accounts. However, he never explained what the loss was in dollars, or how long that 
unemployment situation lasted.  
 
Despite Applicant’s contentions that he contacted, or would contact, creditors or 
collection agents to establish repayment plans, or that payments were actually made, 
no meaningful documentation was submitted by Applicant to support his contentions. 
He supplied documentation indicating student loan interest payments totaling $2,201.93 
were made in 2015, as well as one monthly payment in 2016; increased withholding of 
taxes, but no actual payments of overdue income taxes; and the payment of two very 
small ($55 and $90) delinquent medical bills. He apparently also paid off some medical 
bills not listed in the SOR. Applicant’s professed monthly remainder of between $1,836 
and $1,936 in April 2014, to be increased in mid-2014, should have enabled Applicant 
to contact each creditor and either establish a repayment agreement or make 
substantial payments on each of his delinquent accounts. Monthly remainders in those 
amounts since April 2014, and most especially since mid-2014, if properly applied, 
should have paid off by now all of Applicant’s delinquent accounts, with the exception of 
the federal income tax lien. Applicant’s failure to furnish documented proof of the 
resolution of those delinquent accounts enables me to conclude that he made no good-
faith efforts to do so. If consistent substantial payments had been made on the federal 
tax lien, the remaining balance would have been greatly reduced by now. 
 
Security clearance adjudications are aimed at evaluating an applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. They are not a debt-collection procedure. The 
adjudicative guidelines do not require an applicant to establish resolution of each and 
every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish a plan to resolve 
financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. There is no 
requirement that an applicant immediately resolve or make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in an SOR be 
paid first. Rather, a reasonable plan and concomitant conduct may provide for the 
payment of such debts one at a time. In this instance, there is an alleged plan to resolve 
financial problems, but there is little documentation to support the existence of such a 
plan. There are purported actions taken and some insignificant payments made to some 
creditors, but, with the exception of those insignificant payments, there is little 
documentation to support the existence of most Applicant’s actions or payments. 
Applicant has not acted responsibly by failing to address his delinquent accounts and 
income tax liens.30 Applicant’s relative action under the circumstances confronting him 
cast substantial doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.31 
                                                          
30
 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
11 
                                      
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.32   
     
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He has been 
with his current employer in different positions since March 2005. He served in Iraq as a 
civilian contractor. He is an honorably discharged veteran. He was granted a secret 
security clearance in 2000, a TS security clearance with access to SCI in 2008, and a 
renewed TS/SCI in 2013. There is no evidence of criminal conduct, security violations, 
or the misuse of information technology systems. 
 
The disqualifying evidence is more substantial. Applicant failed to timely pay 
federal and state income tax and income tax liens were filed against him in 2005, 2010, 
2011, and 2012. His student loans went into default. Accounts became delinquent and 
were placed for collection.  He repeatedly declared his intentions to contact his creditors 
and resolve his delinquent account. He contended that repayment plans had been 
established and payments made for many of his accounts. He claimed to have 
documentation supporting his contentions, but aside from a few minor insignificant 
medical bills, he failed to furnish documentation to confirm the establishment of 
repayment plans or payments made. What he claimed were payments, were actually 
increased withholdings for end-of-the-tax-year application and resolution. His declared 
monthly remainder of funds for discretionary saving or spending remained 
unsubstantiated, and if true, would have enabled Applicant to resolve nearly all of his 
debts before the FORM was issued. Applicant’s financial problems do not appear to be 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
31
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
32
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
under control. Applicant’s unsubstantiated actions under the circumstances cast 
substantial doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:33 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of ‘“meaningful track record” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant has failed to demonstrate a “meaningful track record” of voluntary debt 
reduction and elimination efforts, in only resolving two insignificant delinquent medical 
debts listed in the SOR as well as some other medical debts not listed in the SOR, and 
making some payments towards his delinquent student loans. Without supporting 
documentation, I cannot credit him with any efforts to resolve the remaining delinquent 
accounts.  
 
Overall, the evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
                                                          
33
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
