 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
         
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 14-05828 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On August 26, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In a September 21, 
2015, answer to the SOR, Applicant responded to the allegations with comments. She 
also requested a determination based on the written record. On November 25, 2015, 
the Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) with eight attachments 
(“Items”). Applicant timely responded to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on 
March 3, 2016. Based on my review of the case file and submissions, I find Applicant 
failed to mitigate financial considerations security concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 45-year-old information technology resource assistant who has 
worked for the same defense contractor since 2005. From 2007 to 2012, she also held 
a part-time job. She is divorced and has an adult daughter. Applicant earned a high 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
school diploma and an executive assistant diploma. She has no prior military 
experience. In 2012, she received credit counseling with an entity through which she 
developed a budget. She told investigators in late 2012 that it was through that entity 
her debts were consolidated and put into repayment. (FORM, Item 3 at 5)  
 
At issue in the SOR is a 2004 Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge and 24 debts, 
noted at 1.a through 1.y, respectively. The debts range from $25 to a delinquent Federal 
tax balance of about $5,670. They include obligations related to medical accounts, 
taxes, personal loans, credit cards, and a vehicle repossession. In total, the debts at 
issue amount to nearly $25,000. Applicant initially wrote that her financial problems 
began when she hired a lawyer for her 2003 divorce and subsequent child custody 
battle. (FORM, Item 3 at 6) She later attributed her financial distress to a stagnant 
income level and increasing expenses. She submitted copies of letters contacting some 
lenders regarding her situation or requesting repayment plans, mostly dated 2013. No 
documentary evidence, however, was provided showing any payments were made 
toward resolving her obligations, although wage garnishment has been imposed to 
address some of her debt. Her most recent credit report, from November 2015, 
continues to adversely reflect several of the delinquent debts at issue.  
 
Applicant has more recently incurred medical debt, although its origin is 
unexplored. (Response to the FORM at 1). She recently found a new part-time job, 
which is not identified. She is looking for a better paying position. She has also taken in 
a roommate to help meet her rent responsibilities. She recently made inquiries through 
her organization regarding a 2014 state tax lien in an attempt to help clear up her 
security clearance issues. (Response to the FORM at 2) She also submitted copies of 
seven money order receipts, most of them for $10, but it is unclear as to what lenders 
received the purported payments. In addition, she submitted a notice of tax lien and 
demand for payment from her state, dated November 2015, for taxes due in December 
2015. She wrote in 2013 that she was currently making payments on her state taxes for 
2009 through 2011 through her work, but provided no documentary evidence that such 
on-going payments were made and the tax liabilities satisfied.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” All available, 
reliable information about the person should be considered in making a decision. 
 
 
 
 
3 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has incurred 
considerable delinquent debt following a 2004 Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge. At 
present, her debt amounts to almost $25,000, including delinquent taxes. This is 
sufficient to invoke two of the financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 
 
 
4 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
           Applicant cited to an overall debt repayment plan through a consolidation entity, 
but failed to provide documentation regarding that plan, consistent payments through 
that plan, and any signs of progress. Moreover, she provided scant documentary 
evidence reflecting any other consistently applied form of progress on the tax owed and 
delinquent debts at issue. She provided no information indicating that her finances have 
improved, other than to cite to the recent acquisition of a new part-time job and a new 
roommate to help meet her present financial needs. While Applicant has received 
financial counseling, there is no evidence it was necessarily beneficial. There is no 
documented evidence that she is no longer in financial distress or that she has 
implemented safeguards to prevent further financial difficulties from occurring.  
 
        While Applicant cites to medical bills, their origin is unknown. Therefore, it cannot 
be determined whether they were due to unforeseen circumstances. There is no 
indication she has had any break in employment since at least 2005. Indeed, despite 
that period of continuous employment, she apparently has failed to devise, implement, 
and document a workable plan to address her debts in order to work toward financial 
stability. Finally, there is no indication she disputes any of the debts at issue. At best, 
the evidence shows that, at one or more times, she has contacted some of her 
creditors. Therefore, I find that, at best, AG ¶ 20(d) applies in part. Otherwise, none of 
the mitigating conditions set forth at AG ¶ 20 apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c) sets forth the need to 
utilize a whole-person evaluation.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. A divorced mother of one adult 
child, Applicant’s 2004 bankruptcy was apparently used to clear up debt related to her 
divorce and custody battle. She has been continuously employed in the information 
technology sector since 2005. Since that time, however, she has acquired almost 
$25,000 in new delinquent debt. While some efforts have been exerted to address her 
obligations, none have been consistently applied or fruitful.  
 
Applicant lacks a clear and reasonable plan for addressing her debts, dealing 
with her creditors, or for working toward the satisfaction of her debts. While a new part-
time job and roommate may prove to be beneficial, they have yet to yield demonstrable 
benefits. This process does not require that an applicant show she has addressed all of 
the debts and issues set forth in the SOR. It is, however, expected that an applicant 
provide documentary evidence reflecting that she has devised a workable plan to 
address her financial issues, and that she has successfully implemented that plan. 
Without this type of documentary evidence, financial considerations security concerns 
remain sustained.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.y:   Against Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
