 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02124 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns raised by his financial 
circumstances. He has a long history of failing to pay his debts and has accumulated a 
sizeable amount of delinquent debt. He recently started taking action to address his 
delinquent debts, but did not present sufficient evidence that his financial situation is 
under control. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
On July 18, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that his 
circumstances raised security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 
On August 14, 2014, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish 
his eligibility for access to classified information (Answer). 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 On September 18, 2015, Department Counsel indicated the Government was 
prepared to proceed with a hearing and forwarded the case to the Hearing Office for 
scheduling of the requested hearing.2 On October 28, 2015, I was assigned the case 
and, with the agreement of the parties, scheduled the hearing for January 12, 2016.3  
 
 The hearing was convened as scheduled. Department Counsel offered exhibits 
(Ex.) 1 – 4. Applicant testified and offered Ex. A – H.4 I granted Applicant’s request for 
additional time post-hearing to supplement the record.5 He timely submitted Ex. I and 
J.6 He submitted two additional exhibits, which were marked Ex. K and L, after the 
deadline for submitting post-hearing matters.7 Nevertheless, all exhibits were admitted 
into the record. The hearing transcript (Tr.) was received by the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals on January 19, 2016, and the record closed on April 27, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is in his mid-thirties and is a few credits shy of attaining his 
undergraduate degree, but is not currently attending college. He is a document analyst 
for a federal contractor, currently earning a yearly salary of $40,000. In September 
2013, he submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in connection with his job. In 
response to questions regarding his financial record, Applicant disclosed that his 
student loans, totaling about $26,000, had been turned over to collections.   
 
At hearing, Applicant testified that his student loans started becoming delinquent 
in 2008. (Tr. at 38.) In 2012, after a creditor for one of his delinquent student loans 
secured a judgment, Applicant agreed to pay $200 per month to satisfy the judgment. 
                                                          
2 The record is silent concerning the 13-month delay between Applicant’s request for a hearing and the 
case being forwarded to the Hearing Office. However, Applicant did not claim, and the evidence does not 
reflect, he was materially prejudiced from the unexplained delay. As an aside, the above listed 
Department Counsel only took over the case after it was already scheduled for hearing.  
 
3 Department Counsel’s original and supplemental discovery letters to Applicant are attached to the 
record as Hearing Exhibits (Hx.) I – II. Prehearing scheduling correspondence, the notice of hearing, and 
the case management order are collectively attached as Hx. III.  
 
4 Ex. H is a list of references and their contact information. Applicant was advised that he had the right to 
call witnesses at the hearing and, if a witness was not available, he could submit a letter from the witness. 
The record was left open post-hearing, in part, to provide him the opportunity to submit letters from his 
references. Tr. at 8-13, 25-29, 65; Hx. III. No such letters, beyond the two collectively marked and 
admitted as Ex. G, were offered. 
 
5 The original deadline for submitting post-hearing matters was January 26, 2016, but was extended at 
Applicant’s request to February 5, 2016. Post-hearing correspondence is attached to the record as Hx. IV.  
 
6 Ex. I is an e-mail from Applicant, dated January 26, 2016, without attachments; while, Ex. J consists of 
an e-mail from Applicant, dated February 5, 2016, with three attachments.  
 
7 Ex. K consists of an e-mail from Applicant, dated February 12, 2016, with mortgage-related documents 
regarding SOR 1.c and 1.d; while Ex. L is an e-mail, dated April 27, 2016, without attachments. Although 
the exhibits were submitted after the deadline, I have excused the late filing and considered the exhibits. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant admits that he failed to abide by the terms of the agreement, missing about 10 
to 15 payments since 2012. As of the hearing, he had not made the required $200 
monthly payment since approximately February 2015.  
 
Post-hearing, Applicant worked out a new agreement with the judgment creditor, 
agreeing to pay $500 a month beginning on February 9, 2016. Although Applicant 
submitted numerous documents after the deadline for submitting post-hearing matters, 
he did not submit documents reflecting that he actually made the required $500 monthly 
payments. Applicant’s delinquent student loans, which total about $45,000 and are 
referenced at SOR 1.a and 1.b, remain unresolved. (Tr. at 37-40; Ex. 1 at 29-30; Ex. 2-
4; Ex. B; Ex. D; Ex. E; Ex. J) 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems go beyond his delinquent student loans. In 2006, 
he was approached by a former high school friend about a potential real estate 
investment opportunity, whereby Applicant would, on paper, purchase a distressed 
home that the owners could no longer afford. Applicant’s friend would help him 
(Applicant) procure the necessary loans to finance the purchase. The plan was to allow 
the owners to remain in the property, and they would purportedly pay the mortgage 
loan(s) and potentially some amount to Applicant as rent. Sometime later the property 
would be sold in the then-hot real estate market and Applicant would receive some 
amount of the sale proceeds as profit for his investment. Applicant, who was in his late 
twenties at the time, agreed to the plan and purchased a property for about $600,000. 
The first mortgage payment of $3,400 was due in October 2006. Applicant never made 
a mortgage loan payment. 
 
 Applicant testified that in about 2007 he became aware that his former friend was 
involved in a multi-million dollar fraud that he had unwittingly become a victim of. At one 
point during his testimony, Applicant claimed that his former friend forged his name on 
the closing documents. He later testified that he just signed what his friend told him to 
sign. (Compare, Tr. at 30, lines 14-15, with, Tr. at 58, lines 13-17.) He further testified 
that he does not recall whether he signed any closing documents declaring he was 
purchasing the property as his primary residence, but stated unequivocally that he 
would never purposefully sign any document stating that he was going to live in the 
property. (Tr. at 58-59)  
 
Post-hearing, Applicant submitted the closing documents from the 2006 
purchase. The closing documents include an “Occupancy Statement,” whereby 
Applicant stated “under penalty of perjury” that: 
 
I/We will occupy the subject property as my/our principal residence as 
required by, and in compliance with, the terms of the Deed of 
Trust/Mortgage/Security Instrument relating to the subject property. 
 
Applicant’s signature as sole borrower on the Occupancy Statement, Ex. K, is similar to 
the signature appearing on his security clearance application, Ex. 1.  
 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant recently took steps to resolve the mortgage-related debt for the 2006 
(fraudulent) purchase. He initially agreed with the creditor to resolve the debt through a 
deed-in-lieu, but after consulting with an attorney backed out of the agreement. He now 
claims to have resolved the more than $400,000 debt through a short sale. He provided 
no documentation to substantiate his latest claim of resolving the mortgage-related 
debt. As of the close of the record, the mortgage-related debt, which is referenced at 
SOR 1.c and 1.d, remains unresolved. (Ex. F; Ex. I – Ex. L.) 
 
 In December 2015, Applicant moved in with his parents to save money on rent 
and other expenses. He estimates that this recent move will allow him to have an 
additional $700-$800 every two weeks in disposable income, which he can use to pay 
his debts. He has not received financial counseling and, as of the hearing, had some 
unpaid, past-due state tax debt totaling about $300.8 (Tr. at 53-57.) He submitted letters 
from his parents and a co-worker reflecting their opinion of him as a trustworthy 
individual and a good employee. (Ex. G) 
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative Judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the issues raised, has a reasonable opportunity to litigate those issues, and is 
not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). 
In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, an administrative 
judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). Moreover, recognizing 
the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations and the paramount importance 
                                                          
8 The state tax debt is only being considered in assessing Applicant’s mitigation case and whole-person.  
 
5 
 
 
of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has held that “security clearance 
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such decisions 
entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than 
actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern under this guideline is explained at AG ¶ 18: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Applicant’s past financial lapses and current financial situation raise the financial 
considerations security concern. He incurred a significant amount of debt and was, at 
first, unable and then for many years unwilling to pay his debts. He only started to repay 
some of his student loans after a creditor secured a judgment. Even after the judgment 
creditor agreed to a reasonable repayment schedule to resolve the debt, Applicant 
failed to abide by the terms of the agreement. As of the hearing, Applicant had failed to 
make the required monthly payments to the judgment creditor for nearly a year. His 
recent efforts to resolve his longstanding delinquent debt appears to be far more 
attributable to his desire to gain a security clearance, which is required for continued 
employment, than a willingness to comply with his legal, financial obligations. Overall, 
this record raises the concern that Applicant would handle his security obligations in the 
same manner that he has handled his financial obligations. Additionally, the record 
evidence establishes the disqualifying conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a), “inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
 
 The guideline also lists a number of conditions that could mitigate the financial 
considerations security concern. The following mitigating conditions are most relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
6 
 
 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c):  the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d):  the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s position that he was the innocent victim of his former friend’s massive 
real estate fraud was not completely consistent with the record evidence, nor fully 
persuasive. Although Applicant’s unrealistic expectations of an ever-increasing real 
estate market that would remedy the fundamental flaws in his purchase of a property 
that he could not possible afford appears now, with the benefit of hindsight, reckless, at 
the time his financial decision was far from the outlier. Yet, nearly ten years have 
passed since he became aware of the fraud, and he took no action to resolve the 
mortgage-related debt until it became a potential impediment to his receipt of a security 
clearance. Furthermore, even setting aside the mortgage-related debt, the record 
evidence regarding the student loan debt and, more precisely, the lack of consistent 
debt repayment of the judgment debt raises unfavorable inferences regarding 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts remain an ongoing, significant security concern. He 
failed to present sufficient information that his current financial situation is under control 
and that if financial issues arose in the future he will handle them in a responsible 
manner. Therefore, I find that none of the mitigating conditions apply.  
 
 Individuals applying for a security clearance are not required to be debt free, nor 
are they required to resolve all past-due debts simultaneously or even resolve the 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR first. However, they are expected to present 
documentation to refute, explain, or mitigate security concerns raised by their 
circumstances, to include the accumulation of delinquent debt. Moreover, they bear the 
burden of showing that they manage their finances in a manner expected of those 
granted access to classified information.9 Applicant failed to meet his burden.  
                                                          
9 ISCR Case 07-10310 at 2 (App. Bd. Jul. 30, 2008).  
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of all the relevant 
circumstances, to include the nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my 
comments under Guideline F. Several years ago Applicant incurred debt that he did not 
have the means to repay. The circumstances under which he incurred the mortgage-
related debt, and his failure to abide by the terms of an agreed-upon repayment 
schedule to pay one of his student loan debts, raise concerns regarding his overall 
eligibility. Applicant’s presentation was insufficient to overcome the negative security 
clearance implications raised by the evidence. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
with doubts about his present eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations)       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:         Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
