1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-05324
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 8, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On March 23, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F  for Applicant. (Item
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
On April 16, 2015, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and she
requested that her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 2.)
On September 29, 2015, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. On
October 5, 2015, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided
to Applicant. In the FORM, Department Counsel offered six documentary exhibits.
(Items 1-6.) Applicant was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on November 14, 2015.
Applicant did submit additional evidence, which has been identified and entered into
evidence without objection as Items A and B. The case was assigned to this
2
Administrative Judge on December 8, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, and the FORM, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make
the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 43 years old, unmarried, and she has three children. She is
employed by a defense contractor, and she seeks a DoD security clearance in
connection with her employment in the defense sector.
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 29 allegations (1.a. through 1.cc.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically overdue debts, under Adjudicative Guideline F. Applicant admitted all of the
allegations, with the exception of 1.e. and 1.h. in her RSOR (Item 2.) The admitted
delinquent debts total $14,251, and are deemed to be owed by Applicant. 
The complete amount of the alleged debts in the SOR total $14,583. Applicant
wrote that she disputed the debt listed as 1.e. in the amount of $171, because the
creditor had not provided the service that had been agreed to. (Item 2.) This bill has
been identified on the credit report, dated April 9, 2013, and identified as Item 4, but it
shows that the bill has been disputed. I find that this bill has been legitimately disputed
by Applicant. 
Applicant also wrote on her RSOR that she disputed the debt listed as 1.h. in the
amount of $161 on the SOR because it was for tax year 2000 for State A, but she had
moved out of State A in 1999 and paid her state tax for that year to State B. Item 4
identifies that this debt is owed to State A. It does appear that Applicant has a good-
faith reason to dispute this debt.  
The Government has established all of Applicant’s debts through Applicant’s
RSOR, and the credit report, dated April 9, 2013. (Item 4.) Applicant has established
that the debts listed as 1.e., and 1.h. and totaling $332 have been disputed. However,
that still leaves $14,251 of undisputed outstanding overdue debts. No evidence was
introduced to establish that Applicant has contacted any of the creditors, made any
payment plans, or resolved or reduced any of these overdue debts. 
Applicant wrote in a post-FORM letter that her overdue debts occurred primarily
because of medical bills that she incurred due to a number of medical injuries and
treatments, including: emergency gallbladder surgery in 2000; back injury and cervical
spine surgery in 2003; automobile accident with deep tissue damage in 2010 and 2011;
open breast surgery in 2011; ganglion cyst surgery to her daughter in 2013; progressive
damage in her cervical spine resulting in another surgery in 2014 and 2015; and
3
additional medical concerns, including asthma to Applicant and two of her children.
(Item A)
Additionally, she has been the single mother of three children since 2001 and
prior to that she was the sole working individual for her family. Applicant also wrote that
her financial history shows that she has struggled with meeting all of her financial
obligations, but her car payments and her student loans have been paid on time. (Item
2.) Applicant offered no independent evidence that with her current financial situation
she would be able to resolve her past overdue debts or stay current with her present
debts.
Applicant submitted two positive and laudatory character letters submitted on her
behalf, one from her supervisor and the other from a co-worker. (Item B.) Her supervisor
wrote that Applicant “continuously exhibits exceptional personal integrity and a strong
work ethic.” 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
4
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly under AG ¶  19(c), “a history of not
meeting financial obligations” may raise security concerns. I find that both of these
disqualifying conditions apply to Applicant in this case. The evidence has established
that Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt, much of it several years old,
which has not been satisfied. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Under AG ¶  20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As
reviewed above, Applicant explained her financial difficulties occurred, in large part,
because of significant medical issues. However, with the exception of allegations 1.e.
and 1.h., no evidence was introduced that Applicant has responsibly contacted any of
the creditors, made any payment plans, or resolved or reduced any of these overdue
5
debts. Therefore, I find that this mitigating condition is not a factor for consideration in
this case.
Since there is no evidence that Applicant has taken any kind of counseling to
better manage her finances or has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors, I do not find that either AG ¶  20(c) or AG ¶  20(d) is applicable. Finally, I do
not find any other mitigating condition applies to this case, since no evidence was
introduced to establish that Applicant’s current financial status is stable and that she is
able to resolve her past debts or stay current with her recent debts. Therefore, I find
Guideline F against Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the disqualifying conditions apply and no mitigating conditions are
applicable, I find that the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and
doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the
whole-person concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the
security concerns under the whole-person concept. 
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.d.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: For  Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.f. - 1.g.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: For  Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.i. - 1.cc: Against  Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
