 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-02776 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 10, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 11, 2014, and requested a hearing. 
The case was originally assigned to a different judge on February 23, 2015. A hearing 
was scheduled for March 26, 2015, but due to a work conflict, Applicant requested a 
continuance. The continuance was granted and the case was reassigned to me on 
October 7, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice 
 
2 
 
of hearing on November 19, 2015, setting the hearing for December 10, 2015. The 
hearing was held as scheduled. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, which 
were admitted into evidence without objection. The Government’s discovery letter, 
which contained an exhibit list, was marked as a hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant 
testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional 
evidence. He submitted AE E and F. Those exhibits were admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 23, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 60 years old and has worked for government contractors since 1978. 
He is has a doctorate degree in engineering. He is married with two adult children. He 
has held a security clearance for at least 19 years without incident.1  
 
 In his answer, Applicant denied all the allegations. The SOR alleged Applicant 
failed to file his 2005, and 2007 through 2012 federal income tax returns (SOR ¶ 1.a). 
The SOR also alleged he failed to file his 2005 through 2012 state income tax returns 
(SOR ¶ 1.b). Finally, the SOR alleged he was indebted to the IRS for delinquent federal 
income taxes in the amounts of $16,094 for tax year 2010 and $10,366 for tax year 
2006 (SOR ¶ 1.c).2  
 
 Applicant admitted that he had not filed the disputed tax returns when they were 
due, but over time, he filed all the returns. He explained that his failure to file his tax 
returns was not done to hide income or evade taxes, but rather was due to his divorce 
and inability to gather information at that time. He and his wife divorced in 2002 (they 
subsequently remarried in 2004 and are still married). Because of the divorce, which he 
described as contentious, Applicant either was unable to gather the necessary 
information to file his tax returns, or was so overwhelmed by what was happening to his 
life he became paralyzed to act. Once he failed to file the returns for one year, each 
succeeding year’s return became more difficult to prepare and file. He further explained 
that even though he was not filing his tax returns, he was having more than enough 
money withheld from his paycheck for taxes, which generally creates a surplus. He also 
revealed that he did not file his 2013 and 2014 tax returns when due.3  
 
 Applicant provided documentary evidence supporting that he filed his federal and 
state tax returns as follows: for years 2005-2006, filed January 2014; for years 2007-
2011, filed February 2015, July 2015, August 2015, and December 2015; for years 
2012-2014, filed January 2016. Tax years’ 2005-2006 returns were filed before the 
issuance of the SOR. At hearing, Applicant committed to filing all remaining returns 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5-6, 22-23; GE 1. 
 
2 Answer. 
 
3 Tr. at 23-26, 32-33 (In his testimony he indicated he had not filed his 2013 or 2014 federal or 
state tax returns. Since these years were not alleged in the SOR, I will use this information only to the 
extent it may have application to his credibility, mitigation, and whole-person factors). 
 
 
3 
 
within the next month, which he accomplished. His federal and state income tax return-
filing issue is resolved.4  
  
 Applicant presented documentary evidence showing that he overpaid his federal 
taxes even for the years he failed to timely file his tax returns. IRS tax transcripts show 
that the amounts alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c have been paid and that he currently has a credit 
balance (surplus) after filing his 2014 return. Applicant’s tax debt for years 2006 and 
2012 is resolved.5   
  
 Applicant’s supervisor offered a character endorsement of Applicant that stated 
he is an exemplary employee, ranking well above his peers. The supervisor 
recommended that Applicant retain his security clearance. I also find that Applicant 
made a detailed disclosure of his tax issues when he completed his security clearance 
application in February 2012.6   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 34; Answer; AE B, F. 
 
5 Tr. at 23-25; 29-31, 37; Answer; AE A-C, F. 
 
6 GE 1; AE D. 
 
 
4 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant owed federal taxes for two years. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c) apply. He also 
failed to timely file his 2005 and 2007-2012 federal income tax returns, and his 2005-
2012 state tax returns. AG ¶ 19(g) applies.  
 
 
5 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.  
 
In 2014 and 2015, Applicant filed his federal tax returns for years 2005 through 
2014. Although he could have addressed this issue in a more timely manner, he was 
somewhat paralyzed by his divorce and the snowball effect of not filing his tax return. 
He has documented his payments of the outstanding tax debt. Although it took some 
time, he has acted responsibly and in good faith by filing his missing federal and state 
tax returns and, paying any delinquent tax liability. His current trustworthiness, reliability, 
and judgment are no longer at issue. He has resolved his tax return issues and his tax 
debt. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
 
6 
 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s lengthy federal contractor service where he has held a 
security clearance without issue. I considered the recommendation from his supervisor. 
I also considered the impact the divorce had on his tax issues. I found Applicant to be 
honest and candid about the circumstances that led to his tax issues. He took action to 
resolve his taxes and pay his tax debt. I find it unlikely that Applicant will find himself in 
a similar future situation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant refuted and mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
