KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant did not raise an issue of harmful error.  We cannot consider new evidence
on appeal.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 14-05468.a1
DATE: 06/09/2016
DATE: June 9, 2016
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-05468
APPEAL BOARD SUMMARY DISPOSITION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 7, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On March 30, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge John Grattan Metz, Jr. denied Applicant’s request for
a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant’s appeal brief contains no assertion of harmful error on the part of the Judge. 
Rather, it contains a narrative statement detailing the current status of Applicant’s financial situation,
and fifteen pages of documents that either postdate the Judge’s decision or were otherwise not
contained in Applicant’s response to the government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM). 
Applicant describes his submission as “new evidence that was not available and took time to search
for after the deadline of the hearing.”  Applicant’s Brief at 2.  The Board cannot consider
Applicant’s new evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  
The Board does not review a case de novo. The Appeal Board’s authority to review a case
is limited to cases in which the appealing party has alleged the Judge committed harmful error. 
Applicant has not made an allegation of harmful error on the part of the Judge.  Therefore, the
decision of the Judge is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Ra’anan             
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Catherine M. Engstrom    
Catherine M. Engstrom
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
