1 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No.1 14-05537 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
The personal conduct trustworthiness concerns were not established. Eligibility for 
access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 7, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines F and E. The 
DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated 
January 1987, as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
                                                          
1 This case was originally styled as an ISCR case, however, at the hearing and post-hearing, it 
was determined that this was a trustworthiness determination and not a security clearance case. I have 
styled this Decision as an ADP case. See Tr. at 34-36; Hearing Exhibit (HE) II. 
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 14 and August 19, 2015. The 
case was assigned to me on October 19, 2015. The Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on November 10, 2015, and the hearing 
was convened as scheduled on December 11, 2015. The Government offered Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into the record without objection. Department 
Counsel’s discovery letter dated September 10, 2015, which contained an index of 
government exhibits, was marked HE I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A 
through J, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until February 
11, 2016, to allow Applicant to submit additional information and she submitted AE K 
through O, which were admitted without objection. Department Counsel’s transmittal 
email is marked as HE III. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
December 24, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s answer (Ans.) to the SOR, she admitted all the debts listed in the 
SOR and the allegation that she provided false information on her trustworthiness 
application. She also provided extensive explanations, particularly regarding the 
allegations of providing false information, which essentially amounts to her denying any 
intent required to establish those allegations. After a careful review of the pleadings and 
evidence, I make the following findings of fact.2 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a government contractor. She has worked 
for her current employer since May 2014. Her previous employment was in the private 
sector. She is married with four children, three of which live at home, including a one 
year old. Her husband stays home to care for the children. She is the family’s sole 
source of income. She has taken some college courses. She does not have military 
experience.3 
 
 The SOR lists 30 delinquent debts totaling approximately $35,452. The debts 
include 23 collection accounts, 3 delinquent medical accounts, 2 repossessed vehicles, 
a charged-off account, and a judgment. The debts are supported by credit reports from 
April 2014 and April 2015, and by Applicant’s statements to a defense investigator in 
April 2014.4 
 
 The personal conduct allegations include deliberately providing false information 
while completing her trustworthiness application in March 2014 by failing to list her past-
due financial obligations and by failing to list her 1996 felony arrest. 
 
 On March 18, 2014, Applicant completed her trustworthiness questionnaire. She 
answered “yes” to the question concerning whether she had any financial delinquencies 
over 180 days. She listed her student loan debts as the delinquent debts. She failed to 
                                                          
2 Ans. 
 
3 Tr. at 6, 25-26, 37-39; GE 1. 
 
4 GE 2-4. 
 
3 
list the remaining debts, which are the subject of the SOR. She credibly explained that 
she did not have her credit report with her when she completed the application and was 
not sure of the amounts of the other debts. I find Applicant did not deliberately conceal 
her financial debt information.5   
 
 Applicant also failed to list her felony arrest on her application. She explained the 
warrant was for a food stamp fraud charge, which really amounted to unlucky 
circumstances. The case was eventually dropped to a misdemeanor. She read the 
question as asking if she had ever been convicted of any felony offense. She stated she 
had no intent to deceive the Government when she completed the form. I find 
Applicant’s testimony credible and that she could have made such a mistake. I also find 
Applicant did not deliberately provide false information concerning her criminal record.6 
 
 Applicant has always had financial troubles. She provides the sole support for 
her family. Her husband does not work and was incarcerated from 2005 to 2007. She 
admitted that she lives paycheck to paycheck. For 14 years, up until her current job, she 
went without health insurance and some of her medical debts are because of this. Since 
taking her current position, she received a raise which allowed her to pay some of her 
debts. She was given an opportunity to submit post-hearing documents showing any 
additional debt payoffs she accomplished as well as any budgetary information. She 
provided some documents, however, no additional payoffs were included, nor was there 
any budget information. She has not received any financial counseling.7  
 
 The status of the debts is described in the table below:  
 
DEBT SOR ¶ AMOUNT STATUS EVIDENCE 
1.a  $1,089 Remains unpaid. She received a 
settlement offer from collection 
service in May 2015. Applicant 
said she would pay by January 
2016. No proof of payment 
submitted. Unresolved. 
Tr. at 41-42; 
Ans.; AE E. 
1.b  $218 Remains unpaid, no contact with 
creditor. Unresolved. 
Tr. at 42, 44; 
Ans. 
1.c – 1.g $436 
$430 
$280 
$508 
$502 
 
Applicant provided documentation 
showing these five medical 
accounts were paid between April 
2015 and June 2015. These debts 
are resolved. 
Tr. at 44-49; 
Ans.; AE A, 
M. 
1.h $2,000 School debt for dropped class. 
Made one $25 payment in June 
Tr. at 50-51; 
AE D. 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 26; Ans.; GE 1. 
 
6 Tr. at 28-30; Ans.; GE 1. 
 
7 Tr. at 28, 39, 65; GE 3 
 
4 
2015 and a $105 payment in July 
2015, no further payments made. 
Stated she would begin payments 
again in January 2016, but 
provided no proof of payments. 
Unresolved. 
1.i $483 Applicant received an offer to settle 
this account in August 2015. No 
proof of payment. Unresolved. 
Tr. at 52; AE 
F. 
1.j $321 Applicant has made payments (last 
payment in March 2015) to 
decrease the balance owed to 
$160. Account is being resolved. 
Tr. at 53; 
Ans.; AE A 
1.k – 1.l $6,780 
$4,706 
Applicant completed student loan 
rehabilitation program and getting 
these two loans out of delinquency. 
She has not started making regular 
payments on the rehabilitated 
loans. All her student loans total 
over $40,000. Unresolved. 
Tr. at 53-54; 
Ans.; GE 3; 
AE A. 
1.m – 1.n $4,253 
$5,403 
Two deficiency balances from 
repossessed vehicles. Applicant 
contacted one creditor after 
hearing and received a settlement 
offer in January 2016, but provided 
no proof of payment. No proof of 
contact with the second creditor. 
Unresolved. 
Tr. at 54-55; 
Ans.; AE O. 
1.o $1,030 Applicant contacted creditor post-
hearing and received a settlement 
offer in January 2016, but provided 
no proof of payment. Unresolved. 
Tr. at 56; 
Ans.; AE N. 
1.p $311 Judgment remains unpaid. 
Applicant pointed out she paid a 
non-SOR judgment in December 
2014. The SOR judgment remains 
unpaid. Unresolved. 
Tr. at 56-57; 
AE H. 
1.q $344 This account was removed from 
Applicant’s credit report, but she 
admitted that it was not paid. 
Unresolved.  
Tr. at 57; 
Ans. 
1.r $957 Applicant provided proof of 
payment. Resolved. 
Tr. at 58; 
Ans.; AE A. 
1.s $586 This account was removed from 
Applicant’s credit report, but she 
admitted that it was not paid. 
Unresolved. 
Tr. at 59; 
Ans. 
5 
1.t – 1.aa $447 
$39 
$386 
$2,532 
$235 
$91 
$27 
$508 
These accounts were removed 
from Applicant’s credit report, but 
she admitted that they were not 
paid, except for 1.x, but she failed 
to provide proof of payment. 
Unresolved. 
Tr. at 59-61; 
Ans. 
1.bb – 1.dd $260 
$88 
$202 
Debts unpaid. Applicant stated she 
would pay by January 2016. No 
proof of payment. Unresolved. 
Tr. at 62-63; 
Ans. 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
6 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable trustworthiness 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access 
to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG ¶ 18:   
   
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns 
under AG ¶ 19. Two are applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated numerous delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay her obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 
19(a) and 19(c).  
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20(a) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
7 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debts which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Although some of Applicant’s debts occurred several years ago and she has paid 
some of the debts, the majority are still owed and no payment plans were offered into 
evidence. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable at this time.  
 
 Applicant’s husband’s situation and her lack of health insurance contributed to 
her financial distress. Those are conditions that were largely beyond her control. To be 
fully applicable, AG ¶ 20(b) also requires that the individual act responsibly under the 
circumstances. Applicant has taken the first steps toward resolving her debts by 
contacting some creditors and paying several of the debts. She receives some credit 
under this condition, however most of her higher balance debts remain unpaid. AG ¶ 20 
(b) partially applies. 
 
 Applicant presented no evidence of financial counseling. Although she has made 
some progress toward resolving some of her debts, there is insufficient evidence to 
conclude her total financial situation is being resolved or under control. Applicant 
receives partial consideration under AG ¶ 20(c). She has made a limited good-faith 
effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts, but that effort, given the 
totality of debt, is insufficient to receive full credit under this mitigating condition. AG ¶ 
20(d) is partially applicable. She provided proof that SOR debts 1.c – 1.g, 1.j, and 1.r 
were paid.  AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to those debts. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the personal conduct trustworthiness concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
8 
sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the trustworthiness determination process or 
any other failure to cooperate with the trustworthiness determination 
process. 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
Based upon my earlier findings, there is insufficient evidence to support that 
Applicant provided intentional false information on her public trust application in order to 
deceive the Government about her past criminal and financial record. AG ¶ 16(a) does 
not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant has made the initial steps to get her finances on track, however at this point it 
is too early to determine whether she will be able to right her financial ship. Many of her 
larger debts remain unpaid and unaddressed.  
 
9 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a position of trust. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness 
concerns. Trustworthiness concerns under Guideline E, personal conduct, were not 
established. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.g:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h – 1.i:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.j:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.k – 1.s:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.r:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.t – 1.dd:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
