KEYWORD: Guideline H; Guideline E
DIGEST: After reviewing the record, we conclude that the Judge’s material findings are based
on substantial evidence, or constitute reasonable characterizations or inferences that could be
drawn from the record.  Applicant has not identified any harmful error likely to change the
outcome of the case.  The Judge’s material findings of security concern are sustainable.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASE NO: 14-05084.a1
DATE: 06/27/2016
DATE:  June 27, 2016
In Re:
------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-05084
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Jennifer Aronson, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 27, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline H (Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal
Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  On
April 15, 2016, after conducting a hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Robert J. Tuider denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant has worked for his current employer, a Defense contractor, since 2010.  He held
a security clearance for part of that time while serving in the military.  In 2002, Applicant attempted
to sell ecstasy to undercover police officers.  He was arrested and charged with trafficking in ecstasy
and flunitrazepan, felony offenses.  He participated in a diversion program, contingent on serving
in the military.  Applicant stated that he told his recruiter about the arrest.  The recruiter advised him
not to disclose the arrest on his application forms.  At the hearing, Applicant testified that he had
been distributing drugs in order to supply his friends, purchasing about 100 pills over a two-year
period.  However, on cross-examination he was confronted with his clearance interview, in which
he stated that he purchased as many as 500 pills a month and was making a 50% profit.  The Judge
noted that these statements were contradictory.
In 2005, after he enlisted in the military, officials discovered evidence of his drug arrest.  The
agency adjudication facility issued Applicant an SOR.  He prepared a response, in which he
addressed the advice he claimed to have received from the recruiter.  He also asserted that he was
not involved in the incident that resulted in his arrest.  Applicant was granted a clearance, with a
warning that subsequent misconduct could result in suspension of his access to classified
information.  Applicant smoked marijuana on one occasion in 2009, while holding a clearance. 
When he completed his current security clearance application (SCA), Applicant failed to disclose
his felony arrest and his 2009 use of marijuana while holding a clearance.  Applicant claimed that
these false answers were honest mistakes due to haste.  Applicant enjoys a good reputation for his
work performance.  He is viewed as trustworthy, hardworking, and professional.  He received
numerous decorations while in the military.
The Judge’s Analysis
 The Judge concluded that Applicant had not met any of the Guideline H mitigating
conditions.  He found Applicant’s drug use while holding a clearance to be “particularly troubling,”
given his extensive prior history with drugs that was addressed in his 2005 clearance adjudication. 
He also cited to evidence that Applicant had entered the military under false pretenses.  The Judge
stated that, when weighed against the totality of the evidence, the years that had passed since the
2
2009 marijuana use were not enough to show that Applicant’s misconduct was behind him.  Noting
that  clearance holders are expected to disclose security-significant conduct or circumstances, the
Judge  stated that Applicant had failed to provide an adequate explanation for his omissions on the
SCA.  In the whole-person analysis, the Judge cited to evidence of Applicant’s previous false
statements to various officials concerning his background.  He stated that Applicant had shown a
lack of judgment.
Discussion
Applicant challenges the Judge’s findings, particularly that his omissions were deliberate. 
A  Judge should evaluate an applicant’s mens rea in light of the entirety of the record evidence.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04226 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015).  We conclude that the finding is
sustainable, given Applicant’s prior false statements and his inconsistent statements at the hearing. 
The balance of Applicant’s argument is a disagreement with certain comments and conclusions by
the Judge, for example that Applicant may be unwilling to report adverse information to the
Government.  After reviewing the record, we conclude that the Judge’s material findings are based
on substantial evidence, or constitute reasonable characterizations or inferences that could be drawn
from the record.  Applicant has not identified any harmful error likely to change the outcome of the
case.  The Judge’s material findings of security concern are sustainable.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).
Applicant cites to a DOHA case (ISCR Case No. 14-0730) as precedent.  Applicant
characterizes it as an Appeal Board decision, although it is actually one from the Hearing Office. 
We give this decision due consideration as persuasive authority.   However, Hearing Office cases
are not binding on other Hearing Office Judges or on the Appeal Board.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No.
14-04839 at 3 (App. Bd. May 27, 2016).  
Applicant cites to evidence that he believes favorable to him.  His argument is not sufficient
to rebut the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 14-05795 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 26, 2016).  We conclude that the decision is sustainable on
this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent
with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528
(1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered
for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
3
Signed: James E. Moody             
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Catherine M. Engstrom   
Catherine M. Engstrom
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
