 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-03930 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esquire 
       For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On December 3, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a December 12, 2014, response, Applicant denied all allegations and 
requested a hearing before the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). The 
case was designated ready to proceed on September 18, 2015. I was assigned the 
case on October 28, 2015. The case was scheduled on November 2, 2015, for a 
December 1, 2015, hearing, which was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered eight documents, which were accepted without 
objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-8. Applicant offered testimony and four items, which were 
accepted without objection as Exs. A-D. The record was held open through December 
31, 2-15, in the event the parties wished to submit additional material. The transcript 
 
 
 
 
2 
(Tr.) was received on December 8, 2015. On January 6, 2016, I received a package of 
seven files from the Applicant through the Government, which noted no objections. The 
items were accepted as Exs. E-K and the record was closed. After review of the record 
as a whole, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 48-year-old association director who has worked in the same 
position since April 2013. Raised in a military family, he entered the military after high 
school. He served on active duty in the United States military for 22 years, retiring 
honorably at the rank of Chief Warrant Officer 3 in 2008. After his discharge, he earned 
a Bachelor’s degree, then a Master of Arts degree.1 He is currently working on a second 
master’s degree. Applicant is married. His wife held various part-time jobs during 
Applicant’s tenure in the military, but began earning $35,000 a year as an elementary 
school teacher in 2014. Together, they raised three children as he paid child support to 
the mother of his fourth child. Applicant is highly praised by friends and colleagues for 
his qualifications, leadership, initiative, integrity, and faith. (Ex. A) 
 
Throughout his time in the military, Applicant struggled financially. (Tr. 19) He 
attributes this to his multiple relocations, child support payments, and related expenses. 
He received financial counseling both in the military and when he filed for bankruptcy 
protection in 2005. As noted in the SOR, there are approximately three Federal and 
state tax-related debts ($3,984, $2,447, and $4,941, respectively), a charged-off 
consumer balance ($10,417), 22 debts that were included in the Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
filing reflecting nearly $112,000 in past-due obligations, and issues related to the 
misuse of a government travel card and a child support wage garnishment. 
 
 In 2005, Applicant and his family had just relocated for one of the nine moves 
they made during his 22 years of military service. By that point, he and his wife felt 
overwhelmed with bills, mostly related to consumer debt. Applicant filed for bankruptcy 
protection under Chapter 13. He made payments of about $400 to $500 a month on the 
bankruptcy plan for three or four years before he could no longer meet the payment 
schedule. Ultimately, the bankruptcy court dismissed his petition. 
 
 At issue in the SOR are the following obligations:  
 
The charged-off consumer debt for $10,417 noted at SOR 1.a related to a vehicle 
that was originally included in Applicant’s bankruptcy petition. (Tr. 26) Applicant 
provided evidence that he negotiated a repayment plan for the vehicle under which he 
would pay $200 a month from November 2013 through February 2016 to satisfy the 
debt. As of December 2015, however, the balance remaining was shown as $7,617. 
(Ex. E at 2).  
                                                          
1 Applicant’s student loans are currently deferred. (Tr. 22; Ex. C) It is his plan to satisfy them by making 
payments on them for ten years and then have the balance forgiven through work as a teacher.  
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 As of December 2015, the Federal tax balance of $3,984 at SOR 1.b is in 
repayment with a current balance of $2,149. Applicant testified that he is making $150 
monthly payments toward the debt, but provided no evidence that this is the actual sum 
or that his payments have been regularly made. (Tr. 27-28; Ex. E at 3)  
 
Applicant showed the balance on the state tax obligation of $2,447 noted at SOR 
allegation 1c was, as of December 2015, $690.77. He stressed that he had been 
making monthly payments of $150 for an unspecified period of time. There is no 
evidence, however, of those payments, only the reduced balance. (Tr. 28; Ex. E at 4)  
 
The taxes owed to a second state for approximately $4,941 at SOR allegation 
1.d is now at $3,525.79. Applicant provided evidence that one payment of $180 was 
received in November 2015, he but provided no other evidence reflecting a timely 
pattern of regular payments on the tax year (TY) 2013 debt. (Tr. 29; Ex. E at 5) He has 
no other outstanding tax issues. (Tr. 30) 
 
 After Applicant’s 2005 bankruptcy petition was dismissed, he found it very 
confusing to keep the various creditors and their successors straight. He testified that 
he and his wife have settled or satisfied most of the debts at issue, an effort they started 
in about 2010. (Tr. 32-36, 44) He did not, however, provide evidence of such efforts 
except with regard to SOR allegations: 
 
1.e(1) for $7,149 – Applicant testified that he has been paying this creditor $150 
per month for an unspecified time. The balance is now reduced to $1,154. (Ex. F) 
 
1.e(4) for $1,416 – Applicant wrote that he called this creditor, but was told it had 
no record of the account. (Ex. G) 
 
1.e(5-7) for $4,881, $4,977, and $2,643, respectively – Applicant wrote that he 
contacted this creditor and was told that it no longer had a record of the accounts at 
issue, possibly due to their age. (Ex. H at 1) 
 
1.e(12) for $939 – Despite Applicant’s showing that he made a payment on this 
account of $160 in November 2015, his evidence shows that the balance is now 
increased to $1,069. It is unclear whether this is due to fees, interest, or another factor. 
(Ex. H at 2) 
 
1.e(15) for $7,918 – In December 2015, Applicant contacted this creditor and 
was told that he could settle the principal balance of $5,962 through $50 monthly 
payments over the next 12 months, beginning January 2016. As of the time the record 
closed, no payments had yet been made. 
 
1.e(16) for $12,081 – Applicant was issued an Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
Form 1099C for (Cancellation of Debt) for TY 2013 for this obligation, with the 
“identifiable event” date noted as having been in December 2005. (Ex. J at 1) Applicant 
 
 
 
 
4 
wrote that he included this account with his TY 2013 tax filing, although he provided no 
documentary evidence of its inclusion. 
 
1.e(18) for $5,442 – Applicant provided documentary evidence indicating that this 
balance is now reduced to $4,242, with a final payment in November 2015. No other 
evidence of payment was included. (Ex. J at 2-3) 
 
1.e(21) for $8,605 – The balance on this account has increased to $13,857. 
Applicant stated that he has been in repayment on this account for “a year or so.” His 
documentary evidence, however, consists of a payment plan for making monthly 
payments of approximately $126 from December 2015 through November 2016. (Ex. K) 
There is no documentary evidence of actual payments. 
 
None of the other creditors at issue are still contacting him. After being 
interviewed by investigators about his debt before the December 2014 SOR was issued, 
Applicant considered contacting a law firm specializing in helping individuals with 
extensive debt issues. (Tr. 36) He thought it could help him better understand the 
current status of his debts and finances, and help him answer questions posed by the 
investigators he could not address. As well, he wondered if some of the cited debt could 
be related to identity theft. To date, there has been no evidence of identity theft. 
 
 Eventually, in late 2015, Applicant engaged the law firm. He testified that the firm 
is disputing an unspecified number of the accounts at issue. (Tr. 55) He presented 
evidence reflecting that five account entries have been removed from his credit report, 
although it is unclear as to what prompted this action. (Ex. D) He has also asked it to 
contact those creditors, verify what sums are owed, and advise him as to how he should 
proceed. It is also working to increase his credit score by making suggestions to 
ameliorate his situation. One such suggestion, which Applicant offered without 
elaboration, was to have him take one of his credit cards and “cut it in half in terms of 
what [he owes] because they said if you keep it under 50 percent of that you’re allowed, 
that increases your credit score.” (Tr. 55) To date, he only has received one report from 
the firm regarding its initial efforts. 
 
 Presently, Applicant states that he is doing “very well” financially. (Tr. 38) There 
is no evidence of new delinquent debt, however, there is also no documentary evidence 
of his current expenses or obligations. (Tr. 54; Ex. C) His household income includes 
about $38,000 in military retirement income, a $90,000 work income, and his wife’s 
$35,000 income. Applicant now feels poised to address his remaining debt 
aggressively. He maintains a minimal savings account, writing that he prefers to devote 
any additional income straight to debt liquidation. At present, he is making payments on 
the debts cited noted from the SOR, as well as $126 a month on an account of which he 
believes was part of his bankruptcy under a different name, but he is unsure.   
  
 Applicant also testified that he is making payments on other debts that he 
believes were also part of his 2005 bankruptcy filing, but he can no longer identify 
because the names of many of the creditors have changed. To those accounts, he is 
 
 
 
 
5 
making payments of $126 a month and $150 a month, respectively. (Tr. 39-40) 
Payments are also being paid on two credit cards held by his spouse, at the rate of $60 
and $150 a month, respectively. (Tr. 40) He has plans to address a $4,300 balance 
owed to a jeweler over the next year-and-a-half, and payments of about $525 toward 
Applicant’s wife’s 2012 or 2013 used BMW vehicle. (Tr. 41) At the end of each month, 
Applicant wrote that he has a net monthly remainder of about $1,500 to $2,000. Some 
of that surplus goes to his church, while the rest goes to liquidate debt. Applicant 
believes he currently has about $20,000 to $25,000 in outstanding debt, not including 
his deferred student loans (Tr. 43) 
 
 In 2005 or 2006, Applicant used his Government travel card to purchase “gas 
and groceries and stuff like that.” (Tr. 44) His superior at work discussed the matter with 
him, advising him that he could not use his Government card for personal purchases. 
By that point, Applicant had timely paid the balance on the card. Applicant stated that it 
was his only citation for improper on-the-job activity. (Tr. 45)  
 
 Applicant denies that he has had his wages garnished for child support. He 
explained that, unbeknownst to him, a garnishment was put in place automatically when 
he was sent on an overseas assignment. (Tr. 46). Applicant immediately inquired about 
the garnished deductions. He was told it was a common practice implemented to assure 
child support payments were properly made while servicemen were abroad. Because a 
garnishment had been instituted, he cancelled the automatic child support payment 
deductions he had instituted a dozen years previously, and let the imposed garnishment 
process satisfy his obligation. (Tr. 46)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
 
 
6 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, there is credible evidence showing Applicant acquired over $130,000 in 
delinquent debts, has taxes owed, was subject to a child support garnishment, and was 
irresponsible with a government travel card. This is sufficient to invoke financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations, and 
 
AG ¶ 19(d): deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust. 
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
 
 
 
7 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
The delinquent debts at issue are multiple in number, with most being many 
years old. Applicant testified that he is currently living within his means. The evidence 
indicates that has not acquired any recent delinquencies. The picture of Applicant’s full 
financial situation, however, remains incomplete. There is also little evidence of any 
financial reserves beyond the sums he devotes to tithing and delinquent obligations.  
 
Moreover, Applicant concedes that he has struggled financially throughout his 
career, due in part to nine military relocations during his 22 years of service. Although 
the military subsidized his moving and living expenses, the sum was insufficient for him 
to meet his family’s needs and his child support obligation, especially since his wife did 
not start working full-time until 2014. Ultimately, he filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
protection in 2005, but was unable to continue with its associated payments. His petition 
was dismissed in 2009. Given these facts, neither AG ¶ 20(a) nor AG ¶ 20(b) applies 
with regard to Applicant’s debts, although he provided sufficient facts to counter 
allegations that he intentionally misused his Government travel card and neglected his 
child support obligation. With regard to those allegations, AG ¶ 20(a) applies. 
 
Applicant has received financial counseling. There is also documentary evidence 
that some of the debts at issue are being addressed, such as those noted at SOR 
allegations 1.a-d, 1.e(1), 1.e(18), and the IRS 1099 cancellation of debt regarding 
1.e(16). Other account balances previously associated with Applicant’s dismissed 
bankruptcy petition have either increased in balance, are not yet in repayment, or the 
creditor no longer has a record of the accounts (i.e., 1.e(4-7)). There is no documentary 
evidence indicating that Applicant has disputed them with any of the major credit 
reporting bureaus. In his favor, Applicant recently enlisted the aid of a law firm to help 
him address his delinquent debts and improve his credit. To date, however, there is little 
 
 
 
 
8 
documentary evidence of progress. While some overall progress has been made, 
Applicant’s approach has lacked a thoughtful, organized strategy. Hopefully, the law 
firm will soon give his efforts some cohesion. At this point, while AG ¶ 20(c) only applies 
in part, I find, at best, there is sufficient documentary evidence to give rise to AG ¶ 
20(d). It is premature, however, to conclude whether AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate 
determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Here, I considered the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under the guideline 
at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed 
under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a highly credible, straight-forward, and hard-working man who 
honorably served this country for many years. He is well educated, happily married, has 
raised three children, and responsibly supported a fourth child financially. He is active 
with his church. His professional life is devoid of notable errors, with his alleged misuse 
of a Government travel card apparently the result of a misunderstanding and an 
aberrant occurrence, just as the suggestion that his child support was elicited through 
garnishment due to irresponsibility was based on an apparent misinterpretation.  
 
Throughout his lengthy military career, however, Applicant struggled with 
finances. He was unable to adhere to the payment schedule associated with his 2005 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. It was dismissed in 2009. He was unaware of many of 
the debts ultimately at issue in the SOR until interviewed by investigators about two 
years ago. He attempted to sort out his delinquent debts, their current statuses, and 
identify the successors to obligations once included in his bankruptcy petition, but with 
little success. It was not until this past year he made some notable strides. Except for 
one or two debts, he did not start approaching or researching his creditors until late 
2015. He only recently felt that he was able to address his delinquent debt in earnest.  
Consequently, he enlisted the aid of a law firm specializing in helping clients sort out 
their credit and financial issues. 
 
Applicant credibly testified as to some of his efforts to contact a few of the 
creditors at issue. He volunteered information about multiple debts not noted on the 
SOR. He acknowledges he has at least $20,000 to $25,000 in delinquent debt 
outstanding. He showed that he has formally engaged the aforementioned law firm to 
help him address his financial issues and noted that five adverse entries have been 
deleted from his credit report. He also provided documented evidence that he has made 
progress toward those accounts reflected at SOR allegations 1.a-d, 1.e(1), and 1.e(18), 
 
 
 
 
9 
and that he received an IRS 1099 cancellation of debt form regarding 1.e(16). At this 
point, however, there is much more to be done to bring Applicant’s delinquent accounts 
under control. Questioned or out-of-date accounts and balances yet need to be formally 
disputed with the credit reporting bureaus. Payment on some contemplated repayment 
schedules need to be commenced. In addition, other documentary evidence reflecting a 
proven track record of addressing the delinquent debts alleged needs to be compiled.   
  
This process does not require that an Applicant satisfy, or even address, all of 
one’s delinquent accounts It does, however, expect that an applicant employ a 
reasonable, organized plan to address such debts. It then requires documentary 
evidence showing that the plan was successfully implemented. While Applicant has 
started acknowledging his financial issues in earnest, he has thus far failed to provide 
such evidence. At this point it is premature to judge the efficacy of his present strategy. 
Therefore, under these facts, I find that Applicant has not mitigated financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e(1):   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e(2)-(15):   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e(16):   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e(17):   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e(18):   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e(19)-(22):  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f-1.g:   For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
