 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-05043 
 ) 
Applicant for a Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J.Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DOD) intent to deny her 
eligibility to occupy a public trust position to work in the defense industry. Applicant is a 
naturalized U.S. citizen from India. In addition to maintaining close ties to family 
members who are citizens and residents of India, Applicant continues to accumulate 
significant ties to India through the accumulation of over $200,000 in India-based 
assets. Eligibility to occupy a position of trust is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 1, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under the foreign influence and 
foreign preference guidelines.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly 
consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s access to sensitive 
information and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for 
a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust 
position.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department 
on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 
Department Counsel submitted its written case on April 8, 2015. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on April 21, 2015. She did not 
respond. The items appended to the Government’s brief are admitted as Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2, without objection.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
about India. Without objection from Applicant, I approved the request, which is 
appended to the record as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. The relevant facts are highlighted in 
the Findings of Fact section, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 41, has worked for a federal contractor since October 2009. After 
completing an eligibility application in 2011 and 2012, she was granted eligibility to 
occupy a public trust position by another government agency (AGA). She now seeks to 
obtain eligibility to occupy a positon of trust from the DOD. She completed her most 
recent eligibility application in February 2014, reporting new information that was not 
considered during her earlier eligibility investigations.3 
 
 Applicant is originally from India, a parliamentary democracy that shares 
significant strategic interests with the United States. In addition to cooperating on 
counter-terrorism issues, the two countries have increased trade in goods and services, 
cooperate on nuclear policy, and engage in mutual efforts to address pollution and 
climate change. Although largely positive, the relationship between the United States 
and India is not without its concerns. India is an avid collector of U.S. proprietary 
information, and there have been several criminal cases of industrial espionage arising 
out of India, both from private sources and from the government itself. Terrorist activity 
occurs in India, and the country is one of those most persistently targeted by foreign 
and domestic terrorist groups. India has some significant problems with human rights. 
India has good diplomatic relations with Iran and supports that country’s efforts to 
develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. India’s largest supplier of military 
systems and spare parts is Russia.4 
 
                                                          
2 GE 1. 
 
3 GE 2. 
 
4 HE I; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant immigrated to the United States in November 1999. She became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in December 2011.  Married since December 2001, Applicant’s 
husband is a permanent resident of the United States. Her child, 11, is a U.S. citizen by 
birth. Applicant’s mother-in-law is also a U.S. permanent resident and lives with 
Applicant and her family. Applicant and her husband have been homeowners since 
2004. Applicant’s parents and her sister are citizens and residents of India. Applicant’s 
father is a retired banker. The name of the bank suggests that it is a government 
agency similar to the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank, but the record does not provide any 
information to confirm this fact. Applicant’s sister works at a hotel. Applicant maintains 
weekly telephonic contact with her family members and provides $500 monthly in 
financial support to her parents. In the last seven years, Applicant has traveled to India 
three times to visit her family. On her 2007 and 2009 trips, she entered the country 
using her Indian passport. The Indian government issued Applicant a passport in 2007 
with a 2017 expiration date. In March 2012, Applicant filed documents with the Indian 
government renouncing her Indian citizenship and surrendering her Indian passport.5  
 
 Applicant and her husband have purchased two properties in India.  In December 
2009, Applicant purchased an apartment currently valued at $104,000. In February 
2014, the same month she completed her eligibility application, Applicant and her 
husband purchased a second flat worth $107,000. The couple opened a savings 
account in India in 2005 that currently has a balance of $15,000. The assets are 
controlled by Applicant’s father. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant claims that her 
husband is the primary owner of the Indian properties. She also offered to close the 
bank account, if necessary.6  
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”7 
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties, is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.”8 Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to 
the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made.9 An administrative judge’s objective is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision that embraces all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
                                                          
5 GE 1-2. 
 
6 GE 1-2. 
 
7 DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation) ¶¶ 
C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
8 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
9 See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
 
4 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to a public trust position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
Security concerns involving foreign preference arise when an individual acts in 
such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States.10 
The SOR alleges that Applicant held an Indian passport issued in 2007 with a 2017 
expiration date. Based on Applicant’s disclosures in her eligibility application, the 
Government had a good-faith basis for making this allegation.11 However, in her answer 
to the SOR, Applicant provided documentation that she renounced her Indian 
citizenship and surrendered her Indian passport two years before completing her most 
recent eligibility application. The foreign preference concern is mitigated.12  
 
Foreign Influence 
 
“[F]oreign contacts and interest may be a security concern if the individual has 
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign 
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest.”13 The SOR alleges that 
Applicant’s husband is a citizen of India, residing in the United States as a permanent 
resident. The SOR also alleges that Applicant’s parents and sister are also residents 
and citizens of India and that her father is a retired employee of an Indian bank. 
Although the relationship between the United States and India is largely favorable, India 
has a documented history of collecting U.S proprietary information. Also, Indian citizens 
have been involved in several criminal cases of industrial espionage against the United 
                                                          
10 AG ¶ 9. 
 
11 AG ¶ 10(a). 
 
12 AG ¶ 11(e). 
  
13 AG ¶ 6.  
 
 
5 
 
States. Accordingly, the record contains sufficient information to support a finding that 
Applicant’s relationships create a heightened risk of coercion and exploitation.14 
 
Concerns raised by Applicant’s father’s status as a retired banker is mitigated. 
He has been retired for over a decade and the record contains no information to 
suggest that he has ongoing ties to the Indian government. However, the concerns 
regarding the citizenship and residency status of Applicant’s husband, parents, and 
sister remain. Applicant maintains strong ties to her Indian relatives as shown through 
her ongoing financial support of her family and her regular contact with them. Also, 
Applicant and her husband continue to strengthen their ties to India and obligations to 
the Indian government through the accumulation of India-based assets that are valued 
at over $200,000. This asset accumulation has occurred after Applicant’s husband 
obtained permanent resident status and Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen. 
On balance, Applicant’s ties to the U.S. do not appear to outweigh those to India. 
Applicant has failed to establish that she has such deep and longstanding relationship 
and loyalties to the U.S. that she can be expected to resolve any conflict of interests in 
favor of the U.S. interests.  
 
Based on the record, I have doubts about Applicant’s ability to protect and handle 
sensitive information. In reaching this conclusion, I have considered the whole-person 
factors in AG ¶ 2. Applicant’s connections to India raise concerns about her ability to 
handle and safeguard sensitive information. She has not provided sufficient information 
to mitigate the foreign influence concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Foreign Preference   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Foreign Influence:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b, 2.d - 2.e:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 2.c:     For Applicant 
                                                          
14 AG ¶ 7(a). 
 
 
6 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is not clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant Applicant eligibility to occupy a positon of trust. Applicant’s 
access to sensitive information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
