 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-05983 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On January 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign 
Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a letter notarized May 18, 2015, Applicant admitted all allegations raised and 
requested a hearing. I was assigned the case on October 28, 2015. On November 19, 
2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice setting the 
hearing for December 8, 2015. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered three documents, which were accepted into the record 
without objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-3. In addition and without objection, it offered a 
potential hearing exhibit regarding the Peoples Republic of China (China), which was 
accepted as Ex. 4. Applicant gave testimony and the record was held open until 
January 5, 2016, for the submission of any additional materials. On December 9, 2015, 
Applicant forwarded a packet of materials, which was accepted into the record as Ex. A. 
 
 
 
 
2 
The transcript (Tr.) was received on December 16, 2015. With nothing further 
forthcoming, the record was then closed on January 5, 2016. Based on a through 
review of the case file, I find that Applicant carried his burden in mitigating security 
concerns arising under Guideline C and Guideline B.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice  
Department Counsel submitted Requests for Administrative Notice regarding 
certain facts about the nation of the People’s Republic of China. Administrative or 
official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 
at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 
2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 
1986)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings is to 
notice facts that are either well known or from Government reports. Various facts 
pertaining to this nation were derived from the offered request and its attachments.  
 
People’s Republic of China (China): China’s government is authoritarian and 
controlled by the Communist Party. The country has a poor human rights record, curbs 
political dissent, conducts arbitrary arrests, forces involuntary confessions, and 
conducts torture. China commits most of its industrial and domestic production to its 
enormous military force and nuclear arsenal. China is a major trading partner with the 
United States. Both countries worked together in counter-terrorism efforts after 
September 11, 2001. On the other hand, China directly competes with the United States 
on several geopolitical and economic 8 levels. China has targeted the U.S. with legal 
and illegal intelligence gathering operations. The country is a leading collector of 
military, economic, industrial, and technological information from the United States. 
Recent examples of China’s attempts to collect technological information suggest that 
the country’s collection efforts are at a level that poses a substantial threat to U.S. 
national security.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 44-year-old senior electronic engineer who has worked for his 
present employer for nearly four years. He was born in China, where he earned a PhD 
degree. He earned a post-doctoral degree after moving to the United States. He came 
to the United States in 1999 to work in an academic field. Around that same time, he 
met and married a fellow immigrant. The couple initiated the naturalization process to 
become United States citizens. Four years later, Applicant was hired by a start-up 
company. He and his wife became naturalized United States citizens in 2013. They 
have two minor children who were born in the United States. 
 
 Before he became a United States citizen, Applicant was issued a Chinese 
passport in March 2009 that was set to expire in 2019. It replaced a Chinese passport 
issued in 1999 that was destroyed because it had expired. In early 2015, he applied for 
and eventually received a United States passport. He subsequently used that passport 
 
 
 
 
3 
to travel to China along with a visa. (Tr. 18) Applicant was initially unaware that when he 
applied for the visa, the Chinese embassy wrote “cancelled” on the four pages following 
the page with his picture on his Chinese passport. (Ex. A) He initially kept his Chinese 
passport because he understood that it was deemed cancelled by the Chinese 
government when he travelled through China on a United States passport as a United 
States citizen. (Tr. 14, 18-19) He stated that he had been told by friends that by using 
his United State passport for travel within China, he effectively renounced his Chinese 
citizenship. (Tr. 19) He has no need for the Chinese passport and is willing to surrender 
it to Chinese authorities or to his security manager. (Tr. 19) After the hearing, he 
discovered the cancellations in his Chinese passport, noted that the corners of those 
pages were cut, and he forwarded copies of the appropriate pages indicating its 
cancellation to Department Counsel. (Government Exhibits, preface to exhibits, email 
dated December 9, 2015) 
 
 Applicant’s mother and father remain citizens and residents of China. They are in 
their mid-70s and comfortably retired. There is no evidence suggesting either is 
connected with or dependent on the Chinese government or military. Applicant’s mother 
was a medical doctor in a private hospital. His father was a manager in a factory that 
was privatized before he retired. (Tr. 20) Applicant speaks with his parents through 
Skype every few weeks. (Tr. 30) Applicant’s brother lives with the elderly couple. He 
works for a communications company, is married to an education specialist, and has 
two young children. There is no evidence suggesting he is connected with the Chinese 
government or military. Applicant’s father-in-law is retired, almost 90 years old, and in 
poor health. Many years ago, he was the chairman of a company. He speaks with his 
daughter about once a month by telephone. He has no plans to visit the United States. 
As with Applicant’s other relatives in China, there is no evidence suggesting he is 
connected with or dependent on the Chinese government or military. Applicant does not 
provide financial support to his family in China. 
 
Applicant has multiple uncles and aunts, but he does not maintain contact with 
them. (Tr. 23-24) He has no contact with any cousins and maintains no relationships 
with past friends or associates. (Tr. 24) In sum, Applicant only has contact with four 
individuals in China. (Tr. 24) They have a general sense of the type of science Applicant 
studies, but they know no specifics about his job.  
 
 In China, Applicant has no assets or holdings. His parents’ home, where they live 
with Applicant’s brother and his family, is worth around $100,000. Applicant is unaware 
of any other assets of significance they might possess. He has no inheritance 
expectations from his family. Applicant visits his kin about every other year. His parents 
occasionally visit Applicant in the United States, when their health will permit travel.  
 
Applicant has built and established a very successful career and family life in the 
United States. He owns a home valued at $1 million dollars, in which Applicant 
presently has approximately $800,000 in equity. He has substantial retirement and 
savings accounts based here in the United States. His wife works in a highly specialized 
area of the teaching profession. His children enjoy the benefits of the local schools. 
 
 
 
 
4 
Their family socializes with their neighbors and are a part of their community. Applicant 
has no contact with the Chinese government or military. He has no intention of moving 
back to China for any reason. (Tr. 26)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C - Foreign Preference   
 
 AG ¶ 9 sets out the security concern relating to Foreign Preference:   
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States.   
 
 Appellant renewed a passport from China in 2009 that is set to expire in March 
2019. This fact is sufficient to raise:  
 
 Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 10(a)(1):   
  
. . . exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (5) possession of a current 
foreign passport.    
     
 Applicant had a Chinese passport issued to him before he became a United 
States citizen. It was set to expire in 2019. In early 2015, after becoming a naturalized 
United States citizen, Applicant applied for and eventually received a United States 
passport. He subsequently used that passport to travel to China along with a visa. He 
took his Chinese passport with him as well. He believed the act of offering it to Chinese 
officials while traveling on his United States passport in China effectively would cancel 
the Chinese document. In fact, unbeknownst to Applicant at the time he traveled to 
China, Chinese authorities had stamped his Chinese passport as cancelled and had cut 
the corners off some pages, effectively invalidating the document. In the end, the 
cancelled document was given to his security officer. These facts are sufficient to raise 
Mitigating Condition AG ¶11: (b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce 
dual citizenship; and (e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated.    
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence   
 
 Foreign Influence AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts 
and interests” stating: [I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial 
interests, [he or she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and 
should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether 
the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
 
 
 
6 
 AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: (a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if 
that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion; (b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information; and (d) sharing living quarters 
with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a 
heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
 Applicant was born and educated in China. He moved to the United States to 
further his educational opportunities, while his parents and brother continued their lives 
in China as citizens and residents. Applicant married and decided to make the United 
States his full-time home. He and his wife became naturalized United States citizens. 
They had children. Applicant obtained a United States passport. They built a home and 
became a part of their community.  
 
 Applicant has regular contact with his parents about twice a month on Skype. He 
also converses with his brother who, with his own family, lives with Applicant parents.  
Such contact would be deemed frequent.    
 
 In Western terms, Applicant’s retired parents would be considered affluent – his 
mother is a medical doctor and his father was a company manager. They own their own 
home in China. None of his kin has a nexus with the Chinese government or military. 
 
 Applicant provided scant information about his spouse’s father, who is a citizen 
and resident of China. The man is a retired manager who is now 90 years old and in 
poor health. He cannot travel. There is no evidence suggesting he has a nexus with the 
Chinese government or military. He lives quietly. He speaks with his daughter about 
once a month by telephone. There is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of 
affection for, or obligation to, their immediate family members. See generally ISCR 
Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant 
has ties of affection and obligation to his spouse, and she is close to her parent. “[A]s a 
matter of common sense and human experience, there is [also] a rebuttable 
presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family 
members of the person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 07-17673 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 2, 
2009) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03120 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002)). This concept is 
the basis of AG ¶ 7(d). Thus, an indirect, but important tie remains between Applicant 
and his in-law living in China. Such indirect influence could result in a security concern.  
 
 In addition, Applicant has ties of affection to his parents, as shown by his 
frequent communications with them. Applicant’s relationships with residents of a foreign 
country create a concern about Applicant’s “obligation to protect sensitive information or 
technology” and his desire to help his relatives, who live in those countries. For 
example, if intelligence agents or government officials in those countries wanted to 
 
 
 
 
7 
expose Applicant to coercion, they could exert pressure on his relatives residing in 
those locations. Applicant would then be subject to coercion through his relatives and 
classified information could potentially be compromised. Applicant’s and his spouse’s 
possession of close family ties with their families living in a foreign country, are not, as a 
matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an applicant or their spouse 
has a close relationship with even one relative living in a foreign country, this factor 
alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result 
in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 
5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99- 0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
 The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, its 
history of intelligence gathering, and its human rights record are relevant in assessing 
the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to government coercion 
or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the 
foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or 
dependent upon the government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence 
collection operations against the United States. The relationship of China with the 
United States places the burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his 
(and his spouse’s) relationships with family living in China do not pose a security risk. 
Applicant should not be placed into a position where he might be forced to choose 
between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist relatives living abroad.  
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at 15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
 While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from any foreign country 
seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or his 
relatives living in a foreign country, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a 
possibility in the future. Applicant’s and his spouse’s relationships with family members 
living in China creates a potential conflict of interest because these relationships are 
sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his desire to assist relatives in foreign 
countries by providing sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced 
substantial evidence of Applicant’s and his spouse’s contacts and relationships with 
family living in the PRC. Department Counsel has raised the issue of potential foreign 
pressure or attempted exploitation; AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) are established; and 
further inquiry is necessary about potential application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 AG ¶ 8 lists three conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns including: (a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that 
country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government 
and the interests of the U.S.; (b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the 
individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and (c) contact or communication with foreign 
citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation.  
 
 The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows: Once a concern arises regarding an 
Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant 
or maintenance of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 
(9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government presents 
evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut or mitigate 
concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The standard applicable in these proceedings is that 
articulated in Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” 
Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
 AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. While there is no evidence 
Applicant provides financial support to his parents or father-in-law, he has frequent 
contact with his parents and is attributed a similar level of contact with his father-in-law. 
Applicant’s loyalty and connections to family are positive character traits. However, for 
security clearance purposes, those same connections with relatives living in China 
negate the possibility of mitigation under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c), and Applicant failed to 
fully meet his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationships with his 
relatives who are living in China] could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.”  
 
 In contrast, AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. A key factor in an AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is 
Applicant’s “deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant’s 
relationship with the United States must be weighed against the potential conflict of 
interest created by his relationships with family living in foreign countries. In that area of 
consideration, it is notable that neither Applicant nor his family members have been 
detained or notably monitored by China, and Applicant’s sentiments toward that country 
are diminished.  
 
  Applicant has multiple significant connections to the United States and much 
fewer, more limited connections to China. Applicant has lived in this country for 17 
years. During that time, he completed a post-doctoral program, started a career, 
married, decided to settle permanently in the United States and start a family, became a 
naturalized United States citizen, built about $800,000 in equity in the family’s million 
 
 
 
 
9 
dollar home, has seen his wife settle in her professional career, put two children into the 
local public schools, and became active in their community. He surrendered his 
cancelled Chinese passport. He supports the U.S. Government as a contractor. In no 
way has he manifested any patriotism, loyalty, or fidelity to any other country but the 
United States. These connections stand in strong contrast to distant residual ties to a 
brother and to both his parents and father-in-law, three elderly retirees with ill health.  
 
 In sum, Applicant and his spouse’s connections to family living in China are 
significant. Applicant and his wife frequently communicate with their respective parents. 
Other than occasional trips to China, no other tethers bind them, such as financial 
support or inheritance issues. Security concerns are not analyzed in a piecemeal 
assessment. Instead, the overall situation must be considered. Applicant’s 17 years of 
U.S. residence, his significant U.S. financial investments, and his family settled 
comfortably in the United States constitute much stronger connections to the United 
States than to China. I am confident that if foreign elements seek information from 
Applicant, he will immediately report that contact and request to security officials. 
Foreign influence security concerns under Guideline B are mitigated. Even if they were 
not mitigated under Guideline B, they would be mitigated under the whole-person 
concept, infra. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the three guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Most of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under the above guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
There are some facts supporting denial or revocation of Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Applicant’s parents, brother, and father-in-law are citizens and 
residents of China. He regularly communicates with these kin. He visits them every few 
years. His parents used to visit the United States. A Guideline B decision concerning a 
foreign country must take into consideration the geopolitical situation and dangers in 
that country including from intelligence agents. The danger of coercion from China is 
more likely than in many other countries. China competes with the United States 
militarily, diplomatically, and through trade. China has a history of espionage targeting 
U.S. military and industrial secrets.  
 
 
 
 
 
10 
The weight of the evidence supporting granting Applicant’s access to classified 
information is greater than the evidence against granting his security clearance. 
Applicant immigrated to the United States 17 years ago. He met a woman he later 
married. He decided to stay in the United States permanently. The couple started the 
process for becoming naturalized United States citizens. In the interim, Applicant’s 
career blossomed; he bought a million dollar home; he saved for his future with a 
savings account and retirement plan; built a family of his own; and became involved in 
his community. He renounced his Chinese citizenship and, after the hearing, provided 
evidence that his Chinese passport was cancelled by Chinese government officials. 
Today, he travels on a U.S. passport. He considers the United States to be his home.  
 
Applicant’s demeanor, sincerity, honesty, and statements about his connections 
to the United States and limited connections to China at his hearing are important 
factors militating towards approval or continuation of his access to classified 
information. I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the foreign influence security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
