KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant contends that the Judge’s treatment of his case for mitigation failed to take
into account significant evidence, including his financial counseling; his having resolved other,
non-alleged, debts; and his unemployment.  In fact, the Judge addressed much of the evidence
that Applicant cites.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of
the evidence in the record.  Given evidence that the debt at issue in this appeal had been
delinquent for many years, that Applicant apparently has the ability to address it, and that by his
own admission he has done little to do so, the Judge’s conclusions about mitigation are
sustainable. Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 14-06131.a1
DATE: 06/15/2016
DATE: June 15, 2016
In Re:
------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-06131
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Skyler Samp, Esq.
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 27, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant  requested a hearing. 
On March 24, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge Wilford H. Ross denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in concluding that
his circumstances raised security concerns; whether the Judge’s mitigation analysis was erroneous;
and whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis was erroneous.  Consistent with the following, we
affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant’s financial problems began in 2002, when he lost his job and experienced two
years of unemployment.  His SOR lists two significant credit card debts, one of which Applicant had
paid and that the Judge resolved in his favor.  The other credit card debt, for over $24,000, had not
been the subject of payment arrangements.  Applicant’s last payment on this debt was over six years
ago, and he admitted that he had not spoken with the creditor very often.  The Judge noted evidence
of two other debts, for nearly $19,000 and $17,000 respectively, that had been satisfied through
garnishment.  These debts were not alleged, and the Judge stated that he was considering the
evidence in the context of mitigation and the whole-person analysis.  
Applicant has approximately $2,000 per month available to pay bills.  He also testified that
he had somewhere between $1,000 and $3,000 in his checking account at any one time.  He took a
financial counseling course in August 2015.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s circumstances raised security concerns, particularly
19(a)1 and 19(c).2  As stated above, he resolved one of the SOR debts in Applicant’s favor.  For the
other, though noting evidence of Applicant’s unemployment, he concluded that Applicant had not
demonstrated responsible action.  Applicant stated that his contacts with this creditor had been “few
and far between.” Decision at 5.  Moreover, he had not worked out a payment plan, despite having
enough funds with which to do so.  The Judge also concluded that Applicant’s having taken a credit
1Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts[.]”
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting financial obligations[.]”
2
counseling course, while favorable, was not enough fully to mitigate the concerns arising from this
remaining debt.  
In the whole-person analysis, the Judge noted that Applicant had experienced financial
problems for many years, problems that had not been fully resolved.  He cited to evidence that two
other debts had been resolved through judicial means. Overall, the Judge concluded that there is
little evidence that Applicant can maintain a budget or resolve his debts.  The Judge ultimately
concluded that Applicant’s security concerns were not mitigated.
Discussion
Applicant contends that his circumstances do not raise security concerns.  He argues that the
Judge was punishing him for paying his debts sequentially as funds became available rather than
paying them off all at once.  
The Directive presumes a nexus between alleged or proven conduct under any of the
Guidelines and an applicant’s security clearance eligibility.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-01253 at
3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2016). In this case, Applicant admitted the two allegations contained in the
SOR.  In addition, the Government presented evidence that Applicant had been delinquent in paying
the two debts in question for many years.  Applicant’s arguments are not sufficient to rebut the
presumption that his circumstances raise security concerns.  We note that a clearance adjudication
is not an effort to collect a debt.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). 
Much less is it punishment for purported financial misconduct.  Rather, the Directive provides that
it is an effort to examine an applicant’s conduct or circumstances for what they may reveal about
the applicant’s judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability.3  The Judge’s analysis was consistent with
the requirements set forth in the Directive.4
Applicant contends that the Judge’s treatment of his case for mitigation failed to take into
account significant evidence, including his financial counseling; his having resolved other, non-
alleged, debts; and his unemployment.  In fact, the Judge addressed much of the evidence that
Applicant cites.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the
evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-05795 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 26, 2016).  Given
3A Judge should consider the extent to which an applicant’s financial problems cast doubt upon his or her
judgment, self control, and other characteristics essential to protecting national security information.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 12-09719 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 6, 2016).  The Directive states that failure to meet financial obligations may
indicate unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an applicant’s ability to protect
classified information.  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 18.  See Id. at 2-3.
4Applicant also contends that the Judge erred by stating that he had shown no evidence of a payment plan.  He
argues that it is not necessary to have a payment plan, when one can save up the funds to pay his debts in toto.  We note
that, in his Response to the SOR, Applicant stated that he had worked out a payment plan for the debt at issue.  That he
presented no such evidence at the hearing is a matter that a Judge might be expected to note.  
3
evidence that the debt at issue in this appeal had been delinquent for many years, that Applicant
apparently has the ability to address it, and that by his own admission he has done little to do so, the
Judge’s conclusions about mitigation are sustainable.  Moreover, we conclude that the Judge’s
whole-person analysis complies with the requirements of Directive ¶ 6.3, in that the Judge
considered the totality of the evidence in reaching his decision.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 15-00424
at 2-3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2016).  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan                
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed; Catherine M. Engstrom          
Catherine M. Engstrom
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
