 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-07023 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Meg Foreman, Esquire 
     For Applicant: Martin P. Hogan, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On August 17, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an undated response, Applicant admitted one allegation and denied one 
allegation raised under Guideline F. He also requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA). On 
November 16, 2015, the SOR was amended to add security concerns under Guideline 
E (Personal Conduct). To that end, two additional allegations were noted, which 
Applicant denied in an answer dated December 2, 2015. I was assigned the case on 
April 12, 2016. The matter was scheduled on April 29, 2016, for a May 18, 2016, 
hearing. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
The Government offered six documents, which were accepted without objection 
as exhibits (Exs.) 1-6. Applicant offered testimony, introduced one witness, and offered 
25 exhibits, which were accepted into the record as Exs. A-Y without objection. The 
record was held open through June 15, 2016, in the event the parties wished to submit 
additional material. The transcript (Tr.) was received on June 1, 2016, and the record 
was closed on June 15, 2016. After review of the record as a whole, I find that Applicant 
mitigated personal conduct and financial considerations security concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old deputy program manager with a defense contractor, for 
which he has worked since 2013. There, he has earned superior ratings as an 
employee. Applicant served in the United States military for four years of enlisted duty 
and 20 years as an officer, retiring with an honorable discharge in July 2010 at the rank 
of major. (Tr. 43-45) His performance evaluations over his last decade of military 
service generally reflect outstanding levels of service. (Tr. 45-47; Ex. B; Amended SOR 
Response) He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1989 and later attended coursework in 
government acquisitions. He is separated and the father of two adult children. 
 
On April 26, 2004, Applicant, while on active duty in the military, was issued a 
general officer memorandum of reprimand for misconduct arising from his performance 
of duties. That misconduct was cited to include improperly pressuring a contractor to 
modify a job offering to a potential employee for the purpose of increasing the 
individual’s pay rate; improperly assuring employees of an incumbent contractor that he 
would look out for their interests during competition for a new contract; and exercising 
poor judgment by consuming alcoholic beverages while driving a rental vehicle carrying 
contractor employees while on temporary duty abroad. The memorandum was placed in 
his official military personnel file in May 2004. Applicant continues to dispute the 
accuracy of the allegation, as well as the underlying facts. (Amended SOR Response) 
 
 From about July 2007 to January 2010, while on active duty in the military, 
Applicant was investigated by military criminal investigators for fraud against the United 
States Government, during which time he was titled with the offenses of wire fraud, 
conduct unbecoming an officer, and falsification of contract documents. Applicant 
vigorously denied the matter.1 The investigation was concluded with no action taken 
and no charges raised. (Tr. 146) Applicant does not recall being interviewed about the 
issues. (Tr. 137-138)  
 
Ultimately, his commander only determined that he may have improperly signed 
letters of authorization for contractors and forged the signature of another service 
member. In the end, Applicant completed his active duty military service in the military 
at the rank of major with an honorable discharge in July 2010, receiving a Bronze Star 
Medal in addition to numerous previously bestowed decorations, medals, and ribbons. 
 
                                                          
1 The Government noted that the military term “titled” used “doesn’t mean guilty of.” (Tr. 145, 147) It noted 
that as an administrative matter, however, a record of the issue is maintained. (Tr. 147) 
 
 
 
 
3 
In the interim, in late 2007, Applicant purchased a townhouse subject to a 
mortgage. Shortly thereafter, he was transferred to another state. Starting in December 
2007, Applicant initiated mortgage payments through automatic deductions from his 
bank, a practice he would continue until about June or July of 2013. As part of his 
association fees, Applicant relied on his homeowners association to handle ”the overall 
insurance on the homes as agreed by the bank in the condominium rider.” (see, e.g., Tr. 
130, 153; Ex. K at 2) In October 2009, his lender sent him a letter requesting proof of 
insurance on the property. Specifically, the letter noted that failure to provide proof of 
hazard insurance would lead to the lender acquiring coverage on his behalf. When no 
response was received, a second letter to that effect was mailed in November 2009.2  
 
With no proof of insurance received, the lender acquired insurance on the 
property in November 2009. It paid $2,691 for the policy, which for the period of April 
2009 through April 2010. Ultimately, in March 2010, it received proof of insurance 
regarding Applicant’s property, reflecting he had, in fact, maintained coverage from 
June 2009 through June 2010. The lender refunded $2,212 into Applicant’s escrow 
account in March 2010. However, it maintained the expenditure of $479 for the 
remaining gap in insurance, from April 2009 to June 2009.  
 
In June 2011, Applicant’s lender again requested proof of insurance on the 
property. When no proof was received by August 2011, the lender paid $1,329 for a 
policy on the property, effective June 2011 through June 2012. Toward the end of 2011, 
the lender received Applicant’s proof of insurance, and the imposed policy was 
cancelled in December 2011. A refund was placed into Applicant’s escrow account later 
that month for $1,329.  
 
In July 2012, the lender requested proof of insurance coverage from Applicant 
concerning the same property. With no response, a lender-placed policy was acquired 
in August 2012. In September 2012, it paid $2,583 for a policy effective, July 2012 
through July 2013. That amount was refunded in full when the lender received the 
requested proof of insurance in April 2013.  
 
Around this same time period, between around October 2012 and December 
2012, Applicant was deemed to be $33,329 delinquent on his $268,143 mortgage 
balance. (Ex. 3 at 1; Ex. 4 at 6; see also Ex. 2 at 1) Applicant inquired about his having 
been noted as delinquent in or around February 2013, believing that through 
                                                          
2 Although Applicant provided no evidence reflecting the methods of transmission for any responses to 
the lender regarding insurance coverage, he noted he was only to correspond with the lender by mail or 
facsimile transmission (FAX). He testified that “[e]very time that we would send documents [by FAX], [the 
lender] would say that they didn’t receive anything.” (Tr. 129) He testified that “the only time I could get 
[the lender] to finally agree that they had the documents is I would call the insurance company, and then I 
would call [the lender] and put them in a three-way call until [the lender] mentioned that they received the 
fax while we were all on the phone.” (Tr. 129) No reason was given for not using mail as an alternative to 
FAX if FAX was problematic on multiple occasions. 
 
 
 
 
4 
misapplication of his payments, the lender had found him delinquent on the mortgage.3 
Applicant retained an attorney in the matter, who believed the issue was related to the 
lender’s practices and could be settled with favorable terms. (Ex. 2 at 1-2) On the 
advice of counsel, Applicant ceased making payments on the mortgage.   
 
In an August 2013, letter, the lender notified Applicant that it had stopped 
payment on five checks it had sent to him, dated March 2013 through June 2013, that 
appeared to have been unreceived. The checks issued to Applicant were for the same 
sums he had paid to the lender. In sum, it returned approximately $34,628, an amount 
roughly equal to the $33,329 cited as past due in SOR allegation 1.a.4 (Tr. 14; Ex. J; Ex. 
3 at 1; Ex. 4 at 6 ) The only relevant notation on the checks was the entry “for 
misapplication reversal.” (Tr. 80; Ex. J) No explanation was offered as to what this 
phrase signified. Those sums were returned to Applicant because they were deemed 
insufficient to reinstate his loan. (see, e.g., Tr. 157; Ex. J)  
 
As this was going on, Applicant pursued a home loan with a different lender. His 
application was denied. A November 2013 letter from a home loan officer with this 
lending entity noted that the recent home loan request denial was based, in part, on 
issues with Applicant’s current mortgagor, the lender at issue. In her letter, she noted 
that Applicant’s credit history revealed he had been “marked 180 days late twice in a 
row then 30 days late and then foreclosure status.” (Ex. Q) It further noted that this 
foreclosure status on a government-backed loan would make him ineligible for a home 
loan until he could show a clean credit report. 
 
Alleging fraud, Applicant pursued action against the lender, stressing that the 
lender “refused to accept his payments because they wrongly forced placed [sic] 
insurance on the property and received remuneration from the insurer. When 
challenged, [the lender] subsequently returned all [Applicant’s] payments in large 
sums.”5 (SOR Response, law office letter of September 2, 2015)  Based on this 
assertion, it was noted Applicant contended he owes nothing to the lender. Evidence 
was shown Applicant retained counsel to pursue this matter. Through this action, he 
hoped to renegotiate his mortgage with better terms.6 (Ex. 2) 
                                                          
3 Applicant provided no documentary evidence showing that the delinquent sum cited in his credit reports 
is inaccurate or has been disputed. Rather, he maintains that the sum is “not legitimate” for “many 
reasons,” including the fact payments were made. (Tr. 13) 
 
4 A $10,359 check was also returned to Applicant in July 2013, as was a letter with a revised statement of 
sums due.  
 
5 Applicant argued that he is a victim in what is described as a nation-wide fraud scheme perpetrated by 
the lender. (Tr. 15) 
 
6 Notes from an investigative interview with Applicant conducted on April 22, 2014, include:  
 
Subject advised that his lawyer have [sic] put together a Class Action lawsuit case 
against [the lender], but have yet to file it in the court system as subject’s attorney’s [sic] 
believe  [the lender] will settle this matter out of court. Subject will pursue this lawsuit in 
the court system if [the lender] does not settle out of court . . . . [I]n the lawsuit, subject is 
 
 
 
 
5 
 Meanwhile, an adverse judgment for $2,995 against Applicant was entered in 
August 2014 after suit by Applicant’s homeowners association against him. It initially 
began years earlier with a $10 increase in the monthly premium Applicant owed to the 
homeowners association. The information about this increase was “probably” sent to the 
property, not to Applicant at his home or office. (Tr. 133) A tenant living in the property 
was not required or requested to forward correspondence to Applicant. Applicant did not 
check on the status of mail sent to the rental address. Applicant had stopped “putting in 
a forwarding address [postal request] and it just didn’t - - didn’t cross [his] mind because 
[he] had [his] townhome payments going out automatically the same time every month 
through the bank.”7 (Tr. 134)  
 
When Applicant eventually learned of the association fee increase, he was in 
arrears for about $80. He then notified the homeowners association about his preferred 
address for contact. It was noted. However, although the association agreed to waive 
late fees, the amount had ballooned to about $3,000 due to attorney’s fees. (Tr. 69)  
Applicant paid that amount by check in December 2014. (Tr. 71-72; Ex. F)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
suing for not being able to refinance at a lower interest rate due to the bank error and to 
have his credit report cleared of the mis-payments [sic] and foreclosure.  (Ex. at 2)  
 
7 It is unknown when or if Applicant initially requested a forwarding of his mail after he left the property at 
the end of 2007. However, notice is taken that upon notice of a new address, the United States Postal 
Service generally forwards First-Class, Priority, and Express Mail for 12 months at no charge, except 
those marked “Do Not Forward.”  
 
 
 
 
6 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence indicating that Applicant was 
past due on a mortgage account in the approximate amount of $33,329 on a total loan 
balance of $268,143, and indebted on an adverse judgment in the approximate amount 
of $2,995. Such facts are sufficient to invoke financial considerations disqualifying 
conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.   
  
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
 
 
 
7 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
The debts at issue are recent, with only one being satisfied to date. Both 
delinquencies were the result, at least in part, of poor communication or oversight. 
Therefore, they cannot be said to have been created by situations beyond his control, or 
the types of situations that will not recur. Neither AG ¶ 20(a) nor AG ¶ 20(b) apply. 
 
To his credit, Applicant has satisfied the $2,995 debt to his homeowners 
association. Moreover, it is clear through the documentary evidence submitted that 
Applicant made payments on his mortgage in good faith for a period of time, and that 
those payments, while initially accepted, were returned by the lender on its own 
initiative. He is still trying to work out an arrangement with the lender to settle the 
matter, including potential resort to litigation over the way it handled the matter. In light 
of the facts, this factor raises AG ¶ 20(d) in full, and, for having resolved one of the two 
delinquent debts at issue, AG ¶ 20(c).   
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole 
 
 
 
 
8 
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information, 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of . . . (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct or concealment of information about one’s conduct 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
  
The Government provided credible evidence showing that Applicant was issued 
a general officer memorandum of reprimand for misconduct arising from his 
performance of duties while on active in the US. Army in 2004, and that it was placed in 
his official military personnel file that same year. In addition, it provided evidence that 
certain actions attributed to Applicant led to his being titled with various offenses that 
were investigated by the U.S. Army between July 2007 and January 2010. His 
commander subsequently determined that Applicant may have improperly signed letters 
of authorization for contractors and forged a signature. Such evidence is sufficient to 
raise personal conduct disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 16(c), (d), and (e). 
 
There are six personal conduct mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17. Here, four of 
them are potentially applicable:   
 
AG ¶ 17(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
   
AG ¶ 17(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur;    
AG ¶ 17(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and   
 
 
 
 
 
9 
AG ¶ 17(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of 
questionable reliability.   
 
 To this day, Applicant denies the accusations raised in these matters. Indeed, it 
is noted that the latter incident leading to the commencement of an investigation 
resulted in no charges and the investigation closed, the record being maintained to date 
for administrative purposes.  
 
 What is noted is that Applicant continued in service well after the cited incidents 
and activities, receiving an honorable discharge and being awarded a Bronze Star 
Medal in addition to numerous previously bestowed decorations, medals, and ribbons. 
The cited information does not appear to have hampered Applicant’s career. Indeed, 
throughout this time, the majority of his evaluations were superb. Regardless, now 
retired from the military, it is unlikely this type of questioned professional conduct will be 
repeated. The incidents at issue occurred over a decade ago and there is no evidence 
of subsequent activity of this type. Consequently, I find that AG ¶ 17(c) applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the two guidelines at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 50-year-old deputy program manager who has earned superior 
ratings as an employee. He served in the United States military for four years of enlisted 
duty and 20 years as an officer, retiring with an honorable discharge in July 2010 at the 
rank of major. While in service, his appraisals reflected excellent service. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 1989 and later attended coursework in government acquisitions. 
Separated, he is the father of two adult children. 
 
A 2004 military general officer memorandum of reprimand for misconduct may 
provide insight into the judgment or trustworthiness of an applicant, but it is also clearly 
dated. The only other potentially adverse incident during Applicant’s military service was 
his having been titled for offense that were not otherwise pursued after a protracted 
investigation ended in 2010. These incidents appear to be isolated incidents from the 
rather remote past. They do not reflect poorly on the individual of today. Therefore, 
personal conduct security concerns are mitigated.  
 
 
 
 
10 
Applicant could have been more attentive to assuring lines of communication 
were clearly established, maintained, and monitored between himself and both his 
lender and homeowners association. While he could have been more attentive to his 
financial arrangements, he ultimately proved to be reliable in performing his obligations 
appropriately. Here, he satisfied the adverse judgment regarding the homeowners 
association and he showed the he tried repeatedly to make payments on his home loan, 
but that those payments were returned and his efforts rebuffed.  
 
Today, Applicant is pursuing action against his lender for what he genuinely 
believes was a fraudulent practice. He is firm in his commitment to having the matter 
favorably resolved and his credit report corrected. Although a less fluid conclusion 
would be more desirable, Applicant can demonstrate little more in terms of efforts 
exerted to address the debts at issue. The fact that he is continuing with his efforts with 
the lender aided by legal counsel reflects his earnest desire to conclude the matter. 
Under these circumstances, I find that Applicant mitigated financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   For Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
