 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-04878 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire 
                                                     For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On March 26, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on April 22, 2015. He also requested a 
determination based on the written record by an administrative judge from the Defense 
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA).  
 
On July 15, 2015, the Government prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM), 
which included five attached items. Applicant timely responded to the FORM and 
submitted annotated copies of the FORM’s items and an additional document. I was 
assigned the case on October 1, 2015. I have reviewed the official case file in its 
entirety. Based on my review, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old supervisor who has worked for the same Government 
contractor since 2003. He has earned a high school diploma, been married for over 30 
years, and has at least one child. He has lived in the same home since the early 2000s.  
 
 At issue in the SOR are 18 delinquent debts, noted in allegations 1.a-1.r. In sum, 
the alleged debts amount to approximately $56,065, ranging from $22 to $51,172. 
Applicant admitted all related allegations except for those set forth at 1.k, for $78, and 
1.q, for $99, to which he responded by writing “not sure.” (FORM, Item 2, SOR Answer) 
This includes about $3,400 in medical collections, but the largest debt noted, at 1.n, for 
$51,172, is for a charged off second mortgage. Applicant admitted this debt, but wrote 
that it was sold to another entity in 2013 after the one listed in the SOR. While the latter 
entity is reflected in his credit report, the original lender aligns with a first mortgage held 
by the more recent lender. The two mortgages noted by Applicant do not have a 
balance near the one noted in the SOR.   
 
 In response to the SOR, Applicant wrote that his medical bills were related to a 
2009 knee surgery, his daughter’s wisdom teeth, and to medical accounts poised to be 
removed from his credit report in 2015. He also referenced debts owed to a jeweler and 
to a cable telecommunications service. In response to the FORM, Applicant appended 
handwritten notes onto a copy of his security clearance application and to a credit report 
to make his corrections and comments. This includes notes regarding the accounts at 
issue. No documentary evidence, however, was offered to corroborate his assertions 
regarding those accounts.  
 
As for the secondary mortgage issue, Applicant submitted a response to an email 
he wrote to the purported successor to the secondary mortgagor reflected on his SOR. 
In his email, he asked for an explanation concerning entries noted in a previous 
document. In response, the recipient conveyed that the numbers referenced were 
estimates that were “part of the preliminary disclosures,” apparently to a loan refinance. 
(FORM Response, Email of Aug. 9, 2015) Highlighted is a “$198,921 New loan amount 
with upfront mortgage insurance fee” and “$110,590.29? Amount of money [the lender] 
is going to forgive.” No link is provided connecting this lender with the lender cited in the 
SOR. 
 
The remainder of Applicant’s submissions is scant. Little insight is provided with 
regard to his current financial situation. There is no documentary evidence reflecting he 
has received financial counseling. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
 
 
 
3 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  
 
The Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant has multiple 
delinquent debts, to which Applicant admitted responsibility for the vast majority. This is 
sufficient to invoke financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
 
 
 
4 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns: 
  
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
            The delinquent debts at issue are multiple in number and, given the limited 
evidence introduced, largely unaddressed. Many date back to the late 2000s. In light of 
the scant information provided about Applicant’s present financial situation, it cannot be 
determined whether the debts at issue can be adequately addressed or whether more 
financial distress may arise in the future. Consequently, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
Applicant failed to provide information regarding his knee surgery, daughter’s 
dentition, or other medical bills. Therefore, it cannot be determined whether they were 
the result of an unexpected medical emergency. While it may be assumed that they 
were medically necessary, potentially giving rise to AG ¶ 20(b), there is insufficient 
evidence to establish that Applicant behaved reasonably at the time. As for the 
mortgage at issue, while some efforts may have been exerted to address it, the 
documentary evidence fails to show it has been addressed.  
 
Furthermore, there is no documentary evidence reflecting that Applicant has 
received financial counseling. Moreover, there is no documentary evidence showing 
that progress has been made toward satisfying the debts at issue, that a plan has been 
devised and implemented to address that debt, or that Applicant has formally disputed 
 
 
 
 
5 
any of the debts at issue. Therefore, neither AG ¶ 20(c), AG ¶ 20(d), nor AG ¶ 20(e) 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is a 55-year-old supervisor 
who has maintained a steady job and lived in the same home since the 2000s. He has 
earned a high school diploma, been married for over 30 years, and has at least one 
child. 
 
Applicant has multiple medical debts which, while identified, are unexplored, 
unpaid, and appear to be unaddressed. As for the mortgage at issue, Applicant failed to 
provide a nexus between the loan identified in the SOR, the loan he references, and the 
materials he provided. Finally, there is no documentary evidence showing that his 
remaining debts have been addressed. At most, Applicant relies on the fact that some 
of his debts would be removed from his credit report due to their age, a factor that does 
not financially relieve him of responsibility for the underlying debt at issue. 
 
 This process does not require that an applicant show he has addressed all of the 
debts and issues set forth in the SOR. It is, however, expected that he provide 
documentary evidence reflecting that he has devised a workable plan to address his 
financial issues and that he has successfully implemented that plan. Without such 
documentary evidence, financial considerations security concerns remain sustained. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
