 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-06161 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esquire 
For Applicant: Brian E. Kaveney, Esquire 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On July 30, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline G (Alcohol 
Consumption). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In a response dated August 29, 2015, Applicant admitted all seven allegations 
raised and offered brief comments on each point in mitigation. Applicant also requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA). I was assigned the case on November 2, 2015. DOHA issued a notice 
of hearing on November 6, 2015, setting the hearing for November 24, 2015. The 
hearing was convened as scheduled.   
 
The Government offered eight documents, which were accepted without 
objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-8. Applicant gave testimony, introduced five witnesses, 
and offered 21 documents, accepted into the record without objection as Exs. A-W. The 
transcript was received on December 4, 2015. On December 16, 2015, the Government 
 
 
 
 
2 
forwarded an additional document in the form of a positive professional 
recommendation from Applicant’s employer, which was accepted into the record as Ex. 
X. The record was then closed. 
  
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 57-year-old engineer who has been employed by the same 
defense contractor for nearly four years. He has earned two master of science degrees 
related to his field. Applicant is married and has three children. He served as an officer 
on active duty in the United States military for four years in the 1980s. He has 
maintained a security clearance since 1979. Applicant disclosed his past issues with 
alcohol on his security clearance application, a past regarding which he is remorseful. 
He has been sober for nearly four years. (Tr. 13) 
 
 Near the end of 1995, at the age of 38, Applicant first began consuming alcohol 
when he discovered he enjoyed the taste of white wine. By 1998 or 1999, he “began to 
descend into alcoholism. . . .” (Tr. 46) In November 2000, he was charged with Driving 
Under the Influence (DUI), a misdemeanor. (Tr. 83-86) In February 2001, he pled no 
contest and was placed on probation for a year. During the 2004 to 2005 timeframe, his 
alcohol consumption led to his losing a work laptop and cell phone on his way home 
from work.1 By 2009, Applicant’s problem with alcohol hit its nadir. At times he would 
consume one to two bottles of wine a day, occasionally he would drink hard liquor. (Tr. 
76, 79, 84-85) At work, he had always been a “star performer.” (Tr. 81) He had used 
wine to reward himself for his accomplishments. Then, in early 2009, he was charged 
with Driving While Intoxicated (DWI), a misdemeanor, in another state. (Tr. 86-89) 
Ultimately, in July 2009, he again pled no contest, was fined, sentenced to one 
weekend in jail, and placed on probation for one year. 
 
In the interim, after the DWI and as his imbibing began adversely affecting his 
work, Applicant’s drinking issues affected his marriage. At his wife’s urging, Applicant 
sought professional help for his drinking. (Tr. 87) From February 2009 to November 
2009, Applicant received treatment at a comprehensive addiction treatment center, 
where he was diagnosed with Alcohol Dependency by medical professionals. Applicant 
cites February 2009 as to being the end of his “period of consistent drinking,” but he 
suffered at least one relapse and consumed alcohol during this treatment. (Tr. 47) This 
relapse occurred in September 2009, after a stressful work day when he was waiting in 
a crowded restaurant bar, smelled alcohol, and succumbed to a craving. Consequently, 
he repeated the treatment cycle. (Tr. 34)  
 
Since December 2009, Applicant has had two more relapses. First, in July 2011, 
while participating in Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), he was under much pressure at 
during a work trip in a town where he had no information on AA resources. He felt too 
uncomfortable to discuss his drinking issues with coworkers. During dinnertime, he gave 
                                                          
1 No classified information was contained in the items and they were eventually located by local 
authorities. Tr. 47. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
in to his craving for alcohol. When he missed work the following day, his coworkers 
were concerned. Hotel security checked on Applicant, finding him in his room, 
hungover. (Tr. 51) Applicant attributes his lapse, in part, to his stress and hunger, noting 
that he now eats smaller meals on a more frequent basis, and to better manage stress. 
(Tr. 51-52) 
 
 In 2010, Applicant was diagnosed with a cardiac issue and prescribed an anti-
arrhythmic medication, Amiodarone, which can have adverse interaction issues with 
stimulants such as alcohol. It also has a known side effect of potentially causing liver 
damage. Applicant was advised that, with his history of alcoholism, his use of the drug 
could be risky. (Tr. 53)  
 
On or about August 8, 2012, Applicant was suffering from gastritis and having 
difficulty both eating and digesting his food. He was also in a great deal of pain. Rather 
than consult a medical professional, he thought a glass of wine would anesthetize his 
pain. As a result, he felt worse and found it difficult to function for days. This was the 
last time he consumed alcohol. After that incident, he was diagnosed with liver failure. 
Applicant noted that, “it was that path that led me down to eventually getting formally 
diagnosed as having cirrhosis of the liver and then being referred to [a renowned 
medical facility] . . . . I cannot drink at all because of [sic] present nature . . . . [and] to go 
back to drinking, regardless of circumstances, is a death sentence for me, period ” (Tr. 
56)  He acknowledges that he is an alcoholic, as is appropriate under the AA tenets. A 
licensed clinical social worker from the referenced medical center noted in 2012 that 
Applicant has been working on comporting his behavior in high-risk situations, such as 
his son’s wedding, and “remains vigilant with respect to his health.” (Tr. 56-57; Ex. O)  
 
Applicant has executed a statement of intent in which he agrees to remain sober 
while maintaining a security clearance. He knows that he must report any relapse to his 
superiors. (Tr. 57; Ex. N) He has refocused his life away from alcohol and stress toward 
helping others. He now volunteers at his church every week at its child development 
center, where its minister praises him as a superior volunteer who has exhibited no 
indications of alcohol use. (Tr. 104-106) He has learned stress management techniques 
to help cope with his work, including regular exercise, improved diet, prayer, and more 
time with his family and friends. Also, he continues participating in AA, which he attends 
three times a week. He accepts that he is powerless over alcohol and embraces the AA 
concepts. He is mindful of plans he can employ if he finds himself in a situation where 
alcohol is readily available or if he feels tempted to succumb. (Tr. 68-69) 
 
Currently a candidate for a liver transplant, Applicant understands the importance 
of remaining alcohol-free, both in terms of his cirrhosis and his medications. An 
important requirement for being on the liver transplant candidate list is absolute sobriety 
and compliance with constant medical testing and monitoring. He has been under close 
medical scrutiny and subject to rigorous screening since March 2013 in anticipation of a 
liver transplant. Such screening was previously quarterly, but, due to his positive track 
record to date and his continued AA participation, which the transplant division requires, 
he is screened every six months. (Tr. 64-65; Ex. E and Ex. M) To bolster these 
 
 
 
 
4 
requirements, Applicant’s wife, who no longer has any tolerance for his drinking, 
obtained a breathalyzer. She is prepared to require him to use if she has any concerns 
about his sobriety. (Tr. 66-67)  
 
The prospect of further liver issues and his transplant candidacy have been a 
wake-up call to Applicant in terms of being extra diligent with regards to alcohol. He 
currently has a positive prognosis concerning his alcoholism from his alcohol treatment 
center, which concluded he is in remission. (Tr. 71-73; Ex. P, Ex. C) He maintains 
regular contact with his AA sponsor, who holds a Ph.D. and has been sober for 25 
years, between meetings. Applicant has had no adverse incidents at work regarding 
alcohol, his treatment, or his health since his 2012 relapse. Applicant no longer has 
physical cravings for alcohol. He now rarely travels for work, and has his office’s support 
for staying close to home. (Tr. 98, 100) If he must travel, he goes fortified with 
information regarding local AA groups. (Tr. 102)  
 
Applicant’s direct supervisor at work is highly supportive of Applicant’s sobriety 
and is open to working with him should he have any concerns or issues, including those 
related to stress and travel. (Tr. 137-140) Applicant’s security officer is also aware of 
Applicant’s past alcohol-related issues and current strides to maintain sobriety. (Tr. 140) 
Applicant acknowledges that “drink for me amounts to a death sentence.” (Tr. 74) He 
has no problem discussing his stressors with individuals at work. (Tr. 140) 
 
A former supervisor of Applicant’s testified that he has known Applicant for 25 
years and knows of his past problems with alcohol. They maintain regular contact. The 
witness believes Applicant’s problems are in the past. (Tr. 109) He bases this 
observation on Applicant’s incentives, specifically, his placement on the liver transplant 
list, maintenance of his family and marriage, and his personal pride of accomplishment. 
(Tr. 109-110; Ex. D) Due to Applicant’s knowledge, expertise, and diligence, and having 
noted the change in Applicant since he quit alcohol, the witness would rehire Applicant 
“in a heartbeat.” (Tr. 111, 114) He also notes that Applicant’s wife is a very strong 
woman who will not tolerate Applicant relapsing. (Tr. 113)  
 
A Government customer of Applicant’s, with 50 years of military service, has 
known Applicant since 1999. (Tr. 121-126; Ex. Q) He admires Applicant as a worker 
and for overcoming his alcohol issues, which they have discussed. He believes 
Applicant has reorganized his life and will not again jeopardize his family life. Moreover, 
a supervisor of Applicant’s who has everyday contact with him noted that Applicant is a 
trustworthy asset to his team. He knows of Applicant’s past alcohol issues, but has 
never witnessed Applicant suffer any alcohol-related issues. (Tr. 134-135) His current 
supervisor also reports nothing but positive things about Applicant.  
 
Testimony was given by a state licensed professional counselor who is also a 
behavioral health assessment therapist, certified substance abuse counselor, certified 
disorder specialist and nationally certified counselor with a master’s degree in 
counseling. (Tr. 17-18)  During her years of practice, she has clinically conducted 
psycho-social evaluations on thousands of patients and works under medical 
 
 
 
 
5 
supervision for a major health care hospital system. (Tr. 18-19; Ex. U) She was 
accepted by both parties as a duly qualified medial professional capable of forming 
opinions as permitted under DOHA case law. (Tr. 20)  She conducted a full evaluation 
of Applicant, ranging from interviews with Applicant and his wife to a physical 
examination. She reviewed his record from alcohol treatment and spoken with 
associated staff concerning his treatment for alcohol dependence. 
 
That witness believes Applicant’s confession that he is an alcoholic is well-
considered and sincere. (Tr. 26-27) Under the theory that alcoholism is a lifelong 
diagnosis, she noted that he appropriately recognizes that he is in lifelong recovery.2 
(Tr. 36) She diagnosed him with alcohol use disorder in sustained remission, noting as 
well his severe heart and liver issues. (Tr. 22-23) She volunteered that he is conducting 
himself appropriately in recovery and she has not noted any signs of further alcohol use. 
While her profession forbids her from making predictive judgments, she stated that such 
considerations lead her to observe that his chances of relapse are, consequently, lower. 
(Tr. 26) She further noted that she has no reason to conclude Applicant is not following 
treatment recommendations. She concluded by noting that “if he continues doing what 
he’s doing then [sic] he can lead a sober and very healthy life.” (Tr. 29) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
                                                          
2 Consequently, when specifically questioned, the witness stated that it would be clinically impossible for 
her to conclude that Applicant had “zero chances” of relapse, noting that such a prediction or conclusion 
would be “not realistic.” (Tr. 37) She also responded that successful completion of his treatment program 
was not a “guarantee” that he could or would never again abuse alcohol. (Tr. 39) 
 
 
 
 
6 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
     Analysis 
 
Guideline G – Alcohol Consumption 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption is a security concern because it often leads to 
the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. (AG ¶ 21) Applicant pled 
no contest to a DUI and a DWI, lost work-owned property after leaving his office due to 
alcohol use, generally abused alcohol as a “reward,” relapsed during alcohol treatment, 
was medically and clinically determined to be alcohol dependent, and missed a meeting 
while on work travel due to a hangover. This is sufficient to raise Alcohol Consumption 
Disqualifying Conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 22(a) (alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual 
is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent);  
 
AG ¶ 22(b) (alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or 
duty in an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, 
regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or 
alcohol dependent);  
 
AG ¶ 22(c) (habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent); 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
AG ¶ 22(d) (diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., 
physician, clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence); 
 
AG ¶ 22(e) (evaluation of alcohol abuse or dependence by a licensed 
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol 
treatment program); and  
 
AG ¶ 22(f) (relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and 
completion of an alcohol rehabilitation program). 
   
I considered all of the Alcohol Consumption Mitigating Conditions, including:  
 
AG ¶ 23(a) (so much time has passed or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment);  
 
AG ¶ 23(b) (the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of action taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser)); and  
 
AG ¶ 23(d) (the individual has successfully completed inpatient or 
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or licensed social 
worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment program). 
   
While there is no "bright line" rule for determining when conduct is recent or 
when sufficient time has passed since the incidents at issue, a determination whether 
past conduct affects an individual's present reliability and trustworthiness must be based 
on a careful evaluation of the totality of the evidence. If the evidence shows a 
meaningful period of time has passed without evidence of an alcohol issue, there must 
be an evaluation of whether that period of time demonstrates 1) changed circumstances 
or 2) conduct sufficient to indicate a finding of reform or rehabilitation.    
 
Here, Applicant has maintained sobriety for nearly four years. Aside from 
successful completion of an appropriate alcohol treatment program, which was 
immediately and voluntarily repeated after relapse, Applicant willingly acknowledges his 
alcoholism and has committed himself to sobriety. This has been reinforced by four 
highly influential factors. First, his wife has made it clear that their familial happiness 
depends on his comporting his behavior. Second, Applicant has developed serious 
 
 
 
 
8 
heart and liver diseases, both of which can trigger severe bouts of debilitating illness 
and could prove to be fatal with continued alcohol use. Third, Applicant is taking a 
unique and essential heart medicine with highly adverse interactions with stimulants 
such as alcohol.  
 
Fourth, and finally, Applicant’s continued inclusion on the liver transplant 
donation list, which appears to be a medically necessary next step for Applicant given 
his stage of cirrhosis, is strictly based on his remaining alcohol-free. He has shouldered 
the burdens associated remaining sober since 2012 responsibly, understanding the 
potential repercussions of relapse and repeatedly noting that “drink for me amounts to a 
death sentence.” Given these factors after nearly four years of sobriety, I find there is 
sufficient evidence of his commitment to refrain from alcohol abuse. AG ¶ 23(a) applies. 
 
Applicant has embraced the tenets of AA and openly acknowledges his 
alcoholism as a life-long illness that demands a “one-day-at-a-time” diligence to 
maintain sobriety. As noted, he has been abstinent for nearly four years He has a 
positive support network in place, ranging from an experienced AA sponsor, a highly 
watchful and supportive spouse, and concerned work peers, to continued AA 
attendance. He repeated his alcohol treatment volitionally after a single relapse during 
his 2009 treatment. Instead of rewarding himself with alcohol for accomplishments, he 
now spends more time with his family, volunteers at his local church, and is committed 
to both exercise and a healthier diet. Consequently, I find that AG ¶ 23(b) applies. 
 
Taken in conjunction with the above, I further note that Applicant has diligently 
followed his treatment’s aftercare requirements and remained abstinent. Both his 
medical records from his treatment facility and a state licensed professional counselor 
with a master’s degree in counseling from a recognized treatment facility, accepted by 
both parties as a duly qualified medical professional, speak in favor of Applicant. They 
note his compliance with corrective action and posit a cautiously favorable prognosis for 
Applicant, recognizing that alcoholism is a life-long struggle. Therefore, I also find that 
AG ¶ 23(d) applies.  
 
       Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and 
the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate 
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall 
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the 
whole-person concept.   
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature and credible 
57-year-old engineer who has been employed by the same defense contractor for 
nearly four years. He has earned two science-related master’s degrees and served as 
 
 
 
 
9 
an officer in the United States military honorably in the 1980s. He is married to a very 
supportive woman, with whom he has three children. He has maintained a security 
clearance since 1979.  
 
After a relapse in 2009, Applicant repeated and successfully completed alcohol 
treatment. His two subsequent relapses proved to be dire wake-up calls to the medical 
necessity of his remaining abstinent. Aside from marital issues that would again arise 
should his mindful wife be aware that he has relapsed, Applicant has developed severe 
heart and liver problems. The former health issue has made him dependent on an anti-
arrhythmic medication which, by its nature, is incompatible with stimulants. The latter 
health issue is in the form of cirrhosis, which is sufficiently severe to have had his 
medical specialists place his name on the liver transplant list at a major medical 
institution. His inclusion on this list, as well as his everyday health, is dependent on his 
remaining abstinent. A recent medical evaluator assessed that his chances of relapse 
are lowered due to his good judgment and active recovery efforts. Throughout 
Applicant’s period of rehabilitation, he has maintained the trust of his employer and 
demonstrated professionalism.  
 
All of these unique circumstances act as a form of surety that Applicant will 
maintain sobriety or risk extreme repercussions. Combined with his positive references, 
credible testimony, and demonstrated level of commitment in other aspects of his career 
and life, I find it highly unlikely that Applicant will again abuse alcohol. Consequently, I 
conclude that Applicant has mitigated alcohol consumption security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings    
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:   
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT   
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.g    For Applicant   
 
        Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.    
 
                                               
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
