KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: A notation that a debt was removed in a credit report without further explanation does
not establish the reason why that action was taken.  Applicant’s credit reports do not establish
that he dealt with creditors in a responsible manner.  The Judge’s material findings are based on
substantial evidence, or constitute reasonable characterizations or inferences that could be drawn
from the record.  A Judge is precluded from raising security concerns outside the scope of the
SOR without amending the SOR and giving the parties a reasonable time in which to prepare to
address the amendment.    However, conduct not alleged or otherwise fairly embraced by the
SOR may be relevant for other purposes such as evaluating an applicant’s credibility,
rehabilitation, or case in mitigation.  There is no basis for concluding that the Judge considered
matters not alleged in the SOR for an improper purpose.    Adverse decision affirmed. 
CASENO: 14-03475.a1
DATE: 06/15/2016
DATE: June 15, 2016
In Re:
--------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-03475
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
February 4, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing. 
On March 23, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
Administrative Judge John Grattan Metz, Jr., denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s decision was arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law. Consistent with the following, we affirm.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  He served in the military for
over seven years, including two tours in hostile-fire zones, and received an honorable discharge. 
After leaving the military, he was unemployed for about six months before obtaining his current job
in 2007.  He works two full-time jobs and earns a total of about $142,000 annually.  He divorced in
April 2006, married again in September 2006, and separated from his second wife in August 2013. 
Applicant had ten delinquent debts totaling about $35,000.  In his answer to the SOR, he
asserted all the debts were either paid or removed from his credit report. He provided documentation
showing two debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d) were resolved, but no documentation showing resolution
of the other debts.   
Applicant hired a law firm that specialized in contesting entries on credit reports.  Between
January 2014 and February 2015, he succeeded in having 24 accounts removed from his credit
reports.  The removed accounts correspond roughly to the creditors alleged in the SOR.  An August
2015 credit report showed many accounts closed, but also showed new accounts in collection.  A
footnote in the decision reflects that the August 2015 credit report does not provide much clarity to
Applicant’s current financial situation because he did not print account details that were available for
each account.  In the footnote, the Judge also stated, “I cannot tell if the accounts were closed because
they were paid or otherwise resolved, then aged off, or simply aged off.”  Decision at not n. 5.
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge found for Applicant on SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d and against him on the remaining
allegations. The Judge noted that Applicant had delinquent debts dating back to at least 2006 and had
2
not documented any action on them, except perhaps having them removed from his credit report for
reasons that could range from satisfaction of the debt to simple expiration of the seven-year reporting
period.  The Judge concluded that, even though Applicant’s period of unemployment and child
support issues resulting from his divorce and separation were conditions beyond his control, he had
not documented that he dealt with his debts in a responsible manner. The Judge noted the successful
challenge of the contents of a credit report does not establish that Applicant dealt responsibly with
his creditors, had any contact with them for several years, or engaged in good-faith efforts to resolve
his debts.
Discussion
Applicant argues that the Judge should have found his security concerns mitigated.  He points
out that all of the debts were removed from his credit report and disputes the Judge’s finding that the
evidence is unclear as to how the debts were resolved and that some of the debts may have “aged off”
his credit report.  He claimed the debts would not have aged off his credit report until late 2015 or
2016.  The Board, however, has previously noted that a credit report may not be sufficient to meet
an applicant’s burden of persuasion as to mitigation because it may provide little evidence regarding
the underlying circumstances of the debt.  The fact that a debt no longer appears on a credit report
does not establish any meaningful, independent evidence as to the disposition of the debt.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 14-03612 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 25, 2015).  Likewise, the mere notation that a debt was
“removed” in a credit report without any further explanation does not establish the underlying reason
for why that action was taken.  Applicant’s credit reports do not establish that he dealt with his
creditors in a responsible manner.  After reviewing the record, the Board concludes that the Judge’s
material findings are based on substantial evidence, or constitute reasonable characterizations or
inferences that could be drawn from the record.  Considering the record evidence as a whole, the
Judge’s material findings of security concern are sustainable.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at
3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014). 
Applicant also claimed that the Judge considered collection accounts not alleged in the SOR
in denying his security clearance. A Judge is precluded from raising security concerns outside the
scope of the SOR without amending the SOR and giving the parties a reasonable time in which to
prepare to address the amendment.  However, conduct not alleged or otherwise fairly embraced by
the SOR may be relevant for other purposes such as evaluating an applicant’s credibility,
rehabilitation, or case in mitigation.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-00151 at n. 1 (App. Bd. Sep. 12,
2014).  From a review of the record, there is no basis for concluding that the Judge considered
matters not alleged in the SOR for an improper purpose.     
Applicant further contends that the Judge may have denied his security clearance because he
did not express himself clearly at the hearing.  However, having decided to represent himself during
the proceedings below, Applicant cannot fairly complain about the quality of his self-representation
or seek to be relieved of the consequences of his decision to represent himself.  ISCR Case No. 11-
08118 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Aug. 12, 2013).  
3
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  Applicant has not identified any harmful error likely to change the outcome of the case. 
The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted
only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the
national security.”
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan            
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                  
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed; James F. Duffy               
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
