                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
-----------------------------------                  )       ISCR Case No. 14-06977
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant has
not mitigated security concerns regarding her drug use and criminal conduct. Eligibility
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
History of the Case
On August 23, 2015, Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudication
Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOD
adjudicators could not make the preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for
granting a security clearance, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to
determine whether a security clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or
revoked. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
DOD on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR on September 28, 2015, and elected to have
her case decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on February 9, 2016, and responded to
the FORM within the time permitted with copies of her college diploma, college
commendation letters, sentencing statement and guidelines, order releasing her from
supervised probation, order returning her forfeiture items, and endorsement letter from
her father. Applicant’s submissions were admitted as Items 6-12. The case was
assigned to me on March 22, 2016. 
Summary of Pleadings
 
Under Guidelines H, Applicant allegedly was arrested in July 2012,  charged with
felony sale and distribution of marijuana, and sentenced to five years jail time with a five
year suspended sentence, fined $1,500, inclusive of $570 in assessed costs, and
placed on indefinite supervised probation. The allegation was re-alleged as criminal
conduct under Guideline J.
In her response to the SOR, Applicant neither admitted nor denied the
allegations in the SOR. She relied on her detailed explanations and attached
submissions (Items 6-12) for her  mitigation claims.
Findings of Fact
 Applicant is a 31-year-old restaurant manager and consultant for a defense
contractor who seeks the restoration of her security clearance. The allegations covered
in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.
Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married in February 2009 and divorced her husband in July 2012. She
has no children from her marriage. (Item 2) She earned an associate’s degree with
honors in 2014 (Items 2 and 8), and is currently enrolled in a bachelor’s program at a
recognized state university. (Items 1, 9 and 10) She claimed no military service. (Items
1 and 2) 
Applicant has worked for her father’s company since its founding in 2003. (Item
12) Her father’s company is a service disabled veteran owned company who sponsored
Applicant’s security clearance application. (Item 5). As the CEO and managing director
of her employer, her father utilized Applicant’s services in managing several of the
company’s programs, and she assisted him with the company’s cleared personnel
program until he was forced to pull her clearance following criminal charges. (Item 12) 
Drug possession charges and conviction 
In July 2012, Applicant was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana
with intent to distribute. (Items 1, 6, and 10-12) Court records confirm that Applicant
 In an Alford plea, a defendant enters a plea of guilty without making an admission of personal1
guilt. See North Carolina v. Alford, 400 U.S. 25 (1970).  This enables a defendant to enter a guilty plea
while maintaining his or her innocense. However, before a court can accept an Alford plea, the defendant
must admit that there is sufficient evidence to prove his or her guilt, and the court, in turn, must satisfy
itself  that the plea is supported by facts sufficient to sustain a conviction.  See North Carolina v. Alford,
supra, 400 U.S., at 37-39; ISCR Case No. 07-03307 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Sept. 26, 2008); In ruling on the
court’s acceptance of an Alford plea, the appeals court in Crowfoot v. U.S.  Government Printing Office,
761 F.2d 661 at 665, at n. 1 (Fed. Cir. 1985) stressed that a court that receives an Alford plea “must
independently determine that the plea has a factual basis.” Alford  pleas differ slightly from a nolo
contendre plea, in which the defendant agrees to accepting the court’s findings and sentence without
admitting guilt, and the evidence is sufficient to establish guilt.  
3
was found guilty of possession of marijuana with the intent to distribute (a state felony)
in September 2013 and sentenced to five years jail time (suspended), fined $1,500 plus
costs of $570, and placed on indefinite supervised probation. Before pronouncing its
guilty judgment, the court accepted Applicant’s entered Alford plea. In entering an
Alford plea, Applicant accepted the circumstances that the drugs were found in her
house without admitting any previous knowledge of the discovered drugs.(Item 1)  The1
court accepted Applicant’s Alford plea after a thorough review of the presented
evidence, and, in turn, placed her on indefinite supervision. (Items 3-6) Before
sentencing Applicant, the presiding court considered the pre-sentence report and
reviewed the applicable sentencing guidelines and worksheets. (Item 1)
Preceding her July 2012 arrest and ensuing conviction, Applicant resided with
her boyfriend. (Items 5, 6-7, and 12). She was served with a search warrant by
investigating police officials on the strength of an unknown confidential informant who
had participated in a string of purchases from Applicant’s live-in boyfriend. The search
warrant served on Applicant was part of an ongoing criminal investigation of her
boyfriend’s drug sales to confidential informants. (Item 1) Applicant’s boyfriend was, at
the time, an active duty U.S. Marine. (Item 12)
According to what Applicant was told by one of the police investigators who
served the warrant on her, her boyfriend sold marijuana to a confidential informant
employed by the county of Applicant’s residence. (Items 6-7 and 12) With Applicant’s
assistance and admissions, police investigators were able to locate the stored
marijuana in her house and identify who reportedly sold marijuana to the county’s
confidential informant. (Item 1-3 and 12) Although Applicant was not implicated nor
named in the warrant, police arrested her on grounds of complicity in her boyfriend’s
drug sale.
Following her July 2012  arrest for aiding and abetting her boyfriend’s marijuana
sale to a confidential informant, law enforcement authorities seized the marijuana and
other contraband found in Applicant’s home and asked the presiding court for seizure
approval. (Items 1, 6, and 11) After the state’s arguments for enforcing the seizure, the
presiding court denied the state’s petition and ordered the return of the seized property
(i.e., $393, an Apex 40 inch LCD television, a Nikon D40 camera, and an HP laptop
computer) to Applicant. (Items 1, 6, and 11) 
4
Based on the sentencing court’s review of Applicant’s exhibited good behavior
while under supervised probation, the sentencing court issued an order in June 2014,
releasing her from future supervision, conditioned on her future good behavior, while
upholding the other terms of her 2013 sentence (inclusive of continued non-supervised
probation). (Items 1-6) Since the sentencing court released her from supervised
probation, Applicant has been fully compliant with the terms of her probation and has
been a model contributor to her father’s company. (Items 6 and 12)  Applicant has no
prior criminal history and no previous involvement in illegal drugs of any kind.
Endorsements
Applicant is highly regarded by her father, who is the chief executive officer
(CEO) of a service disabled veteran owned company who sponsored Applicant’s
security clearance. (Item 12) He credited Applicant with always being a model
contributor to his company. He characterized her as being extremely resourceful and
efficient. He stressed Applicant’s working two jobs while a full-time student who owns a
home, cares for a homeless relative, and continues to be “a vibrant and productive
person,” who has learned her lesson. (Item 12)
Co-workers of Applicant at her father’s restaurant praise her overseeing efforts.
(Item 1) They credited her with performing multiple tasks and cited examples of her
supervising quality control and interfacing with customers and vendors. They described
her as organized, efficient, honest, and trustworthy with exhibited good moral character.
(Item 1) Applicant’s college dean extolled her solid academic achievements in her 2015
and 2016 semesters. (Item 8) Deans of her university’s school of arts and sciences
credited her with significant academic contributions. (Item 8)
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-making
process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that could
create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as considerations
that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions
that could mitigate security concerns.” 
The AGs must be considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance
should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative
judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be
evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a) of
the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
5
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made about
whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Drug Involvement
The Concern: Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription
drug can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and
trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it
raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with
laws, rules, and regulations.  AG, ¶ 24.
 Criminal Conduct
The Concern: Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s
ability to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
                                  Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant or
continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding
that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the Directive
requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence
accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a
security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and materiality of that
evidence. See United States, v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511 (1995).  As with all
adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a
reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely, the judge cannot
draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
6
security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not require the
Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled or
abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance. Rather,
the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation, or
mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security clearances be
clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the ultimate burden of
demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance determinations should
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S.
518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant currently has two jobs: one as a restaurant manager and another as a
part-time consultant for her father’s business. Her father sponsored her for a security
clearance and later suspended it following her 2012 arrest and ensuing felony conviction
for aiding and abetting her boyfriend’s marijuana sales to a confidential informant with
the intent to distribute. She has since been released from her court-ordered supervised
probation, but remains subject to the probation conditions for the duration of her five-
year suspended sentence. 
On the strength of the evidence presented, two disqualifying conditions of the
Adjudicative Guidelines for drug abuse are applicable: DC ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,”
and DC ¶ 25(c), “illegal possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.” Because
Applicant’s 2013 felony conviction is covered by her state’s criminal laws, as well as by
federal laws governing the distribution of illegal drugs, DC ¶ 31(a) of Guideline J, “a
single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses,” and DC ¶ 31(d), “individual is currently
on parole or probation,” apply to Applicant’s situation as well
Considering the felony nature of Applicant’s 2013 sale of illegal drugs with the
intent to distribute conviction based on her entered Alford plea and her still incomplete
probation under the terms of her sentencing order, she is not eligible for mitigation credit
under any of the mitigating conditions under Guidelines H and J. While she continues to
assert her innocence, as she is free to do under her approved Alford plea, the evidence
developed by arresting police was presumably enough to warrant the entered felony
conviction and ensuing sentencing that included indefinite supervised probation and
compliance with the court’s probation conditions associated with his suspended five-year
suspended sentence. 
Where an applicant remains subject to a sentencing court’s probation jurisdiction,
security clearance eligibility decisions based on assessments of reliability and
trustworthiness are usually premature. So, while Applicant’s progress with her work and
7
education are encouraging, it is still too early to make safe predictions about the level of
trust and reliability required of Applicant to hold a security clearance.  
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has established insufficient
probative evidence of unknowing collaboration with her boyfriend in the sale and
distribution of illegal drugs from her residence. The felony conviction and ensuing
sentencing reflect sustainable court findings of participation in her boyfriend’s drug
transactions. Applicant’s claims that she did not know of her boyfriend’s drug sales from
her residence and was not involved in the actual transactions, while noted, are not
enough to undue the presiding court’s findings of her guilt. Applicant’s credited
employment contributions and educational achievements, while significant and
encouraging, are not at this time enough to surmount the trust issues associated with
her still recent felony conviction. Her felony conviction is still too recent to be outweighed
by her contributions to her employers and university.   
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
felony conviction, she fails to mitigate  security concerns related to her felony drug
conviction. More time is needed for applicant to demonstrate the level of durable trust
and reliability required to hold a security clearance. Unfavorable conclusions warrant
with respect to the allegations covered by Guidelines H and J.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE H: (DRUG INVOLVEMENT):        AGAINST APPLIICANT
   
Subpara. 1.a:          Against Applicant
GUIDELINE E: (CRIMINAL CONDUCT):        AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subpara. 2.a:                                        Against Applicant
 
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
8
                                        
  
