KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: Applicant failed to make a prima facie showing that she submitted documents that
were not included in the record.  Applicant did not rebut the presumption that the Judge
considered all of the evidence in the record.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 14-02362.a1
DATE: 06/21/2016
DATE: June 21, 2016
In Re:
------------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-02362
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
March 14, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On March 30, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Martin H. Mogul denied Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30
In the appeal brief, Applicant requests her case be remanded to the Judge so that he could
consider all of the documents that she submitted. She stated that it appears from reading the Judge’s
decision that documents she submitted never made it to him for his consideration.  We construe her
request as raising a due process issue because documents she submitted were missing from the
record. 
We have examined Applicant’s contention in light of the record as a whole.  The Judge found
in favor of Applicant on ten of the alleged debts and against her on nine on them.  Regarding a debt
of over $13,000 (SOR ¶ 1.g) for which the Judge found against her, she argues that she provided
documentation showing the debt was included in a class action lawsuit.  The record does contain a
court document concerning a proposed settlement in the class action lawsuit.  Under the proposed
settlement, the creditor would waive an outstanding balance on an applicable loan and report to the
credit reporting bureaus the loan balance was zero and should be marked as “paid as agreed.”  The
court document reflected that a hearing was scheduled for August 2015 to decide whether the
proposed settlement should be approved.  The hearing date for the proposed settlement, however,
was almost two weeks after she submitted her Response to the FORM.  Under these facts, we
conclude that Applicant has not made a prima facie showing that she submitted more documents
regarding the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g than those contained in the record.1  Furthermore, Applicant has not
rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all the evidence in the record even though he did
not discuss the court document in his findings regarding the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 14-06093 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2015).
Applicant also argues she provided bank statements and paperwork from creditors showing
that she paid three debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.p, 1.q, and 1.r) for which the Judge found against her, and they
were apparently deleted from her credit report.  The record contains a credit report that Applicant
submitted with a notation that it was being submitted for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.p, 1.q, 1.r, and other
debts.  In her Answer to the SOR, she also stated that she provided documents from creditors
showing the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.p, 1.q, and 1.r were paid.  The Judge, however, found that he could
not locate any documents in the record supporting Applicant’s claim that she paid those debts.  The
total amount of the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.p, 1.q, and 1.r was about $440, which is less than 3% of the
total amount of the remaining unresolved debts.  Given the small dollar amount of the debts in
question, it is likely that the Judge would have rendered the same decision even if the documents
that are allegedly missing had been contained in the record.  Therefore, any error that may have
occurred in the handling of the documents that are allegedly missing was harmless.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 14-03601 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 1, 2015). 
The Judge examined the relevant evidence and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  Applicant has not identified any harmful error likely to change the outcome of the case. 
The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may be granted
only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt concerning
personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the
national security.”
1 Applicant claimed the court document stated the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g was cleared and paid in full, which was
not accurate. 
2
Order
The case is AFFIRMED.   
Signed: Michael Ra’anan               
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields              
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy                
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
3
