 
1 
                                      
 
     DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 14-06160 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding criminal conduct and 
personal conduct considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 26, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.1 On April 4, 2014, he submitted another e-QIP.2 On May 30, 
2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information 
                                                          
1
 Item 4 (First e-QIP, dated March 26, 2009). 
 
2
 Item 3 (Second e-QIP, dated April 4, 2014). 
 
2 
                                      
 
(December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations 
made under the Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security 
concerns under Guidelines J (Criminal Conduct) and E (Personal Conduct), and 
detailed reasons why the DOD CAF was unable to make an affirmative finding under 
the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative 
judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or 
revoked.  
 
 It is unclear when Applicant received the SOR as there is no receipt in the case 
file. In a statement notarized June 9, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations 
and elected to have his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.3 A 
complete copy of the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to 
Applicant on January 8, 2016, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 
days after receipt of the FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. In addition to the FORM, Applicant was furnished a copy of 
the Directive as well as the Guidelines applicable to his case. Applicant received the 
FORM on January 15, 2016. A response was due by February 14, 2016. As of May 31, 
2016, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) had not received a 
response to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on March 31, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations 
pertaining to criminal conduct (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.d.) in the SOR. With regard to the 
allegations pertaining to personal conduct, Applicant failed to address one (¶ 2.a.) and 
admitted in part and denied in part the remaining allegation (¶ 2.b.)  After a complete 
and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, 
I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
serving as an electronics technician with his current employer since July 2007.4 A 2005 
high school graduate, Applicant continued his education and received his associate’s 
degree in 2007 and his bachelor’s degree in 2010.5 He has never served with the U.S. 
military.6 He was granted a secret security clearance in July 2010.7 He has never been 
married.8  
 
                                                          
3
 Item 2 (Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated June 9, 2015). 
 
4
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 11. 
 
5
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 9-11. 
 
6
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 15. 
 
7
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 30-31. 
 
8
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 17. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
Criminal Conduct
9
  
 
Applicant has a substantial history of conduct as a justice-involved individual, 
commencing in April 2007, when he was 20 years old, and continuing through at least April 
2013. Included in that history are various incidents, mostly fueled by his consumption of 
alcohol, which led to arrests and charges, as well as at least one citation for a traffic 
infraction. The SOR alleged four such incidents:  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.d.): In April 2007, while in a university town with his brother, sister, and a 
cousin, Applicant attended a party and consumed five or six beers over a five-hour period. 
Applicant acknowledged that he was slightly intoxicated by the time they departed the party. 
Applicant’s cousin had a beer in his hand while the group was walking down the street. The 
police stopped them and requested that they display their identification. Applicant was 
scared, and he initially produced the identification of another person (henceforth referred to 
as a fake ID) that his cousin had previously furnished him. The police officers noted that the 
identification was not Applicant’s, and they requested the real identification, which Applicant 
promptly produced.  
 
Applicant was charged with (1) use of the driver’s license of another, a 
misdemeanor; (2) liquor under 21 and any liquor in body, a misdemeanor; and (3) false 
report to law enforcement, a misdemeanor. After spending the night in a holding cell, 
Applicant appeared before a judge and was ordered to: undergo an alcohol evaluation with 
a court-appointed counselor; complete one weekend of alcohol education; pay a fine; and 
prepare a written report about the dangers of consuming alcohol. Applicant completed all of 
the requirements, and the charges against him were eventually dismissed.
10
  
 
In April 2009, Applicant discussed the incident with an OPM investigator. Applicant 
explained that the alcohol-education class was very beneficial. He decided to abstain from 
drinking alcohol until he turned 21. Since that time, Applicant stated that he “drinks alcohol 
responsibly” when he has four or five mixed drinks when socializing with friends at bars. He 
also stated that he does not drive after consuming alcohol.
11
 
  
(SOR ¶ 1.c.): In November 2010, Applicant and a former cohabitant each consumed 
six or seven beers at a party at her residence or a bar. The party ended around 2 a.m. 
Applicant acknowledged that both his friend and he were intoxicated. A situation arose that 
brought the police to the residence. Applicant’s version of the events differs substantially 
from that of the police. According to Applicant, when his friend found a telephone number of 
                                                          
9
 General source information pertaining to Applicant’s criminal conduct discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits: Item 2, supra note 2; Item 3, supra note 2; Item 4, supra note 1; Item 5 (Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) Identification Record, dated April 12, 2014); Item 6 (Police File, various dates pertaining to a 2013 
incident); Item 6 (Police File, various dates pertaining to a 2010 incident); Item 7 (Personal Subject Interview, dated 
April 29, 2014); Item 8 (Personal Subject Interview, dated April 29, 2009).  
 
10
 Item 8, supra note 9, at 1-2; Item 5, supra note 9, at 2. Applicant offered two different descriptions of the 
events surrounding the incident. The initial description appears above, and as it was the one closest to the event, I 
have concluded that it is the more reliable of the two. The more recent description was given during an investigation 
conducted by the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in April 2014. In his statement, Applicant did not 
recall the quantity or nature of the alcohol consumed; the reason for being stopped by the police; or if he had to pay a 
fine or receive alcohol counseling, treatment, or education. See Item 7, supra note 9, at 8-9.  
 
11
 Item 8, supra note 9, at 2.  
 
 
4 
                                      
 
another female in Applicant’s cell phone, she confronted Applicant and struck him in the 
face. He purportedly asked her how she would feel if he struck her, or words to that effect. 
He said that she went into her bedroom and called the police. When he noted the arrival of 
the police, he went to the door to open it for them, but they burst through the door and 
struck him in the face. He was arrested. Applicant denied having resisted arrest or 
attempting to assault the police officers.
12
  
 
The version of the events reported by the police commenced before the arrest. At 
approximately 1:30 a.m., police officers were dispatched to the residence because of a 
reported verbal argument. Upon their arrival, Applicant was sitting on the curb, and he 
denied the situation with his friend had turned physical. Applicant was given the opportunity 
to call a taxi or walk to his parents’ nearby residence. The police watched as Applicant 
initially walked in the right direction but later changed directions. They again approached 
him to convince him to continue to his parents’ house. Applicant wanted to drive his vehicle 
to the house but was told he was too intoxicated to do so. Although he uttered some nasty 
comments to the police, they overlooked his statements and allowed him to leave. 
  
Approximately one hour later, the police, including some of the same police officers 
from earlier that morning, were again dispatched to the girlfriend’s residence because 
Applicant had returned to the residence, broken a window, and made entry into the house. 
When the officers entered the front door, Applicant was in the living room and positioned 
himself in a fighting stance. He ignored police orders to get down on the couch or ground, 
and he tried to avoid being handcuffed. When the police tried to take him into custody, 
Applicant lunged at, and grabbed one officer around the waist, and lifted him off the ground. 
Applicant threatened one officer and said: “I know a guy in Mexico that will come up and kill 
you.” After some more physical interplay with two officers, Applicant was finally subdued.
13
  
 
Following the incident, Applicant was initially charged with (1) aggravated assault of 
an officer, a felony; (2) two counts of disorderly conduct – fighting, a misdemeanor; and (3) 
threatening and intimidating with injury or damage to property, a misdemeanor.
14
 According 
to an incident/investigation supplemental report, the county attorney reviewed the case and 
turned down the felony charge of aggravated assault because of “inadequate evidence of 
intent,” and recommended the remaining charges be filed through the city court.
15
 The FBI 
Identification Record reported that no complaint was filed for the charges of aggravated 
assault or the two counts of disorderly conduct. The status of the threatening and 
intimidating with injury or damage to property charge is unclear, for in one section it says no 
complaint was filed but in another section it says that Applicant was found guilty, fined an 
unspecified amount, and placed on probation for the period of two years.
16
 It appears that 
the county attorney’s recommendations were followed, and the charges were filed in the city 
court. Applicant acknowledged that he entered a plea of guilty for one misdemeanor charge, 
                                                          
12
 Item 7, supra note 9, at 7.  
 
13
 Item 6 (2010 event), supra note 9.  
 
14
 Item 5, supra note 9, at 2.  
 
15
 Item 6 (2010 event), supra note 9.  
 
16
 Item 5, supra note 9, at 2.  
 
 
5 
                                      
 
but he could not recall which one, and the remaining charges were dismissed. He confirmed 
that he had paid a fine and attended an alcohol-education class, but he did not recall any 
probation being imposed.
17
 
 
In April 2014, Applicant discussed the incident with an OPM investigator. Applicant 
explained that he considered the incident to be an isolated one and not part of any pattern. 
He stated that he intends to maintain control of himself in the future to ensure that such 
behavior does not recur.
18
  
 
(SOR ¶ 1.b.): In February 2013, Applicant was issued a photo-radar traffic citation for 
speeding, not reasonable and prudent. The original fine was $250, but because Applicant 
failed to address it in a timely manner, the fine increased to $310. He eventually paid the 
increased fine. Under the state law which was violated, Applicant’s action was merely a civil 
traffic violation for which he received a civil penalty. It is not considered a criminal 
violation.
19
 
  
During his April 2014 OPM interview, Applicant discussed the incident with the OPM 
investigator. As a result of his experience, he claimed to have become more aware of traffic 
laws. He denied intentionally violating the traffic laws, but conceded that he was not paying 
attention at the time of the incident. He considered the incident to be an isolated one and 
did not foresee any recurrence.
20
 
  
(SOR ¶ 1.a.): In April 2013, Applicant and a male friend were at a bar where 
Applicant consumed, what he estimated to be two beers within two hours. According to 
Applicant, another individual approached Applicant’s companion and commenced a verbal 
confrontation. Applicant said he stood up and was struck in the face one time. Applicant 
denied fighting back. The police were called, but when they arrived, Applicant was angered 
when they refused to arrest his assailant. He was ordered to be quiet when he objected. He 
added that the police departed the bar with no further action being taken. He indicated that 
he subsequently received a citation in the mail which cited him for disorderly conduct.
21
  
 
Applicant’s version of the events differs substantially from that of the police. 
According to witnesses at the bar, Applicant and his companion were very flirtatious with the 
female patrons as well as very loud and obnoxious. At one point, Applicant yelled a 
derogatory racial slur at one of the patrons, and that patron got up from his table and struck 
Applicant in the face. The combatants were ordered to leave the bar. When the police 
arrived, witnesses were separately interviewed. Applicant became loud, disturbed various 
patrons, and disturbed the police investigation. He was handcuffed. A bar surveillance video 
was reviewed and confirmed the witness’ description of the event. Applicant was charged 
with disorderly conduct (uses abusive or offensive language or gestures to any person 
present in a manner likely to provoke immediate physical retaliation by such person), a 
                                                          
17
 Item 7, supra note 9, at 7-8.  
 
18
 Item 7, supra note 9, at 8.  
 
19
 Item 7, supra note 9, at 13.  
 
20
 Item 7, supra note 9, at 13.  
 
21
 Item 7, supra note 9, at 5.  
 
 
6 
                                      
 
misdemeanor. The other combatant was charged with assault, a misdemeanor. Applicant 
entered a plea of guilty to the charge. He was ordered to attend anger-management classes 
and was fined $300. The classes took place on a weekly basis for 17 weeks in a group 
setting.
22
  
 
During his April 2014 OPM interview, Applicant discussed the incident with the OPM 
investigator. As a result of his experience, he claimed he no longer goes to bars to insure 
no recurrence of this type of conduct. He considered this incident to be an isolated one, and 
did not foresee any recurrence.
23
 However, Applicant acknowledged that he continues to 
consume two to three beers twice a month at home, bars, or restaurants, and that he drinks 
to intoxication, which he estimated to be four or five beers, three times per year. He 
contended that when he consumes alcohol he becomes quiet, but not violent.
24
 
 
Personal Conduct 
  
In March 2009, when Applicant completed his First e-QIP, he responded to some 
questions pertaining to his police record. The questions in § 22 asked if, in the last seven 
years he had been arrested by any police officer, sheriff, marshal, or any other type of law 
enforcement officer; and if he had ever been charged with any offenses related to alcohol or 
drugs. Applicant answered both questions with “yes.” He reported that in May 2006 he was 
charged with underage drinking, and that the charge was dropped. He attempted to 
minimize the actual facts, because Applicant was actually charged with (1) use of the 
driver’s license of another, a misdemeanor; (2) liquor under 21 and any liquor in body, a 
misdemeanor; and (3) false report to law enforcement, a misdemeanor. Applicant appeared 
before a judge and was ordered to: undergo an alcohol evaluation with a court-appointed 
counselor; complete one weekend of alcohol education; pay a fine; and prepare a written 
report about the dangers of consuming alcohol. Applicant completed all of the requirements, 
and the charges against him were dismissed.  
 
(SOR ¶ 2.b.): In April 2014, when Applicant completed his Second e-QIP, he 
responded to similar questions pertaining to his police record. The questions in § 22 asked 
if, in the last seven years: he had been issued a summons, citation, or ticket to appear in 
court in a criminal proceeding against him; he had been arrested by any police officer, 
sheriff, marshal, or any other type of law enforcement officer; and he had been charged, 
convicted or sentenced of a crime in any court. Applicant answered the questions with 
“yes.” He reported that in July 2013 he was charged with disorderly conduct by being loud in 
a public place. He acknowledged that he was arrested, convicted, and fined $500.
25
 He 
certified that the response was “true, complete, and correct” to the best of his knowledge 
and belief.  
                                                          
22
 Item 7, supra note 9, at 7; Item 6 (2013 incident), supra note 9, at supplemental notes, dated April 28, 
2013. Although the Incident/Investigation Report, dated April 21, 2013, reflects three victims (Applicant, the bar, and 
the other combatant), two offenders (Applicant and the other combatant), and three offenses (assault–touched to 
injure, disorderly conduct-language and gesture, and disorderly conduct-fighting) there is no indication which charge 
was made to individual offenders. See Item 6 (2013 incident), supra note 9, at incident/investigation report, at 1.  
 
23
 Item 7, supra note 9, at 6.  
 
24
 Item 7, supra note 9, at 9. 
 
25
 Item 3, supra note 2, at 27-29.  
 
 
7 
                                      
 
 
Applicant’s response to the questions were false and incomplete, for Applicant 
omitted and concealed his 2007 charges of (1) use of the driver’s license of another; (2) 
liquor under 21 and any liquor in body; and (3) false report to law enforcement; his initial 
2010 charges of (1) aggravated assault of an officer; (2) two counts of disorderly conduct – 
fighting; and (3) threatening and intimidating with injury or damage to property; and the 
eventual 2010 charge of threatening and intimidating with injury or damage to property. He 
also failed to report the various sentences he received from the judges for those criminal 
actions.  
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied intending to falsify the responses to the 
questions and claimed he had simply misunderstood the questions. He stated that when the 
question asked of what he was convicted, he understood it to ask of what he was found 
guilty. He added that “some of these items that have come up do not directly reflect the 
person [he is] now. [He] was a very young kid, and very irresponsible. [He has] changed a 
great amount. . . .”
26
  
 
(SOR ¶ 2.a.): The SOR also alleged that the allegations set forth in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. 
through 1.d. constituted personal conduct concerns. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”27 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”28   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
                                                          
26
 Item 2, supra note 2, at 2.  
 
27
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
28
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
8 
                                      
 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”29 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.30  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”31 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”32 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
  
                                                          
29
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
30
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
31
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
32
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Criminal Conduct is set out in 
AG ¶ 30: “Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses” is potentially 
disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 31(c), if there is an “allegation of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted,” security concerns may be raised. Applicant’s history of criminal conduct, 
over a seven-year period, consists of three alcohol-related incidents involving criminal 
charges, arrests, convictions, and dismissals, for a variety of actions. Applicant’s one 
alleged traffic offense is not considered a criminal violation. As to the three alcohol-
driven criminal incidents, AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) have been established.  
 
The guidelines also include examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from criminal conduct. Under AG ¶ 32(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” Similarly, AG ¶ 32(d) may apply when “there is evidence of successful 
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of 
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good 
employment record, or constructive community involvement.”  
 
AG ¶¶ and 32(a) and 32(d) partially apply. Applicant’s three incidents of criminal 
conduct occurred over a seven-year period, with the most recent incident occurring in 
April 2013. Those incidents had one common theme, and that was Applicant’s 
consumption of alcohol. The earliest incident occurred when he was an under-age 
drinker who produced a fake ID to a police officer, and the other two incidents involved 
his alcohol-fueled aggression towards police officers and either a bar patron or his 
former girlfriend. The February 2013 speeding violation was not a crime, but merely a 
civil infraction, and is relatively insignificant. As a result of his conduct, Applicant went to 
jail and to court: he underwent alcohol education with a court-appointed counselor, 
wrote a report about the dangers of consuming alcohol, and paid a fine in 2007; he 
attended another alcohol-education program and paid a fine in 2010; and he attended 
anger-management classes and paid a fine in 2013. Regardless of the disposition of the 
charges or the punishment ordered, Applicant continued consuming alcohol in 
quantities that resulted in his criminal behavior.  
 
Following the 2007 incident, Applicant stated that he “drinks alcohol responsibly” 
when he has four or five mixed drinks – the same quantity that he previously 
acknowledged made him intoxicated – when socializing with friends at bars. He also 
 
10 
                                      
 
stated that he does not drive after consuming alcohol. After the 2010 incident, Applicant 
explained that he considered the incident to be an isolated one and not part of any 
pattern. He stated that he intends to maintain control of himself in the future to ensure 
that such behavior does not recur. Subsequent to the 2013 incident, Applicant again 
considered the incident to be an isolated one, and he claimed he no longer goes to bars 
to insure no recurrence of that type of conduct.  
 
Contrary to Applicant’s claims, his alcohol-fueled criminal conduct is not a string 
of isolated incidents. Furthermore, after all of the arrests, charges, and court actions, 
Applicant’s periodic return to criminal activity reflects evidence of unsuccessful 
rehabilitation. His minimization of the facts related to each incident, either to the police 
or in his e-QIP, reflect insufficient evidence of remorse. There is no evidence of a good 
employment record or of constructive community involvement. Those factors, added to 
his failure to recognize the negative impact alcohol has had on him, and his refusal to 
abstain from further alcohol consumption, raise the likelihood that additional criminal 
conduct will recur, and they cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment. 
 
While there is evidence that certain charges have been dismissed or otherwise 
not prosecuted, those dismissals and non-prosecutions do not, without substantially 
more, necessarily reflect that Applicant did not commit the individual offenses charged. 
Generally, the passage of time without recurrence of additional criminal activity can be 
construed as some evidence of successful rehabilitation. However, in this instance, the 
criminal activities have continued over time. While a person should not be held forever 
accountable for misconduct from the past, in this instance the past is relatively recent, 
and the concerns about future criminal conduct are continuing.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
 
Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
11 
                                      
 
 
 Under AG ¶ 16(c), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
 
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 16(e), it is also potentially disqualifying if there is 
personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . . 
 Applicant’s three alcohol-fueled criminal incidents in 2007, 2010, and 2013 
involved high-risk, immature, and possibly impulsive behavior that got him into trouble 
with the police. Aside from his under-age drinking in 2007, Applicant produced a fake ID 
to a police officer. In 2010, he broke into a house, eventually attacked a policer officer, 
uttered nasty comments to the police, verbally threatened a police officer, and resisted 
arrest. In 2013, he was very loud and obnoxious towards other bar patrons, and he 
uttered a derogatory racial slur at one patron. Applicant was struck in the face by the 
other patron, and they were ejected from the bar. Applicant disrupted the police 
investigation. While individuals may mature and become more even-tempered and 
responsible as they mature, enter the work force and take on added responsibilities, 
Applicant has offered little evidence reflecting such maturity. Instead, he has either 
failed to report significant facts, or he minimized the nature and facts of the incidents 
when discussing them and reporting them.  
 
 In March 2009, when Applicant completed his First e-QIP, he attempted to 
minimize the actual facts by acknowledging underage drinking, but omitting the use of a 
fake ID. That omission was not alleged in the SOR, but is referred to here only as 
evidence of an established pattern of conduct by Applicant. In April 2014, when he 
completed his Second e-QIP, he again attempted to minimize or conceal the actual 
facts by acknowledging the 2013 disorderly conduct, but omitting the 2010 incident in its 
entirety, as well as the other two 2013 charges. Applicant denied intending to falsify the 
responses to the questions and claimed he had simply misunderstood the questions. 
His explanation is difficult to accept. Considering Applicant’s history of minimizing and 
concealing the true facts pertaining to his criminal conduct and personal conduct, his 
explanation is rejected. AG ¶¶ 16(a), 16(c) and 16(e) have been established. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct, but none of those mitigating conditions apply. 
His conduct shows a lack of honesty and integrity. It is also recent and serious. In the 
 
12 
                                      
 
absence of some significant emotional and attitudinal changes by Applicant, it appears 
that such overall behavior is likely to recur. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated this case in 
light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal 
analysis.33    
    
 There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. He has been 
with his current employer since July 2007. He has both an associate’s degree and a 
bachelor’s degree. He was granted a secret security clearance in July 2010.  
 
 The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is a justice-involved individual whose history of criminal conduct took place 
over a seven-year period. Included in that history are various incidents, mostly fueled by 
his consumption of alcohol, which led to criminal charges, arrests, convictions, and 
dismissals, for a variety of actions.  His relations with the police officers have not been 
good. He has furnished a fake ID to police officers; cursed at, and threatened, police 
officers; assaulted a police officer; resisted arrest; disturbed a police investigation; 
misrepresented the true facts pertaining to his criminal incidents; and claimed that his 
experiences, including the incidents and his court-mandated alcohol education and 
anger management classes have been beneficial. He claims to have changed, but he 
has not furnished any evidence, other than his own statements, that those changes 
actually took place. He also unrealistically contends that each of his incidents of criminal 
conduct was an isolated incident. All of the above, when added to his minimizing the 
significance of alcohol on his conduct, raises the likelihood that additional criminal 
conduct will recur. The combination of Applicant’s actions, explanations, and beliefs 
                                                          
33
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
13 
                                      
 
cast doubt on Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. See AG ¶ 
2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c.:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d.:    Against Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a.:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b.:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
