 Authorized by Section E3.1.2.2 of DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive)1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-02843
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nicole A. Smith, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant’s current period of sobriety and psychiatric stability are not sufficient to
overcome the security concerns raised by her long-term abuse of alcohol and
prescription medications, and by her long history of co-occurring psychiatric problems
that have been prolonged by repeated noncompliance with treatment and abuse of
prescribed medications. Her request for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On November 8, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to renew her eligibility for a security clearance
required for her job with a defense contractor. After reviewing the completed
background investigation, which included her responses to interrogatories  from1
Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators, it could not be determined that it is clearly
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by the Directive.2
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).3
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included 11 exhibits (Items 1 - 11) proffered in4
support of the Government’s case.
2
consistent with the national interest for Applicant to continue to be eligible for access to
classified information.2
On May 20, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that
raise security concerns addressed under the adjudicative guidelines for alcohol
consumption (Guideline G), illegal drugs (Guideline H), and psychological conditions
(Guideline I).  Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without3
a hearing. 
On October 28, 2015, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR.4
Applicant received the FORM on November 12, 2015. On December 3, 2015, Applicant
submitted additional information (Response to FORM) consisting of a letter from
Applicant and a letter from her treating physician. Her submission is admitted without
objection. The record closed on December 12, 2015, and the case was assigned to me
on January 5, 2015. 
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline G, the Government alleged that from her early 20s, Applicant
consumed alcohol, at times to excess and to the point of intoxication, including while
she was at work, until at least 2014, despite multiple failed attempts to stop drinking and
being diagnosed as alcohol dependent (SOR 1.a). It was also alleged that in June 2014,
Applicant drank to excess while engaged in therapy because she was feeling depressed
(SOR 1.b). 
Under Guideline H, the Government alleged that in December 2013, Applicant
required treatment for dependence on amphetamines (SOR 2.a); and that she has a
history of abusing Adderall in a manner inconsistent with the advice of her treating
medical providers, “up to and including while in ongoing therapy in June 2014.” (SOR
2.b) 
Under Guideline I, it was alleged that Applicant’s mood and personality disorders
between 2001 and 2014 were diagnosed and treated as major depressive disorder,
generalized anxiety disorder, adjustment disorder, and bipolar disorder (SOR 3.a); and
that Applicant has a history of not adhering to the prescribed regimen of medications at
times (SOR 3.b). (FORM, Item 1)
In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the allegations. (FORM, Item 2)
In addition to the facts established by Applicant’s admissions, I make the following
findings of fact.
3
Applicant is a 51-year-old employee of a defense contractor, for whom she has
worked since February 2001. She has held security clearances with DOD and other
federal agencies since 1983. Applicant has been married since April 1988 and has two
adult children in their 20s. Applicant’s husband has been disabled since suffering a
brain aneurysm in 1999. As a result, Applicant has been the sole source of income for
her family for the past 17 years. (FORM, Items 3 and 11; Response to FORM)
In her 2012 EQIP, Applicant disclosed that since at least 2005, she had received
treatment from a mental health professional for both alcohol and psychological
problems. She stated she was an active member of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) and
was “in a grateful recovery.” She also disclosed that since 2001, she has been treated
for severe depression, bipolar disorder, and anxiety disorder. Information produced by
Department Counsel in the FORM shows, in great detail, that Applicant has abused
alcohol since sometime in the mid-1980s; that she is alcohol dependent; and that she
suffers from co-occurring and significant mental health problems. (FORM, Items 3 - 11)
In the course of treatment for her psychological problems, Applicant has abused
her medications, chief among them Adderall, prescribed in conjunction with other
medications for her anxiety. Applicant abused Adderall, as well as several other of her
medications over the past ten years, and she became addicted to the amphetamine
contained in Adderall. Applicant has a history of either abusing her prescriptions by
consuming them in excess, or she has unilaterally stopped taking her prescriptions
without consulting her treating physicians or psychiatrists. (FORM, Items 6 - 11)
Since 2002, Applicant has been admitted for in-patient psychiatric care and
alcohol abuse at least seven times. She has been in AA off and on since 2006. Both her
psychological and substance abuse treatments have been marked by multiple relapses.
After submitting her EQIP in 2012, Applicant was found to have been drinking at work,
to be addicted to Adderall, and to still be inconsistent in her compliance with the
medications and course of treatment prescribed for her. She has, at times, been suicidal
with paranoid hallucinations, and she has been repeatedly treated for significant and
pervasive depression and anxiety. In January 2014, she was readmitted to a psychiatric
center after ingesting 30 days worth of medications while drinking. Inpatient and
outpatient treatment between February and May 2014 yielded some improvement and a
“good” prognosis for recovery. However, within a month, Applicant was drinking one
half-gallon of vodka daily, and she had resumed her abuse of Adderall. She was
readmitted for treatment in June 2014 after drinking vodka while sitting in the parking lot
at her psychiatrist’s office before an appointment. She was given only a “fair” prognosis
at discharge because she had “co-occurring mental disorder that may complicate early
recovery.” This observation came to fruition during inpatient treatment between June 20
and July 11, 2014, when she was found to be abusing Adderall while a patient at that
facility. The most recent discharge notes did not include a prognosis for recovery.
(FORM, Item 11)
In response to the SOR, Applicant provided letters from her psychiatrist, her
pastor, and a fellow AA member. All of them observe that Applicant is currently stable
and adhering to treatment. Applicant herself has made clear that she accepts
responsibility for her conduct, but she also provided a great deal of information about
 Directive. 6.3.5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
4
her difficult personal history and the stressors of her family life that she believes have
contributed to her anxiety and depression, as well as to her abuse of alcohol and
prescription medications. In addition to her husband’s disability, her son was in trouble
with the law a few times while he was a teenager, and her daughter had significant
medical problems for which Applicant did not always have sufficient insurance
coverage. Applicant’s mother and brother died in 2009 and 2012, respectively. Applicant
and her husband filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1999 because of their daughter’s
medical problems, and they recently lost their house to foreclosure. In response to the
FORM, Applicant provided an update from her psychiatrist who opined that, as of early
2015, Applicant was stable and had an excellent prognosis for recovery, provided she
continues her work with AA and complies with her other prescribed treatments. (FORM,
Items 2 - 4; Response to FORM)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue6
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
 Directive, E3.1.14.7
 Directive, E3.1.15.8
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).10
5
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls7
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  8
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such9
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.10
Analysis
Alcohol Consumption
Available information shows that Applicant has a long history of abusing alcohol.
She has been diagnosed as alcohol dependent and has relapsed repeatedly despite
multiple inpatient and outpatient treatment efforts and her participation in AA. She has
consumed alcohol at work and while in treatment. This information raises security
concerns addressed at AG ¶ 21:
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
More specifically, this record requires application of the following pertinent AG ¶
22 disqualifying conditions:
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
(b) alcohol-related incidents at work, such as reporting for work or duty in
an intoxicated or impaired condition, or drinking on the job, regardless of
whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent;
6
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol
abuser or alcohol dependent;
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician,
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol
dependence;
(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a licensed
clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol
treatment program; and
(f) relapse after diagnosis of alcohol abuse or dependence and completion
of an alcohol rehabilitation program.
By contrast, I have considered the mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 23:
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness,
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse,
and is making satisfactory progress; and
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program.
None of these factors apply. Applicant has a long history of significant alcohol
abuse and addiction. She has continued to relapse despite extended and significant
treatment, both inpatient and outpatient. Prognoses have varied over the years and
often have been invalidated by Applicant’s relapses. Even though Applicant’s latest
prognosis is “excellent,” that determination is conditioned on continued adherence to the
strictures of AA and to her prescribed medication and treatment regimens. Doing so
involves efforts Applicant repeatedly demonstrated she has been unable to sustain.
Balanced against all of the foregoing, her current progress, while encouraging, must be
7
weighed with great caution. On balance, the record shows that serious security
concerns remain about Applicant’s use of alcohol.
Drug Involvement
Applicant abused and misused prescription drugs, most notably Adderall
prescribed as part of her treatment for anxiety. She became addicted to the
amphetamines in Adderall, and has abused other prescription medications at various
points in the course of her psychiatric treatment since at least 2006. Most of her conduct
in this regard has occurred while she has held security clearances. This information
reasonably raises a security concern that is stated at AG ¶ 24 as follows:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and
include: 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2)
inhalants and other similar substances; 
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction. 
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
condition under AG ¶ 25
(a) Any drug abuse (see above definition); 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician,
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of drug abuse or drug dependence;
(f) failure to successfully complete a drug treatment program prescribed by
a duly qualified medical professional;
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance; and
(h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and
convincingly commit to discontinue drug use.
I have also considered the following pertinent mitigating conditions listed under
AG ¶ 26:
8
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: . .
. . (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended;
and
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program,
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements,
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified
medical professional.
Applicant has misused prescription medications since at least 2006. Available
information reflects definitive diagnoses of addiction to Adderall and the amphetamines
it contains. Repeated attempts at treatment and rehabilitation failed to establish that she
is engaged in meaningful recovery from this condition. During Applicant’s most recent
inpatient treatment in July 2014, she continued to abuse Adderall and there is no
prognosis regarding this aspect of Applicant’s substance abuse struggles. Even if she
had established that she has not used Adderall over the past year, Applicant’s long
history of abusing many other medications prescribed for her militates against a finding
that any period of abstinence in this regard is sufficient. Applicant did not mitigate the
security concerns raised by her abuse of, and addiction to, prescription medications.
Psychological Conditions
Since at least 2002, Applicant has suffered from major depression and general
anxiety disorder. At times she has been suicidal and has exhibited other behaviors and
impairments that raise security concerns about her mental health. The security concern
about these matters is expressed at AG ¶ 27, as follows:
Certain emotional, mental, and personality conditions can impair
judgment, reliability, or trustworthiness. A formal diagnosis of a disorder is
not required for there to be a concern under this guideline. A duly qualified
mental health professional (e.g., clinical psychologist or psychiatrist)
employed by, or acceptable to and approved by the U.S. Government,
should be consulted when evaluating potentially disqualifying and
mitigating information under this guideline. No negative inference
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the
basis of seeking mental health counseling.
This record requires application of the following more specific disqualifying
conditions under AG ¶ 28:
9
(a) behavior that casts doubt on an individual's judgment, reliability, or
trustworthiness that is not covered under any other guideline, including but
not limited to emotionally unstable, irresponsible, dysfunctional, violent,
paranoid, or bizarre behavior; and 
(c) the individual has failed to follow treatment advice related to a
diagnosed emotional, mental, or personality condition, e.g. failure to take
prescribed medication.
Applicant’s mental health conditions have been a matter of well-documented
treatment for the past 15 years. They are interrelated with her significant alcohol abuse
and dependence. She has alternately abused her medications and ignored her doctors’
advice and directions for treatment. At times she has been suicidal and has had
paranoid and hallucinatory episodes due to her substance abuse.
I have also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 29 mitigating conditions:
(a) the identified condition is readily controllable with treatment, and the
individual has demonstrated ongoing and consistent compliance with the
treatment plan;
(b) the individual has voluntarily entered a counseling or treatment
program for a condition that is amenable to treatment, and the individual is
currently receiving counseling or treatment with a favorable prognosis by a
duly qualified mental health professional; 
(d) the past emotional instability was a temporary condition (e.g., one
caused by a death, illness, or marital breakup), the situation has been
resolved, and the individual no longer shows indications of emotional
instability; and
(e) there is no indication of a current problem.
Available information does not support any of these mitigating conditions.
Applicant’s psychological problems have existed at least for the past 10 years. Her
recent favorable prognosis for recovery is predicated on her adherence to treatment and
compliance with medication regimens. Applicant has not established a record of
compliance that sufficiently counterbalances her poor track record of relapses and
medication abuse. Although it appears difficulties in her personal life have, at times,
been overwhelming, there has been no indication her condition was ever temporary.
Applicant has not shown that there is no indication of a current problem, only that she
has been stable and sober for a relatively brief period. Security concerns remain about
Applicant’s psychological conditions.
In addition to my evaluation of the facts and application of the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines G, H and I, I have reviewed the record before me
in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant’s personal life
has been marked with significant struggles. Undoubtedly, they have served to trigger
10
and exacerbate relapses in her conditions. But the overwhelming weight of the available
evidence shows that her abuse of alcohol and her anxiety and depression disorders
predate most of the life events she cited in response to the Government’s concerns.
That same information also makes clear that Applicant is still at risk of relapsing in both
her alcohol recovery and her mental health treatment. On balance, I have serious
doubts about Applicant’s addiction recovery efforts and her  mental health. Because
protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, those
doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline G: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline I: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 3.a - 3.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                            
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
