KEYWORD: Guideline F; Guideline E
DIGEST: The Judge’s findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence.  Applicant has not
rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered all of the evidence.  Applicant has not
demonstrated that the Judge mis-weighed the evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 14-03944.a1
DATE: 06/09/2016
DATE: June 9, 2016
In Re:
----------------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 14-03944
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
January 22, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for that
decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E
(Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive). Applicant requested a hearing.  On March 31, 2016, after the hearing, Defense Office
of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge Philip S. Howe denied Applicant’s request
for a security clearance.  Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s findings of fact
contained errors and whether the Judge’s adverse decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to
law.  Consistent with the following, we affirm.  
The Judge’s Findings of Fact
Applicant’s SOR allegations arose from a series of business activities that he engaged in over
the years.  In summary, the Judge found that Applicant began a company that provided support to
the U.S. military.  Applicant was offered a job working for a Government agency, so he sold the
business to the minority shareholders.  However, the new management did not perform well, and
the company experienced significant financial problems.  Applicant bought the business back, and
he has undertaken to pay down debt and resolve the company’s problems with state taxing
authorities and with the IRS.  These agencies placed liens against Applicant, including one for
$800,000 that was placed against his home.  He also owed personal taxes to his state.  The Judge
found that Applicant had employed an attorney to assist with these problems and that he had entered
into payment agreements.
Applicant engaged in other business activities, including working for another employer to
earn income while he was acquiring his former company.  In this capacity, he met with persons in
an African country.  Applicant spoke with a “rebel leader” of that country about arms sales. 
Applicant stated that he was willing to provide weapons, contingent on obtaining a licence to do so
and a contract for shipping.  However, no further action was taken on this matter.  In addition,
Applicant withdrew about $6,800 of company funds to pay a personal debt.  He did not have
permission from the company to do so.  Applicant’s employer told him that she was going to fire
him, but Applicant resigned instead.  Applicant claimed that he resigned because his employer was
a racist who did not want to do business with Africans.  He provided no corroboration for this
assertion.  When completing his security clearance application (SCA), Applicant did not disclose
his employment with this company.  
Applicant had other financial problems that resulted in lawsuits.  The Judge entered
favorable findings regarding three SOR allegations regarding litigation against Applicant.  In one
of them, Applicant was sued for over a million dollars but settled for under $100,000.  The other two
pertained to loans he had acquired in his effort to repurchase his former company. 
Applicant enjoys as excellent reputation for the quality of his work and for his effort to
restore his company’s financial health.  He also submitted laudatory written statements from
business associates, friends, his facility security officer, and his domestic partner.  
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s circumstances raised concerns under both Guidelines. 
Among other things, the Judge found that Applicant’s omission of his employment from the SCA
was deliberate.  Concerning mitigation, the Judge noted evidence that Applicant was paying his tax
2
debts.  However, he characterized Applicant’s testimony about his finances as “imprecise and
confusing.”  Decision at 8.  He also stated that Applicant provided no evidence as to the exact
amounts he owed or the current status of the debts.  He stated that Applicant’s case consisted more
of promises to pay debts in the future than of a track record of debt resolution.  He also concluded
that Applicant did not mitigate his having taken funds from his employer without permission.  
Applicant’s financial problems were cross-alleged under Guideline E.  The Judge found that
they impugn his reliability and trustworthiness.  In addition, he concluded that the other Guideline
E allegations, such as his having met with the rebel leader, having resigned from employment in lieu
of termination, and his deliberate SCA falsification, were not mitigated.
Discussion
Applicant challenges some of the Judge’s findings of fact.  For example, he argues that his
omission from the SCA was an honest mistake, that there is no evidence of a tax lien against his
home, that he had authority to withdraw funds from his employer, and that he did not engage in arms
sales talks with a foreign rebel, etc.  We examine a Judge’s findings to see if they are supported by
“such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in
light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.
For the most part, the Judge’s findings are based upon Applicant’s own statements, whether
in his clearance interview, his Answer to the SOR, and/or his testimony at the hearing.1  Concerning
the SCA omission, the Judge noted that Applicant had disclosed all of his other employment
positions, leaving out only the job which he had left under adverse circumstances.  It was reasonable
for the Judge to conclude that Applicant had intentionally left out information that he found
embarrassing or that might be viewed unfavorably.  The Judge’s material findings are based upon
substantial evidence or constitute reasonable inferences that could be drawn from the evidence.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-03420 at 3 (App. Bd. Jul. 25, 2014).  
1Applicant testified that the IRS had placed a lien against his home in the amount of about $800,000 for taxes
owed by his company.  Tr. at 107.  He made a similar statement in his Answer to the SOR.  To the extent that his appeal
argument means that there is no independent evidence of his lien, we note that the Government has no duty to provide
evidence regarding allegations that an applicant has admitted.  Directive ¶ E3.1.14.  He told his clearance investigator
that he met with a rebel commander at a hotel “to discuss firearms acquisition.”  Applicant advised the commander that,
if the commander could get a contract, Applicant “was willing to provide these weapons.”  The commander gave
Applicant photographs of the weapons that he wanted, and Applicant kept them in his desk at work.  Summary of
Clearance Interview, September 5, 2013, at p. 3, included in Government Exhibit (GE) 2, Answers to Interrogatories. 
Applicant certified that GE 2 accurately reflected the interview, although he stated that “nothing substantial came of the
pursuits” with the foreign persons except for the construction of a small schoolhouse.  Applicant did not object to the
admission of GE 2.  Tr. at 38.  He testified that he never promised to provide weapons.  Tr. at 82.  The evidence as a
whole supports the challenged findings about Applicant’s interactions with the foreign persons.  Concerning the $6,800
fund withdrawal, Applicant told the interviewer that he had been desperate and that the company would have denied him 
the funds if he had asked for them.  His rationale for taking the money was that he was the reason that the company had
the funds to begin with.  Interview Summary, supra, at p. 3.  
3
Applicant cites to evidence, such as his testimony and the letter from his attorney that he was
resolving his tax liabilities, the circumstances underlying his resignation from the company, etc.  He
also cites to his military service and to his having held a clearance for many years without incident. 
The Judge made detailed findings about Applicant’s circumstances, including most of the matters
that he addresses on appeal.  Applicant has not rebutted the presumption that the Judge considered
all of the evidence in the record.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-05795 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 26, 2016).
 
 Applicant challenges the manner in which the Judge weighed the evidence, arguing that he
did not extend enough weight to evidence that was favorable to Applicant.  In fact, the Judge
acknowledged that Applicant’s testimony presented his circumstances in a favorable light, and he
concluded that Applicant was, to a certain extent, addressing his financial problems.  However, the
Judge’s characterization of Applicant’s explanations as “confusing” is supportable, as is his
conclusion that Applicant had presented insufficient evidence of the true extent of his tax debts or
of the extent to which they were being paid. Moreover, the Judge’s treatment of the Guideline E
allegations, especially the deliberate omission from the SCA and the discussions with the foreign
official, are consistent with the record that was before him.  Applicant’s exculpatory statements
appear to have been made after the SOR placed him on notice that his clearance was in jeopardy. 
We find no reason to question the manner in which the Judge weighed the evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 14-06686 at 2 (App. Bd. Apr. 27, 2016).2  
The Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for the
decision.  The decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”
2At the beginning of his brief, Applicant argues that his financial problems do not raise security concerns. 
Given the extent of Applicant’s debts, including his tax liabilities, the Judge’s conclusion that the case raised concerns
under Guideline F is supportable.  See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 18 to the effect that financial circumstances can raise
questions about an applicant’s reliability and ability to protect classified information.  Applicant did not make a similar
argument about the Guideline E allegations.  
4
Order
The Decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan                
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Catherine M. Engstrom     
Catherine M. Engstrom
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
