 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 14-05080 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the drug involvement trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 30, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement, and Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as 
amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD 
on September 1, 2006. 
 
On January 23, 2016, and February 22, 2016, Applicant submitted answers to 
the SOR and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on April 8, 2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a notice of hearing on April 21, 2016, and the hearing was convened as 
 
2 
scheduled on May 11, 2016. Government Exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 were admitted in 
evidence without objection. Applicant and one witness testified. Applicant did not submit 
any documentary evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 23, 
2016.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing the Guideline F 
allegations. There was no objection and the motion was granted. 
 
I amended the SOR to conform to the evidence presented at the hearing. SOR ¶ 
1.a was amended by modifying the dates alleged to read as follows: “From 
approximately 1989 to 1994 and again from 2004 to June 2008.”1 
 
 I also amended SOR ¶ 1.b to conform to the evidence presented at the hearing, 
by deleting the date “06/2013” and substituting the date “July 2008,” and deleting the 
date “12/2013” and substituting the date “April 2016.”2 There were no objections to the 
modifications.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b and 1.c. Her admissions 
were incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 53 years old. She completed high school and some college, but did 
not earn a degree. She disclosed on her Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) that she married in 
2001 and has been separated from her husband since 2005. At her hearing, she 
testified that she believes her husband filed for divorce and it was granted in 2006 or 
2007, but she was uncertain.4 She has a 14-year-old child from the marriage. She has a 
23-year-old child from a previous relationship. Both children currently live with Applicant. 
She has been employed with a federal contractor since January 2013.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. 28-33, 47. 
 
2 Tr. 42-47. 
 
3 DOD Directive 5220.6, as amended, permits an administrative judge on her own motion, to amend the 
SOR to conform to the evidence admitted or for other good cause. When such amendments are made, 
the administrative judge may grant either party’s request for such additional time as the administrative 
judge may deem appropriate for further preparation or other good cause.  
 
4 Tr. 16-20; GE 1 is an Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing for National Security 
Positions. It is noted that this form was used in this case for a trustworthiness determination. 
 
5 GE 1, 2. 
 
3 
 Applicant testified that she has had a recurring drug-abuse problem. She stated 
she has been in abusive relationships, including her marriage. She has lived in 
domestic-violence shelters at different times.6  
 
 Applicant began using marijuana after she graduated from high school in 1982 
and continued using it until 1989. She began using crack cocaine several times a week 
in 1989. Applicant participated in a drug treatment program for pregnant women who 
were addicted to drugs in 1992. She confirmed that she was using crack cocaine while 
she was pregnant with her first child. She apparently stopped while in this program and 
her son was born in June 1992. She then resumed using crack cocaine until 1994.7  
 
 Applicant stated that she stopped using crack cocaine in 1994 and attended 
Narcotics Anonymous until 2004. She stated she did not use any illegal drugs during 
this ten-year period. She resumed using crack cocaine in 2004 and would use it about 
three to four times a week until May 2006, when Applicant stated that she went to a 
church-based rehabilitation program until June 2007. She was required to go to 
meetings at the church and her home church paid for the program. The program did not 
have professional drug counselors, but was based on going to church and “the Word of 
God.”8 The program required attendees to go to stores, set up a table and a donation 
box, and then solicit donations to help others stay off drugs. She completed this 
program in June 2007 and received a certificate of completion.9  
 
 After completing the church program, she moved with her second son to a 
transitional housing unit for women.10 In July 2007, approximately a month after moving 
to transitional housing, Applicant resumed using crack cocaine daily. She testified that 
she knew where to purchase the crack cocaine. She then moved residences so she 
could take care of her mother. She testified that she stopped using crack cocaine in 
about May 2008. She stated she stopped using it on her own without the help of any 
programs.11  
 
 Beginning in July 2008, Applicant began to occasionally smoke marijuana. She 
estimated she used marijuana about once every six months. Her last use was about a 
month before her hearing when she used it with some of her friends. Sometimes her 
friends supply the marijuana and sometimes she purchases it. She last purchased 
marijuana in 2016. She continues to meet with these friends about once or twice a 
                                                          
6 Tr. 20-21. 
 
7 Tr. 28-30, 51-53. 
 
8 Tr. 22. 
 
9 Tr. 22-27, 30-33, 55. 
 
10 Tr. 33. It is unknown where her first child was residing at this time.  
 
11 Tr. 21, 34-41, 55; GE 2 is the summary of an unsworn statement taken by a Government investigator 
on April 16, 2014. In the summary, Applicant indicated that after she completed the church-based 
rehabilitation program, she did not use crack cocaine again. This is inconsistent with the testimony she 
provided. 
 
4 
month. She does not know if her friends use other types of illegal drugs. She admitted 
she continued to use illegal drugs after completing her SF 86. Her intention going 
forward is to not use illegal drugs. She has never been arrested for her drug activity. 
Applicant testified that the people she associates with should not have a bearing on her 
trustworthiness.12  
 
 Applicant completed a SF 86 in March 2014. In response to question 23, which 
inquired about her past illegal drug use and activity, she disclosed that she used crack 
cocaine from May 2006 to June 2008. Part of question 23 stated: “Do you intend to use 
this drug or controlled substance in the future?” Applicant stated: “I no longer want to 
use crack cocaine because it is very expensive and I don’t want it to affect my job or 
how I care for my kids.”13 She also disclosed other drug use as: “THC (such as 
marijuana, weed, pot, hashish, etc.” She disclosed that her first marijuana use was June 
2013 and her most recent use was December 2013. She described her use as: “nature 
of use was recreational[.] I would use[] a couple of times a week.” She disclosed her 
intent to not use it in the future was because “I do not want it to affect how I do my 
job.”14 During her background interview with a government investigator in April 2014, 
Applicant disclosed she used marijuana about twice a week from June 2013 until 
December 2013. She used it by herself. She purchased it through a telephone contact 
and paid about $20 for six blunts. She used it at her residence. She indicated that she 
stopped using marijuana because she did not want it to affect her job and she had no 
intention of using it in the future.15 When asked why she continued to use marijuana 
after completing her SF 86, she stated: “I can’t really answer that, Judge. The only thing 
that I could tell you at this time is that, you know, I do my job and I do it well. And 
anything outside of my job, I felt, was my own personal recreation.”16 Applicant 
acknowledged that she was aware that the use of marijuana is illegal.17 
 
 Applicant testified that her employer has never tested her for drug use, but she is 
subjected to random drug testing. She is aware that her employer has a drug-use policy 
that mandates no illegal drugs are permitted on the premises and use of illegal drugs is 
prohibited.18 
 
 Applicant’s mother testified on her behalf. She believes Applicant has not used 
illegal drugs since she moved back to where she is currently residing. Applicant has 
                                                          
12 Tr. 42-47, 56-57, 60-62. 
 
13 GE 1 at pages 29-30. I have not considered Applicant’s failure to report her earlier marijuana use for 
disqualifying purposes, but will consider it in analyzing mitigation, credibility, and the whole person. 
 
14 GE 1. 
 
15 Tr. 50-51, 58-59; GE 2. 
 
16 Tr. 50. 
 
17 Tr. 50. 
 
18 Tr. 59-60. 
 
 
5 
helped care for her mother while her mother was recovering from surgery. She believes 
Applicant’s attitude has changed and her character is good.19 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
                                                          
19 Tr. 63-68. 
 
6 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the trustworthiness concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions for drug involvement under AG ¶ 
25 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) any drug abuse; 
 
 (c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
 (h) expressed intent to continue illegal drug use, or failure to clearly and 
convincingly commit to discontinued drug use. 
 
 Applicant has a history of illegal drug use and possession beginning in 1982 and 
continuing up until April 2016, a month before her hearing. She used crack cocaine 
extensively in the past and continues to use marijuana. She has not participated in a 
bona fide drug rehabilitation program since 1992, and her most recent marijuana use 
was after completing her SCA. She told a government investigator in April 2014 that she 
did not intend to use illegal drugs in the future. Her last purchase of marijuana was in 
2016, and she continues to associate with friends who use marijuana. I did not find 
Applicant’s testimony credible that she does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future. 
There is significant evidence to conclude that she has not clearly and convincingly 
committed to discontinue her use of illegal drugs. The above disqualifying conditions 
apply.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and  
 
 
7 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and favorable prognosis by duly qualified 
medical professional.  
 
Applicant has a long history of using illegal drugs from 1982 to April 2016. Based 
on her testimony, she has refrained from using crack cocaine since June 2008, but she 
continued to use marijuana, even after completing her SCA. Applicant’s drug use is 
recent and did not happen under circumstances that are unlikely to recur. She 
purchased marijuana as recently as 2016 and continues to associate with friends who 
use illegal drugs. Her behavior casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, 
and good judgment. AG ¶ 26 (a) does not apply.  
 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant has demonstrated an 
intention to not abuse any drugs in the future. Based on Applicant’s recent purchase 
and use of marijuana; her continued association with friends who use illegal drugs; her 
past promises that she does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future; and an 
insignificant period of abstaining from illegal drug use, I find AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply.  
 
Applicant testified that she completed a church-based rehabilitation program, but 
there were no certified professional counselors associated with it. She also participated 
in a drug-rehabilitation program for addicted pregnant women, but she continued to use 
crack cocaine after her child was born. She used crack cocaine while in a transitional 
housing program. Applicant continued to use marijuana up to April 2016. AG ¶ 26(d) 
does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
8 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant has a long history of drug addiction and abuse. Based on her testimony 
she stopped using crack cocaine in June 2008, but continued to use marijuana up until 
a month before her hearing. She purchased marijuana in 2016 and continues to 
associate with friends who are drug users. Applicant does not have a credible track 
record to conclude she will not use illegal drugs in the future. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the drug involvement trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F:   WITHDRAWN 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.g:   Withdrawn 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
