 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
         
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 14-04656 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On December 2, 2014, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 On February 26, 2015, 
Applicant responded to the SOR, admitting the 13 allegations with comments. He also 
requested a determination based on the written record. On July 19, 2015, the 
Government issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) with four attachments. Applicant 
timely responded to the FORM with additional material. The case was assigned to me 
on October 9, 2015. Based on my review of the case file and submissions, I find 
Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations security concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old high school graduate who has been employed as a 
shipfitter by the same defense contractor since March 2014. He is single with two minor 
children. Applicant has not served in the military and has no prior government service. 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
He experienced periods of unemployment from January 2014 to March 2014, due to a 
lack of work; February 2013 to May 2013, after being told things were not working out 
with his employment; and February 2011 to September 2011, due to lack of work. 
During the interim periods, he worked as a heating, ventilating, and air conditioning 
(HVAC) installer. Otherwise, he has been continuously employed since at least August 
2006, after a seven month period of unemployment caused by a lay off. He has no 
criminal record or past issues with drugs or alcohol. In completing his March 2014 
security clearance application (SCA), Applicant disclosed that he had financial issues. 
 
At issue are 12 accounts representing approximately $9,700 in delinquent debt, 
including an adverse 2007 judgment for $945 and $4,208 for past-due child support. 
The rest appear to be consumer, medical, or utility accounts. Applicant admits all 
related allegations. In his SOR Response, Applicant noted that the child support 
arrearage at SOR allegation 1.b was being paid through a garnishment to the 
appropriate child support department and the rest were currently being consolidated by 
a law firm for repayment starting after January 1, 2015.   
 
In his FORM Response, Applicant made additional comment with attachments. 
He principally noted that the information comprising the FORM was outdated. He further 
noted the following regarding the December 2014 SOR allegations: 
 
1.a – Applicant admitted responsibility for the $945 adverse judgment alleged, 
noting that he had no information regarding the alleged debt and stating that it is no 
longer on his credit report. 
 
1.b – Applicant provided information that he is no longer delinquent on his child 
support payments and the balance is now zero. (FORM Response attachment, credit 
report excerpt at 1) 
 
1.c - Applicant admitted responsibility for the $622 collection account alleged, 
noting that he had no information regarding the alleged debt and stating that it is no 
longer on his credit report. 
 
1.d - Applicant admitted responsibility for the $468 collection account alleged, 
noting that he had no information regarding the alleged debt and stating that it is no 
longer on his credit report. 
 
1.e – Applicant admitted responsibility for the charged off $388 referenced, but 
wrote that it is now part of a repayment plan, under which he has been making monthly 
$50.70 payments toward the debt, leaving a $287 balance. (FORM Response 
attachment, credit report excerpt at 2; receipts reflecting two payments for $50 each) 
 
1.f - Applicant admitted responsibility for the $1,077 collection account alleged, 
noting that he had no information regarding the alleged debt and stating that it is no 
longer on his credit report. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
1.g - [The SOR did not include a subpart 1.g] 
 
1.h - Applicant admitted responsibility for the $776 collection account alleged, 
noting that he had no information regarding the alleged debt and stating that it is no 
longer on his credit report. 
 
1.i – Applicant admitted responsibility for the $380 collection account alleged, 
noting that he had no information regarding the alleged debt and stating that it is no 
longer on his credit report. 
 
1.j – Applicant admitted responsibility for the $380 collection account alleged, 
noting that he had no information regarding the alleged debt and stating that it is no 
longer on his credit report. 
 
1.k - Applicant admitted responsibility for the $248 collection account alleged, 
noting that he had no information regarding the alleged debt and stating that it is no 
longer on his credit report. 
 
1.l - Applicant admitted responsibility for the $148 medical collection account 
alleged, noting that he had no information regarding the alleged debt and stating that it 
is no longer on his credit report. 
 
1.m – Applicant admitted responsibility for this $128 medical debt, showing it has 
been paid and poised to be deleted from his credit report. (FORM Response, 
attachment, creditor letter of August 21, 2015; TransUnion letter of August 28, 2015) 
 
Applicant also showed that he is in timely repayment on debts not noted in the 
SOR, such as his student loans and a new account now appearing in his most recent 
credit report. (FORM Response narrative) There is also documentary evidence of 22 
timely payments on an account with a principal balance of approximately $11,000, but 
there is no apparent link between it and the accounts at issue in the SOR. (FORM 
Response, attachment, statement of August 21, 2015)   
 
In responding to the SOR and the FORM, Applicant provided scant evidence 
regarding his current income, expenses, and other factors reflecting his present 
financial situation or his ability to address the debts at issue, regardless of whether they 
are currently reflected on his credit report. There is no evidence indicating whether he 
has received financial counseling or has formally disputed any of the debts at issue 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
4 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may 
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” 
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified 
or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, the Government introduced credible evidence showing Applicant acquired 
approximately $9,700 in delinquent debts. This is sufficient to invoke two of the financial 
considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 
 
 
5 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
           The delinquent debts at issue are multiple in number and largely unaddressed. 
Little is known of his present financial situation, so it cannot be determined whether 
another period of delinquent debt acquisition is likely to recur. Moreover, while Applicant 
did experience periods of unemployment in the past decade, he failed to provide any 
narrative as to what reasonable efforts he took, if any, to contain his debt or to address 
the debts he had accumulated. There is no documentary evidence reflecting that 
Applicant has received financial counseling.  
 
          Furthermore, while Applicant showed some progress and regular payments on 
accounts not at issue in the SOR, he only presented documentary evidence showing 
that he is no longer past due on the debt reflected at 1.b, has reduced the debt at 1.e by 
approximately $100, and paid the $128 balance noted at allegation 1.m. The remaining 
nine of the dozen delinquent debts at issue remain virtually unaddressed, undisputed, or 
uninvestigated. With no clear strategy yet in place and with scant progress made on the 
delinquent accounts at issue, none of the mitigating conditions apply. 
           
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
 
 
 
 
6 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c) sets forth the need to 
utilize a whole-person evaluation.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under 
the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. Applicant is a 33-year-old shipfitter     
who is a single father of two children and a high school graduate. He has worked for the 
same employer since March 2014. Applicant experienced periods of unemployment 
from January 2014 to March 2014, February 2013 to May 2013, and February 2011 to 
September 2011, working as a HVAC installer in between those periods of time. 
Otherwise, he has been continuously employed for the past decade.  
 
Applicant has acquired a dozen delinquent debts amounting to almost $10,000. 
While it may be assumed some or all of that debt may be related to his periods of 
unemployment, Applicant offered scant information as to his current financial situation 
and regarding his approach to addressing the dozen delinquent obligations at issue. 
Many of the debts are no longer reflected on Applicant’s credit report, and there is no 
indication that he has tried to investigate further into their status or dispute their 
inclusion on his credit report. While he provided admirable examples of progress on 
some debts not at issue, he only demonstrated notable progress on three of the 
delinquent debts reflected on his SOR, amounting to less than $1,200. While this 
process does not require an applicant to satisfy or address all debts at issue in an SOR, 
it does expect that Applicant demonstrate that he has developed a workable plan for 
addressing those obligations, and documentary evidence indicating that it has been 
successfully implemented. At this point, Applicant has not met this burden. 
Consequently, financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c-1.d:   Against Applicant  
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    Not applicable 
Subparagraphs 1.h-1.l:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.m:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
                             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
