1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-05013
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 1, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On February 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline B for Applicant. (Item
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on March 12, 2015, and he
requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 1.)
On September 22, 2015, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant. In the
FORM, Department Counsel offered five documentary exhibits. (Items 1-5.) Applicant
was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation,
extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on November 7, 2015. Applicant
submitted additional evidence, which has been identified and entered into evidence
without objection as Items A, B, and C. The case was assigned to this Administrative
2
Judge on November 10, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel requested in the FORM that I take administrative notice of
certain facts relating to the country of Taiwan that were reviewed in the FORM. The
documents upon which the facts were based have been referred to in the FORM as
source documents I through XIV. A brief summary of the facts administratively noticed
are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the FORM, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact:
Applicant is 74 years old, and a United States born citizen. Applicant has been
married since 1964, and his spouse, who was born in Canada, became a United States
citizen in 1992. Applicant and his wife have one son, who was born in Canada, but is a
United States citizen. He also has a sister, who is a United States citizen. Applicant
received his Bachelor’s, Master’s, and Doctorate degrees from a United States
university. (Item 2.)
Applicant identified himself on his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) as being employed as a Professor of Physics for a United States
university from November 1979 to the present. In his Post-FORM submission, he wrote
that he had retired from his position on June 30, 2014, although he was elected to
emeritus status, and he still maintains an office on campus. (Items 2 and A.)
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
The SOR lists two allegations, (1.a. and 1.b.) regarding Foreign Influence, under
Adjudicative Guideline B, which will be reviewed in the same order as they were listed
on the SOR.
1.a. The SOR states that Applicant maintains contact with an associate who is a
citizen and resident of Taiwan. This associate is employed as the director of a scientific
institute in Taiwan and was a senior official of the Taiwanese Government from 2008 to
2012. (Item 1.)
In his RSOR, Applicant admitted this allegation. He wrote that this associate and
Applicant have had a purely scientific interaction. The associate and Applicant served
together for several years in the Physics department of the United States university,
where Applicant worked for approximately 35 years. During their years working together
they interacted as scientific colleagues in research and teaching programs. The
associate left the university several years ago, and Applicant had no further contact with
3
him until 2012, when the associate proposed that Applicant serve on the review board
of the institute, of which the associate was the director. Applicant asserted in his
statement, “At no time in our entire history have [the associate] and I discussed any
political or social issues; nor did we discuss any of my government of [sic] industrial
research efforts.” (Item 1.)
1.b. The SOR states that in approximately October 2013, Applicant was
requested by the Taiwanese associate addressed in 1.a., above, to serve on an
academic review board at the Taiwanese institute, of which the associate is the director.
Applicant agreed to this request and traveled to Taiwan, where he served as an
advisory committee member in November 2013. (Item 1.)
In his RSOR, Applicant admitted this allegation. He wrote that he had been
encouraged by the Director of the Geophysical Institute of his university to continue his
association with the associate and to serve on the academic review board to promote
cooperation and collaboration in the geosciences between the two institutes. Applicant
further wrote that during his brief visit to Taiwan, November 2 through 7, 2013, he met
each day with the faculty and students of the institute to hear descriptions of their
research and to discuss their goals and progress toward those goals. Again, Applicant
reiterated in his reply, “All of my discussion with the staff and students of the Institute
were of a scientific nature. There were no discussions of political or social issues; nor
were there any discussions of my governmental or industrial research.”(Item 1.)
In his post-FORM statement, Applicant noted that in the FACTS section of the
FORM, no mention was made as to his assertion that during his trip to Taiwan, no
discussion of his research for Government or industry was made with foreign scientists.
(Item A.) Applicant also submitted a letter from his former employer confirming that
Applicant had been employed by the United States university as a Professor in Space
Physics from October 15, 1979, until his retirement on June 30, 2014, when he ceased
to be employed by the university. (Item B.) 
Applicant also submitted a letter from the Director of the Geophysical Institute of
Applicant’s former university. The writendicated that he was employed by the Navy Civil
Service for 30 years, during all of which he maintained a security clearance. (Item C.)
He wrote that Applicant 
is one of our most accomplished faculty and it is inconceivable that he has
ever done, or could ever do, anything to jeopardize the security of the
United States. [Applicant] has distinguished himself with an outstanding
record of research publication and has made numerous significant
contributions to national security in his DoD sponsored research. 
The Director also wrote that “[the associate] was a distinguished full professor at
[the same United States university as Applicant] for 18 years, and he has published
more that 240 refereed papers in scientific journal two thirds of which had U.S. co-
authors. . . . In addition to his professional ties [the associate] and his wife have two
daughters, who are United States citizens, and they are currently living and working in
4
[a city in the United States] both having successfully graduated from American
universities and launched professional careers.” Finally, he described the associate as
an outstanding friend to the United States.
Current Status of Taiwan
I take administrative notice of the following facts regarding Taiwan. Taiwan has
an elected democratic government. It has the 17  largest economy and is a leadingth
producer of high-technology goods. It engages in industrial and economic espionage.
Proprietary information technology is high on the Taiwanese list of targeted information
to be acquired by their agents from foreign governments and businesses. 
There are 23 million Taiwanese citizens. Their per capita income in 2005 was
$15,000, cited by their president in a speech that he presented as economic progress
under his administration. Although the United States now recognizes Taiwan as part of
the People’s Republic of China (PRC) as “one-China,” it continues to maintain strong
unofficial relations with Taiwan.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
5
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding Foreign Influence: 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the
individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is
associated with a risk of terrorism.
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The applicable conditions in this case include: AG ¶ 7(a) “contact with a
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who
is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion.” This is potentially
applicable because Applicant’s contact with the associate, who is a citizen and resident
of Taiwan. 
I find AG ¶ 7(b) “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country
that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect
sensitive information . . . and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or
country by providing that information” also potentially applies in this case.
6
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I find that AG ¶
8(b) “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of loyalty or
obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the
individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that
the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
interest,” is applicable to this Applicant and controlling in this case because of the
following facts: Applicant is a United States born citizen, and his wife, son and sister are
also United States citizens. Applicant received all of his education, including a
doctorate, in the United States. He was employed as a professor at a United States
university from 1979, where he had a long and distinguished career, until he retired in
2014, when he was selected as professor emeritus of the university. The associate of
Applicant, who resides in and is a citizen of Taiwan, lived and worked as a professor for
18 years at a United States university, and  has two daughters, who are United States
citizens and residents. The associate is a respected scientist, who has worked with
many other American scientists for much of his career. Finally, Applicant clearly
asserted that during his entire history with this associate and during his brief trip to
Taiwan, no discussion of his research for Government or industry was ever held. 
 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
  
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on the reasons cited above
as to why mitigating condition AG ¶ 8(b) applies and is controlling under Guideline B, I
find that the record evidence leaves me with no significant questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns
under the whole-person concept. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. and 1.b.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
