 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive).1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-05934
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant did not meet his burden of producing information that mitigates the
security concerns about his past-due or delinquent debts. His request for access to
classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On February 3, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain eligibility for access to classified information,
required in connection with his employment at a defense contractor. After reviewing the
completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could
not determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to have
access to classified information.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included six  exhibits (Items 1 - 6) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case.
2
On April 5, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that
raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).2
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. On
July 17, 2015, Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals
(DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant3
received the FORM on October 29, 2015, and had 30 days from the date of receipt to
object to the admissibility of the Government’s information and to submit additional
information in response to the FORM. Applicant did not respond within the time allotted,
and the record closed on November 28, 2015, The case was assigned to me on April 1,
2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $19,631 for
eight delinquent or past-due accounts (SOR 1.a - 1.h). The debts at SOR 1.a and 1.d -
1.h are for delinquent student loans. The debts at SOR 1.b and 1.c are for delinquent
credit cards. In his Answer, Applicant admitted owing the student loans, but averred he
was making monthly payments on them. He denied the credit card debts, claiming he
had paid them. (FORM, Items 1 and 2) In addition to the facts established by his
admissions to the remaining allegations, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked since April 2005. Since 2001, he has worked as an accountant for various
companies, with a period of unemployment from July 2004 to April 2005. Applicant
holds bachelor’s and master’s degrees earned in 1999 and 2000, respectively. (FORM,
Item 3)
When Applicant submitted his EQIP, he disclosed two credit card accounts that
had become delinquent in 2010 but had been resolved in 2011. He also disclosed he
had obtained credit counseling and a debt consolidation loan. (FORM, Item 3)
A credit bureau report obtained in 2012 showed that Applicant was paying his
student loan accounts as required. It also documented the use of a credit counseling
service. A credit report obtained by DOD in 2014 documented the debts at SOR 1.b and
1.c. Finally, a credit report obtained in April 2015 documented the delinquent student
loan accounts as well as the credit card debts as alleged in the SOR. Applicant did not
submit any information, either in response to the SOR or in response to the FORM, to
support his claims of payment. (FORM, Items 4 - 6)
 Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
3
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls6
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such8
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
4
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Financial Considerations
Available information, including Applicant’s admissions, is sufficient to support
these SOR allegations. Applicant’s denials of SOR 1.b and 1.c left the burden on the
Government to present reliable information in support of those controverted issues of
fact. The credit reports provided with the FORM satisfy that burden. The facts thus
established reasonably raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 18
as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history
of not meeting financial obligations). By contrast, I have considered the following
pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating conditions:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
5
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
AG ¶ 20(c) is supported, in part, by Applicant’s EQIP disclosure of credit
counseling and an entry on the oldest credit report available. However, he did not
provide sufficient detail about that credit counseling for it to have any probative value in
mitigation. Applicant did not present any information that would support application of
any of the other mitigating conditions. His debts must, therefore, be considered as
current, as they have not been paid or otherwise resolved. Applicant did not sufficiently
document his claims that he has paid or is now current on any of the debts alleged.
In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative
factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant did not meet his burden of providing
information that would support any of these factors. Without such information,
unresolved doubts are established about his suitability for access to classified
information. Because protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these
adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
