 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 14-06314 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On April 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On April 22, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision on the 
record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on November 
19, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on December 3, 2015.  Applicant had 30 days 
to submit a response to the FORM. He did not submit a response to the FORM. On 
February 26, 2016, the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me 
on March 24, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, 
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Rulings on Evidence  
 
 Items 5 and 6 of the FORM are portions of the Report of Investigation (ROI) from 
the background investigation of Applicant. They are summaries of Applicant’s Personal 
Subject Interviews conducted as part of his background investigation on September 16, 
2013, and April 30, 2014. They are both unsworn and unauthenticated. DOD Directive 
5220.6, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20 states, “An ROI may be received with an authenticating 
witness provided it is otherwise admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence.” (see 
ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. Bd., February 3, 2014)).  
 
Although Applicant, who is representing himself, has not raised the issue via an 
objection, I am raising it sua sponte because Items 5 and 6 are not properly 
authenticated. While Department Counsel mentions the authentication requirement of  
¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive in Footnote 1 of the FORM without directly citing it, I cannot 
conclude Applicant expressly waived this rule because he did not submit a response to 
the FORM. Waiver means “the voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or 
implied – of a legal right or advantage; the party alleged to have waived a right must 
have had both knowledge of the existing right and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s 
Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner, editor-in-chief, 9th ed., West 2009). In 
accordance with the Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20, Items 5 and 6 are not admissible 
and will not be considered in this decision.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the SOR allegations. (Item 1)    
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to maintain his security 
clearance. He has worked for his current employer since March 2009. His highest level 
of education is a Master’s Degree. He divorced in October 2010 and has one son. (Item 
2)   
 
On August 26, 2013, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). In response to Section 26 – Delinquency Involving 
Routine Accounts, Applicant listed several delinquent accounts. (Item 2, section 26) A 
subsequent background investigation revealed the following delinquent accounts which 
are alleged in the SOR: a $38,178 delinquent student loan account that was placed for 
collection in December 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 3; Item 7 at 2); an automobile account 
that was charged off in the amount of $8,942 in November 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 4 at 
3; Item 7 at 2); a delinquent medical account in the amount of $845 placed for collection 
in July 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 7 at 2); and a $421 television account placed for 
collection in September 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 7 at 2). 
 
Additional delinquent accounts include: a $45 gas bill placed for collection in 
September 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 4 at 12; Item 7 at 2); a $10 electric utility bill placed 
for collection in January 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 4 at 4; Item 7 at 10); an $855 credit card 
account that was placed for collection in March 2009 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 4 at 4); a $775 
 
3 
 
 
cell phone account placed for collection in May 2013 (SOR ¶ 1.h: Item 4 at 12); and a 
$118 pest control account that was placed for collection in June 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.i: Item 4 
at 12).  
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant states that he is currently working with the 
creditor in SOR ¶ 1.b to pay off the debt. He claims that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 
1.e, and 1.f were paid off several years ago. He claims the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g 
was a corporate credit card and his former employer should have paid off the balance  
(Item 1). This debt no longer appears on Applicant’s credit report, dated November 
2014. SOR ¶ 1.g is found for Applicant. Regarding the remaining debts, Applicant did 
not provide any additional documentation to corroborate his assertions, such as 
receipts, bank records, payment agreements, proof of making payments towards a 
payment plan, and evidence of formal disputes. He also did not exercise the opportunity 
to submit additional documents in his response to the FORM.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
encountered financial problems beginning with his divorce in 2010. The SOR alleges 
nine delinquent accounts with a total balance of approximately $50,189. These debts 
are unresolved. Both AG &19(a) and AG &19(c) apply.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
 
5 
 
 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances);  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control);  
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and  
 
AG & 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue). 
 
AG & 20(a) does not apply. Applicant incurred the delinquent accounts alleged in 
the SOR between 2010 to 2014. While Applicant admits each debt, he did not provide 
evidence to show what steps he has taken towards resolving the debts.  Aside from the 
corporate credit card debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g, which is no longer on his credit report, 
the other debts alleged in the SOR remain unresolved. Applicant’s financial issues are 
ongoing.  
 
AG & 20(b) partially applies, because Applicant’s financial problems were 
partially the result of his divorce in 2010. However, Applicant continued to incur 
 
6 
 
 
delinquent accounts for several years after his divorce. For this reason, this mitigating 
condition is given less weight.  
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply because Applicant did not attend financial counseling.  
His delinquent accounts remain unresolved. His financial situation remains uncertain.  
 
AG & 20(d) does not apply, because Applicant did not demonstrate that he made 
a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent accounts.  Aside from saying that certain 
debts are paid or are being paid, Applicant needed to provide proof that he was, in fact, 
resolving his debts.  Proof of payment such as receipts, bank statements, or a printout 
of a payment plan history are among the documents Applicant could have provided to 
show that he was attempting to resolve his delinquent accounts. Applicant did not 
provide additional evidence and did not demonstrate that he was making a good-faith 
effort to resolve his delinquent accounts.  
 
AG & 20(e) does not apply. Applicant claims he paid off the debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.e and 1.f.  He did not provide receipts or proof that the debts were paid. If these 
two debts were paid in full, Applicant could have disputed these entries with the credit 
reporting agencies.  Applicant provided no indication that he attempted to dispute these 
debts with the credit reporting agencies or with the creditor directly. AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts that would mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns. Applicant admits the debts, but has not taken action 
 
7 
 
 
towards attempting to resolve these accounts, such as entering into a repayment 
agreement with each creditor. Applicant did not mitigate the concerns arising from 
financial considerations. 
 
 The determination of an individual’s eligibility for a security clearance is not a 
once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying 
and mitigating to the evidence presented. Under Applicant’s current circumstances, the 
granting of a security clearance is not warranted. In the future, if Applicant takes 
proactive steps towards resolving his delinquent accounts and establishes a track 
record of repayment, he may demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
worthiness.  
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s seven years 
of service with his employer. In the future, he may be able to demonstrate a track record 
of resolving his financial obligations. It is too soon to make that conclusion at this point. 
The security concerns raised under financial considerations are not mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.f, 1.h – 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
  
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
