 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive).1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 14-06543
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant did not carry his burden of producing information that mitigates the
security concerns about his past-due or delinquent debts, and about his personal
conduct. His request for eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On May 6, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for access to classified
information required as part of his employment with a defense contractor. After
reviewing the completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD)
adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information.  On August 8, 2015, DOD issued a1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included six exhibits (Items 1 - 6) proffered in support3
of the Government’s case.
2
Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts that raise security concerns addressed
under Guideline E (Personal Conduct) and Guideline F (Financial Considerations).  2
On September 4, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR and requested a
decision without a hearing. Department Counsel for the Defense Office of Hearings and
Appeals (DOHA) subsequently issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM),  dated3
October 27, 2015, in support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on November
30, 2015, and had 30 days from the date of receipt to submit additional information in
response to the FORM. Applicant did not submit additional information within the time
allotted, and the record closed on December 30, 2015. The case was assigned to me
on April 1, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owed $21,058 for the
three delinquent or past-due accounts listed at SOR 1.a - 1.c. As to SOR 1.c, it was also
alleged that the unpaid debt at issue resulted from Applicant’s deliberate failure to
register his boat so as to avoid paying taxes and registration fees for the boat. This
conduct was also alleged as adverse personal conduct under Guideline E (SOR 2.a).
(FORM, Item 1)
Applicant is 43 years old. He and his wife have been married since June 2011,
and they have one child, born in April 2013. Since April 2005, Applicant has been
employed by various companies in web design and software engineering jobs. He was
unemployed between October 2003 and April 2004, and between January 2014 and
March 2014. (FORM, Items 2 and 6) 
All of the SOR allegations are supported by the documents provided by the
Government. (FORM, Items 1 - 6) In Applicant’s response to the SOR (FORM, Item 1),
Applicant admitted he was responsible for the debts and conduct alleged. 
As to SOR 1.a, this is a debt for a delinquent second mortgage for a rental
property. Applicant averred that he was repaying the delinquency at a monthly rate of
$175 through an agreement with the creditor. However, Applicant did not produce any
information to support his response to this allegation.
The debt alleged at SOR 1.b is for a past-due payment on a car loan obtained in
September 2011. This debt was first reported as past due in April 2014, and is likely
related to Applicant’s period of unemployment that ended the previous month. In
support of his claim that he has paid this debt, Applicant provided a receipt for payment
by credit card on August 18, 2015, of $356 to the creditor listed in SOR 1.b. (FORM,
Items 1, 3, and 4)
 Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
3
The debt and conduct alleged at SOR 1.c and 2.a arose when Applicant bought a
boat in March 2012, but did not register it as required in the state where he lived.
Applicant continued to use and enjoy the boat without proper registration. He admits he
did not register the boat so he would not have to pay property taxes on it. As a result, he
owed the state at least $3,800 in taxes and other costs of registration. In response to
the SOR, Applicant provided documentation showing that the boat was legally
registered and the taxes on it were paid in July 2015. He further claimed that he did not
initially register the boat and pay taxes on it because he had lost his job, and because
his wife’s income had fallen while she was pregnant in late 2012 and early 2013. At the
time Applicant bought the boat in early 2012, he was gainfully employed, and remained
employed for another 21 months. His wife did not become pregnant until about five
months after he bought the boat. (FORM, Items 1 - 6)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
4
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls6
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such8
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The Government met its burden of production in support of the allegations in the
SOR. The facts established herein raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part,
at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); 19(c) (a history of
not meeting financial obligations); and 19(d) (deceptive or illegal financial practices such
as embezzlement, employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account
fraud, filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches of trust).
The Government’s information shows that Applicant has a history of indebtedness,
which continues insofar as SOR 1.a, the largest of the debts alleged, remains
unresolved. It also shows he engaged in deceptive financial practices with respect to his
failure to register his boat. 
By contrast, I also considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating
conditions:
5
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
These mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant’s debts and financial
problems are recent, because they are ongoing and unresolved. Applicant’s claims that
his financial problems were caused by his 2014 unemployment and by his wife’s loss of
income because of pregnancy are not supported by the record. In fact, they are directly
contradicted by the record. Applicant did not present any information regarding financial
counseling or other assistance with his finances, and he did not present any information
regarding the health or management of his personal finances. Although he has paid two
of the debts alleged, his actions were undertaken only after they were delinquent for a
long period of time. As to SOR 1.b, the debt was paid after he received the SOR. These
actions do not constitute good-faith efforts to repay his debts. Finally, his claim that he is
repaying the debt at SOR 1.a is not supported by any corroborating documentation. On
balance, Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns about his finances.
Personal Conduct
The Government’s information about Applicant’s deliberate failure to register his
boat so he would not have to pay taxes and registration fees, and his continued illegal
operation of that boat between March 2012 and July 2015, reasonably raises a security
concern about his judgment, truthfulness, reliability, and trustworthiness. That security
concern is expressed at AG ¶ 15:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
More specifically, this record requires application of the disqualifying condition at
AG ¶ 16(c):
6
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline,
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability,
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard
protected information.
By contrast, the only potentially applicable mitigating condition is at AG ¶ 17(c):
the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment.
I conclude that the record does not support this mitigating condition. Applicant’s
conduct was undertaken deliberately and while he had the means to pay the taxes. His
explanation for his conduct is not credible and only serves to heighten concerns about
his trustworthiness and candor. Applicant’s conduct – his illegal operation of the boat
and disregard for his financial obligations to the state – continued for over three years.
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns under this guideline. 
In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative
factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Nonetheless, Applicant did not carry his
burden of presenting sufficient information to refute the SOR allegations or to mitigate
the security concerns established by the Government’s information. Without such
information, doubts remain about his suitability for access to classified information.
Because protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications,
those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
