1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 14-02451
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 27, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On February 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline E for Applicant. (Item
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG),
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on March 25, 2015, and he
requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 1.)
On September 28, 2015, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. A
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on
October 6, 2015. In the FORM, Department Counsel offered six documentary exhibits.
(Items 1-6.) Applicant was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on November 5, 2015.
Applicant submitted a letter, which has been identified and entered into evidence
without objection as Item A.  The case was assigned to this Administrative Judge on
2
November 10, 2015. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for
access to classified information is granted.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the FORM, and the admitted documents, and upon due
consideration of that evidence, I make the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 61 years old. He is married, and he has one son. Applicant received
a Bachelor of Science degree in 1978. Applicant has been employed as a member of
the Electronics Engineering staff by his current employer, a defense contractor, since
July 1998, and he seeks a DoD security clearance in connection with employment in the
defense sector. (Item 2.) 
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The Government alleges in this paragraph that Applicant is ineligible for
clearance because he engaged in conduct that exhibited questionable judgement,
unreliability, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and untrustworthiness.
The following allegations are cited in the SOR as tending to show that:
1.a.  It is alleged in the SOR that on or about 2009 or 2010, two female co-
workers of Applicant made allegations of sexual harassment against Applicant, and that
he was not aware of these complaints until March 2012. In his RSOR, Applicant
admitted that he “made comments, in person and by Instant Messaging (IM), that were
inappropriate, to one female co-worker.” He stated that this co-worker and he worked
together, and they “got along O.K. initially. At some point our interaction became
strained. After that she did not want to talk to me anymore. I was advised by others to
stay away from her, which I did.” Applicant also wrote, “I was not aware of the
allegations made by the second woman. I was only told, in March 2012, that a second
woman complained about me to HR, but not the nature of the complaint.” (Item 1.)
1.b.  It is alleged in the SOR that from November 2010 to Mach 2012, at various
times, Applicant sent to a third female co-worker IM, Facebook and email massages
that were deemed inappropriate, after this co-worker had requested Applicant to cease
sending her any further electronic messages. In his RSOR, Applicant admitted this
allegation and he wrote, “[The co-worker] and I exchanged IMs starting in fall of 2010.
However, at one point, she put in an IM that she ‘was not a fan of compliments.’ I
stopped paying her compliments until the first two months of 2012, when we started
working together again. I thought the situation was different but I was wrong. I sent her
a number of Facebook messages in January and February of 2012, which led to the
reprimand.” (Item 1.)
1.c.  It is alleged in the SOR that on March 15, 2012, Applicant was issued a
Letter of Reprimand after a company investigation substantiated sexual harassment
allegations by the co-worker discussed in 1.b., above. In his RSOR Applicant wrote, “I
3
received the reprimand in March of 2012 and I was quite surprised. The female co-
worker had been nice and friendly to me in the project meetings. I admit I totally misread
the situation, thinking she wanted to be friends. I should not have sent her the Facebook
messages. Since she did not want to be Facebook friends, she took the messages to be
harassment.”  (Item 1.)
Finally, Applicant wrote, “Since 2012 I have relocated to [a different plant.] I have
learned a great deal from the experiences in 2009 - 2012. I am much more careful with
what I say and do at work now. I work hard at treating all of my fellow co-workers with
the respect they deserve.” (Item 1.) No evidence was introduced to show that there
have been any additional sexual harassment allegations against Applicant since March
2012.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c),
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
4
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline E - Personal Conduct
The Government relies heavily on the honesty and integrity of individuals seeking
access to our nation’s secrets. The Government is concerned if an applicant for a
security clearance engages in conduct that exhibits questionable judgement,
unreliability, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or untrustworthiness.  
In reviewing the disqualifying conditions under Guideline E ¶ 16, I conclude that
Applicant’s contact with his co-workers through email, IM, and Facebook, in such a
manner that he was found to have committed sexual harassment with at least one of his
co-workers, exhibits questionable judgment. However, I am convinced that Applicant
was not aware that his conduct was sexual harassment, and he has averred that since
he became aware, he has attempted not to act in such an egregious manner in the
future. The record before me, which shows no further complaints against Applicant for
sexual harassment since March 2012, indicates that he has been successful in that
attempt. Therefore, I find that mitigating condition ¶ 17(c) is applicable and controlling
because “so much time has passed . . . that it [the behavior] is unlikely to recur and
does not cast doubt on the individual’s [current] reliability . . . or good judgment.”
Therefore, I resolve Guideline E for Applicant.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
5
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the mitigating condition is applicable and controlling under Guideline E,
I find that the record evidence leaves me with no significant questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person
concept. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns
under the whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.c.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
