 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive).1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-02905
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Adrienne M. Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant did not carry his burden of producing information that mitigates the
security concerns about his past-due or delinquent debts. His request for access to
classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On September 5, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for access to classified
information required as part of his employment with a defense contractor. After
reviewing the completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD)
adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included seven exhibits (Items 1 - 7) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case.
2
On November 5, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging
facts that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).  On November 25, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR and2
requested a decision without a hearing. On December 18, 2015, Department Counsel
for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant
Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on January 4,3
2016, and timely submitted additional information in response to the FORM. The record
closed on February 3, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on March 15, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that Applicant owes $21,224 for the
six delinquent or past-due accounts listed at SOR 1.a - 1.f. In his Answer, Applicant
admitted, with explanations, all of the allegations. (FORM, Item 1) In addition to the
facts established by his admissions, I make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked since March 2014. Applicant served in the U.S. Army from November 1979 until
he was honorably discharged in March 1992. Since then, Applicant generally has been
employed by various defense contractors. Applicant was unemployed from August 2012
until January 2013 after the contract a previous employer held was terminated.
Applicant has a good reputation in the workplace, as attested to by his supervisor.
(FORM, Item 2; Response to FORM)
Applicant and his wife have been married since December 1990. He has one son
and two stepchildren, all adults. When Applicant was interviewed about his finances by
a Government investigator in December 2014, he alluded to medical problems his wife
had experienced. He also mentioned that his son had incurred legal fees, but Applicant
did not provide details about either circumstance. (FORM, Items 2 and 3)
Applicant first received a security clearance in July 1980. His clearance was
revoked by the DOD CAF in May 2013 because he failed to respond to a request for
additional information about his finances. In the EQIP he submitted to regain his
clearance, Applicant disclosed the debts listed at SOR 1.a - 1.d and 1.f. All of the debts
alleged in the SOR are further documented in two credit reports obtained by the
Government as part of the investigation and adjudication of this case. Applicant incurred
a tax debt to the IRS for the 2013 tax year (SOR 1.f) because he mistakenly thought his
employer at the time was withholding taxes from his pay. Applicant entered into a
repayment plan with the IRS and has since resolved the debt. (FORM, Items 1 - 5;
Response to FORM)
The other debts alleged in the SOR arose because Applicant allowed himself to
become financially overextended. He cited his wife’s medical problems, his son’s legal
 Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
3
fees, and his five-month period of unemployment as contributing factors. Applicant
claimed that he retained the services of a debt resolution company to negotiate
settlements with his creditors around the time he submitted his EQIP. With his response
to the SOR, Applicant submitted copies of settlement offers from each of the creditors
referenced in SOR 1.a - 1.e. They were sent to him between September 2010 and
October 2014. He did not present information showing he had acted on those offers. In
response to the FORM, Applicant submitted a letter from the aforementioned debt
resolution company stating that he had completed their debt settlement program.
However, he did not provide any pertinent details about the plan, such as which debts
were included in the plan or actual proof of payments. (FORM, Items 1  - 3; Response
to FORM).
Applicant has a good reputation at work. His supervisor, with whom Applicant
has worked in various capacities for about 18 years, trusts Applicant and has observed
him handle classified information properly and with due discretion. (Response to FORM)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
4
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls6
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such8
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The Government met its burden of production in support of the allegations in the
SOR. The facts established herein raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part,
at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history
of not meeting financial obligations). This record presents reasonable security concerns
about a significant amount of unpaid debt and a history of financial problems since at
least 2010.
By contrast, I also have considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating
conditions apply:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
5
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
Applicant’s debts and financial problems are recent, because they are ongoing
and, with exception of his tax debt (SOR 1.f) unresolved. Application of AG 20(d) is
limited to that debt. As to the other five delinquencies at issue, Applicant did not present
much detail about the financial effects of his wife’s medical problems or his son’s legal
issues. Nonetheless, I accept that those factors, along with his period of unemployment,
had an adverse impact on his finances. But mitigation is not available because Applicant
admittedly allowed himself to become financially overextended. He also did not provide
sufficient information to establish that he acted responsibly in the face of his financial
problems. It appears he entered into a debt repayment plan, but he did not show what
debts were resolved through that plan. It also was not established that he received any
financial counseling to help him better manage his finances. Finally, Applicant did not
present information about his current finances that would support a finding that he is
unlikely to again be overextended.
In summary, Applicant was on notice as early as May 2013, when adjudicators
asked him for more information about his finances, that the onus was on him to address
the Government’s concerns about these issues. It may be that the debts alleged here
have been resolved. It was up to Applicant to show that. On balance, Applicant has not
mitigated the security concerns about his finances.
In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative
factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). I have considered Applicant’s Army service
and his supervisor’s high regard for his work and reliability. Nonetheless, Applicant did
not carry his burden of presenting sufficient information to refute the SOR allegations or
to mitigate the security concerns established by the Government’s information. Without
such information, doubts remain about his suitability for access to classified information.
Because protection of the national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications,
those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.
6
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
