 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05793 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
June 15, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had her wages garnished in April 2010 and July 2014; had delinquent 
tax debts in 2010 and 2011; and violated her company’s policy regarding misuse of her 
corporate credit card in 2009. Applicant failed to present sufficient mitigating evidence. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 16, 2015, Applicant submitted a signed Electronic Questionnaires 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP.) On December 30, 2015, the Department of 
Defense issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive 
Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
On January 25, 2016, Applicant answered the SOR (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 15, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on March 16, 2016, scheduling the hearing for April 4, 2016. The hearing was convened 
as scheduled. The Government offered Hearing Exhibit (HE) I and Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 6, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf 
and presented Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through D. Department Counsel had no 
objections to AE A through AE D, and they were admitted. The record was left open for 
receipt of documentation until April 18, 2016. Applicant submitted seven additional 
exhibits, marked AE E through AE K. Department Counsel had no objections to AE E 
through AE K and they were admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on April 12, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 47 years old. She has been employed by a Government contractor 
since 1987, although she was laid-off in 2003 by her employer for an undisclosed period 
of time. She has never married and has one adult daughter. She is enrolled in a 
master’s degree program. (GE 1; GE 3; AE A; AE B; Tr. 49.) 
 
 As listed in the SOR, Applicant is alleged to have had her wages garnished in 
April 2010 and July 2014; had delinquent state tax debts in 2010 and 2011; and to have 
violated her company’s policy regarding misuse of her corporate credit card in 2009. 
Applicant admitted all of the items alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.f. Her debts are 
identified in the credit reports entered into evidence. (Answer; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6.) After 
a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant’s wages were garnished beginning July 2014 for the total amount of 
$11,090.98, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant testified that this debt was related to a 
condo she rented in 2010. She claimed that her initial check to rent this property, in the 
approximate amount of $3,200, was mistakenly “shredded” by the management 
company and that she was requested to issue another check several months after her 
move-in date. However, she had not monitored her account to see if that check had 
cleared and subsequently spent those funds. She was unable to repay this debt and 
was evicted. The management company obtained a judgment against her, and her 
wages were garnished to repay the judgment. This debt was satisfied through the 
garnishment in April 2015 as reflected by Applicant’s most recent credit report and her 
pay stubs. (GE 6; AE I; Tr. 36-39.)  
 
 In November 2011 Applicant was issued a tax levy in the amount of $281 relating 
to unpaid vehicle registration, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. Applicant testified she paid this 
debt, but failed to present documentation to substantiate this claim. (Tr. 51-52.) 
 
As identified in SOR ¶¶ 1.c through 1.e, Applicant’s employer received three 
garnishment orders to satisfy tax levies filed against Applicant, in the amounts of $425, 
$881.26, and $987.65. Applicant testified that she incurred these debts by withdrawing 
 
3 
 
funds prematurely from her 401K savings plan in order to attempt to pay the mortgage 
on a home she purchased in 2006. She purchased the home in 2006 with her former 
fiancé, who lost his business due to the economic downturn in 2007. She claimed that 
she resolved all of these debts. She indicated the smaller debts were paid directly to the 
state, but that the largest debt was resolved through garnishment. She presented 
documentation that appears to show she resolved a “Legal OrdTax [sic] Levy” in 
January 2014, but neither the creditor nor the specific debt are identified. I am unable to 
discern, from the documentation provided by Applicant, the status of each of these 
individual debts. These debts remain unresolved. (AE I; Tr. 27-29, 39-40, 51.) 
 
 In March 2009 Applicant was issued a corrective action memo and received five 
days off without pay due to her violation of her company’s policy regarding misuse of a 
company credit card. Applicant explained that she reserved a rental car using her 
corporate account so that she would get a discount. She had planned to use her 
personal credit card to pay for the vehicle, but when she returned the car, there was 
only a key-drop box and no live attendant. As a result, the rental vehicle was charged to 
her corporate card, which was on file with the rental car agency. (GE 2; Tr. 44-48.) 
 
 Applicant presented documentation that shows she is current on her credit card 
bills. (AE F; AE K.) Her current budget shows that she should have $2,248 left at the 
end of the month after paying on her liabilities.1 (AE G.) However, she testified that she 
has “nothing left” at the end of the month. (Tr. 55.) Applicant has had no formal financial 
counseling. (Tr. 52.) 
 
 Applicant received her company’s 25-year service award in 2014. (AE A.) She 
has good grades in her master’s degree program. (AE B.) Her work performance 
evaluations reflect she does an “outstanding job.” (AE D.) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and 
mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s budget from October 2009 to August 2015 reflected a surplus of only $606 a month. (AE H.) 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes three conditions that could raise security concerns and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
5 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial indebtedness documented by the credit 
reports and incident history reports in evidence. She has not addressed her 
delinquencies, despite allegedly having a surplus of $600 per month from 2010 to 2015. 
Further, her creditors were forced to take legal action against her and seek repayment 
through involuntary garnishment. Additionally, she was also reprimanded by her 
employer for misuse of her company credit card. The evidence raises security concerns 
under the above disqualifying conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to 
rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
 The guideline includes five conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s financial difficulties: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems are recent. Her $11,090 judgment was only 
resolved in 2015, through involuntary garnishment. Further, she failed to present 
sufficient documentation to show the tax liens are resolved. She has not demonstrated 
that future financial problems are unlikely. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a) has not been 
established. 
 
 
6 
 
 Applicant blamed her financial problems on her former fiancé’s business loss and 
the economic downturn in 2007. These may have been a circumstance beyond her 
control. However, she failed to act responsibly under the circumstances, and did not 
address her debts in a timely manner. Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b) has not been fully 
established. 
 
 Applicant provided no evidence of financial counseling. There are no clear 
indications that her financial problems are being resolved or are under control. Her 
history of financial mismanagement, whether it was her misuse of her corporate credit 
card or her failure to resolve tax debts, shows she exercises questionable financial 
judgment. The Appeal Board has held: “On its face, satisfaction of a debt through the 
involuntary establishment of a creditor’s garnishment is not the same as, or similar to, a 
good-faith initiation of repayment by the debtor.”2 Further, her documentation failed to 
support her claim that her tax liens have been fully resolved through garnishment. 
Mitigation under AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) have not been established. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) requires Applicant to provide documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of the dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Applicant has 
not provided any evidence of any formal dispute or a basis for one. Mitigation under AG 
¶ 20(e) has not been established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant has 
                                                          
2 ISCR Case No. 08-06058 at 6 (App. Bd. Sept. 21, 2009). 
 
7 
 
been a dedicated employee, serving her employer for over 25 years. She has a 
reputation for outstanding work. However, she is a mature adult and responsible for her 
choices and financial obligations. Her financial decisions since 2009 reflect that she 
lacks the responsibility, judgment, and trustworthiness required to hold a security 
clearance. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
