 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00061 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 1, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by 
the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered (Answer) the SOR on September 10, 2015, and requested a 
hearing. The case was assigned to me on November 2, 2015. The Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on November 10, 2015, 
setting the hearing for December 10, 2015. The hearing was held as scheduled. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence 
 
2 
 
without objection. I marked Department Counsel’s discovery letter, which included an 
exhibit list as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A 
through J, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was held 
open to allow Applicant to submit additional evidence. She did not submit any further 
evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 23, 2015.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and has worked for government contractors since 2005 
(employed by current contractor-employer since 2009). She has a high school diploma 
and has taken some college courses. She is divorced (since 2008) and has three minor 
children for whom she has custody. She served in the Army Reserve from 1996 to 2005 
and was honorably discharged in the pay grade of E-5. She has held a security 
clearance since becoming a contractor employee and has never had a security 
incident.1  
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant has 15 delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$24,575. The debts were listed on credit reports from January 2013, September 2014, 
and October 2015. Applicant admitted some of the allegations and denied others. The 
admissions will be treated as findings of fact.2  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties came about because of her divorce. Before the 
divorce, both she and her ex-husband contributed to the family obligations. After their 
separation, Applicant’s ex-husband refused to contribute to paying their obligations and 
refused to pay his obligatory child support. Applicant stated that for the six years they 
have been divorced, her ex-husband has only made 13 child support payments. He 
owes approximately $15,000 in back child support. As a consequence of losing her ex-
husband’s income, Applicant was unable to make all of her debt payments. She has 
recently taken action to address her debt situation. The status of the debts is as 
follows:3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a mortgage account ($4,873 past due on total debt of $134,618): 
 
 Applicant’s ability to make her mortgage payments was impacted by her ex-
husband’s refusal to contribute to these payments. She attempted to pursue a short 
sale of the property, but her ex-husband refused to cooperate in the sale. The property 
eventually went through a foreclosure sale and the debt was satisfied. Applicant 
provided documentary proof of the sale with a price above the amount she owed. This 
debt is resolved.4  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5-6, 26-27, 39; GE 1. 
 
2 Answer; GE 2, 4-5. 
 
3 Tr. at 23, 26, 40; Answer. 
 
4 Tr. at 29-30; AE I.  
 
 
3 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b-1.d consumer debts ($6,340; $5,488; $1,132): 
 
 Applicant testified that these three debts were for car payments that her ex-
husband was responsible for pursuant to their divorce settlement. He failed to make the 
required payments. Applicant made contact with the current creditor in order to work out 
a payment arrangement. This debt is being resolved.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e medical debt ($65): 
 
 Applicant attempted to track down this medical debt, but without a creditor’s 
name or full account number she was unable to do so. The debt does not appear on the 
two most recent credit reports. This debt is resolved.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f consumer debt (no amount stated): 
 
 Applicant claims she paid this account, but does not have documentation 
showing such payment. She provided a copy of an August 2015 credit report entry 
showing the charged-off account for $918. She also provided a December 2015 credit 
report (by the same credit reporting service), which no longer contained this account. 
This debt is resolved.7 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h consumer debt (no amounts stated): 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing these two accounts have no past-due 
amounts and both were closed with zero balances. These debts are resolved.8 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.i judgment ($2,417): 
 
 Applicant testified that this debt was paid by payroll deduction and provided 
documentation from the court of record showing that no balance exists. This debt is 
resolved.9 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j consumer debt ($3,459): 
 
 Applicant attempted to track down this debt, without success. She disputed the 
debt with the credit reporting services, which were documented. The most recent credit 
report shows a zero balance and zero past due for this account. This debt is resolved.10 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 31-32; AE A. 
 
6 Tr. at 33; GE 5; AE I. 
 
7 Tr. at 33-34; AE B, J. 
 
8 Tr. at 35; AE J. 
 
9 Tr. at 35-36; AE C.  
 
10 Tr. at 36-37; AE J.  
 
4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k consumer debt ($299): 
 
 Applicant presented documentation showing this account was paid in April 2013. 
This debt is resolved.11 
  
 SOR ¶¶ 1.l-1.n medical debts ($241; $139; $122): 
 
 Applicant testified she paid these three medical accounts, but does not have 
supporting documentation. The accounts do not appear on the two most recent 
Government credit reports. These debts are resolved.12 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.o consumer debt ($103): 
 
 Applicant paid this account in June 2012. This debt is resolved.13 
 
 Applicant is current on her student loan payments and her other monthly 
obligations. She has about $300 of monthly discretionary income once all her 
obligations are paid. She has a 401(K) plan with a balance of about $16,000.14 
 
 Applicant presented the testimony of a former coworker who is aware of 
Applicant’s financial difficulties related to her divorce. The witness also related her 
knowledge that Applicant has made strides toward resolving her financial issues. She 
recommends that Applicant retain her security clearance. Applicant also presented 
three reference letters from coworkers who all attested to her trustworthiness, 
dedication, honesty, and integrity.15 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
11 Tr. at 38; AE D.  
 
12 Tr. at 38; GE 4-5.  
 
13 Tr. at 39; AE E. 
 
14 Tr. at 42-43, 50. 
 
15 Tr. at 21-24; AE F-H. 
 
 
5 
 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
6 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant had multiple delinquent debts that she failed to pay over an extended 
period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise both disqualifying conditions stated in 
AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
  Several financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The delinquent debts attributed to Applicant are somewhat remote, but still owed 
nonetheless. She was relieved of the mortgage debt when the property sold above the 
amount she owed at a foreclosure sale. She has paid all the delinquent debts for which 
she could track down. Since she has made a concerted effort to repair her financial 
position, it is reasonable to conclude that these types of debts will not recur, nor do they 
cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) 
partially applies.  
 
The circumstances of her divorce, where her ex-husband fails to pay child 
support and failed to honor his obligations under the divorce settlement, were conditions 
beyond her control. She acted responsibly by attempting to short sell her house before it 
 
7 
 
was foreclosed, paying several creditors, and by trying to locate other creditors, some 
without success. She also continued to pay her student loan debt. AG ¶ 20(b) applies. 
 
 There is no evidence Applicant received credit counseling. She made a good-
faith effort to resolve the debts by either paying them or attempting to track down the 
current creditors. AG ¶ 20(c) and ¶ 20(d) partially apply. She also successfully disputed 
one debt, with supporting documentation (SOR¶ 1.j), therefore, AG ¶ 20(e) also applies 
in part. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s military and federal contractor service. I found Applicant 
to be honest and candid about the circumstances that led to her debts. She took action 
to resolve them. I find it unlikely that Applicant will be in a similar future situation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
    
 
 
________________________ 
 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
