 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-03302 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andre M. Gregorian, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
August 29, 2012. On November 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 30, 2015, and included a letter of 
explanation. He elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting documents, known as the File 
 
2 
 
of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel on January 29, 
2016.   
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections to the proposed evidence, and submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on February 
21, 2016, and submitted an undated letter in response, marked as Applicant Exhibit 
(AE) A. He did not assert any objections to the Government’s evidence. The case was 
assigned to me on May 3, 2016. The Government’s exhibits included in the FORM 
(Items 1 to 6) and AE A, are admitted into evidence. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges eight delinquent debts, totaling approximately $44,436, 
including, charged-off accounts, collection accounts, and a past-due mortgage.  
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.d-1.h. The evidence 
submitted with the FORM substantiates the SOR allegations. 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old and employed by a defense contractor since 2010. He 
has held a security clearance in the past. He was married in 1999 and divorced in 2008. 
He served on active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from 1995 to 2005, and was 
honorably discharged. He currently works overseas as part of his civilian employment. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a delinquent mortgage account that is past due in the amount 
of $21,675 with a total amount owed of $291,018. Applicant noted in his Answer to the 
SOR that he was on a payment plan and intended to apply excess cash to the account 
and pay it off in six months. In his response to the FORM, he deleted the payment plan 
language, and stated that he never received the excess cash he was hoping for. He 
stated he was not successful in refinancing the account and intends to “force the sale” 
and cut ties to his ex-wife financially. No documentation regarding the current status of 
this account has been provided. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b alleges a delinquent education loan in the approximate amount of 
$16,694. In his Answer, Applicant noted that he had negotiated a pay-off amount for 
less than the amount owed, but that he had to further investigate the status of the 
account. In his response to the FORM, he claimed that the loan was paid in January 
2016, but he did not provide documentary evidence in corroboration. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a delinquent cable service debt. Applicant claimed in his 
Answer that his girlfriend researched the bill and determined it was legitimate, and that it 
would be paid in the “next check.” In his response to the FORM, he claimed his 
girlfriend set up a payment plan, but he did not provide documentary evidence in 
corroboration. 
 
 
 
3 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d alleges a small medical debt that Applicant intended to verify. No 
further information was provided regarding this debt. SOR ¶¶ 1.e-1.h allege various 
consumer debts. Applicant stated in his Answer that they did not appear on his credit 
report and therefore denied the allegations. No further information was provided 
regarding these debts. 
 
Applicant noted his 20 years of service to the United States Government through 
military and civilian service, including service in the Pentagon during 9/11. He also 
discussed a string of bad circumstances, including his divorce, difficulties with his 
girlfriend’s health and personal situation, his job loss when his company lost a 
government contract, and that he is earning less than he did in the past. He noted his 
hope of a new contract and pay raise, and efforts taken to reduce his living expenses. 
 
No additional information was provided to show Applicant’s current financial 
status or efforts to resolve the debts listed in the SOR. Additionally, there is no evidence 
of credit counseling or budget information. He failed to provide any corroborating 
evidence to show he is paying and/or addressing his delinquent debts. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.1  In Department of Navy v. Egan,2 the Supreme Court stated that the burden 
of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.3 
                                                     
1 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan.27, 1995). 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.4 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to sensitive and classified information. Decisions include, by 
necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard sensitive or classified information. Such decisions entail a 
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of 
compromise of sensitive or classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                           
2 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance). 
 
3 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
4 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
5 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19.  The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and, 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 Applicant has unresolved delinquent debts resulting from several personal and 
financial difficulties, including a divorce and loss of income. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue: and 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.5 
 
  None of the mitigating conditions are fully applicable. Applicant has been working 
full time with his current employer since 2010. Although he has alluded to financial 
difficulties arising from his divorce and other difficult situations that give rise to 
conditions that are largely beyond his control, he did not provide evidence that he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. There is no documentary evidence to show what 
efforts were taken to address his debts including payment, disputing or other 
                                                     
5 AG ¶ 20 (f) is not applicable. 
 
6 
 
responsible resolution of the debts. Additionally, there is no evidence to show his 
current financial status in order to evaluate the likelihood of financial responsibility going 
forward, and Applicant has not sought credit counseling or other financial assistance. 
 
  There is insufficient evidence to determine that Applicant’s financial obligations 
have been or will be resolved. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable 
to find that he acted responsibly under the circumstances or that he made a good-faith 
effort to resolve his debts. The totality of the unresolved delinquent debts leaves me 
with doubts about Applicant’s overall financial condition and ability or willingness to 
address his financial responsibilities. They continue to cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated Applicant’s Answer and my 
findings of fact and comments under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Gregg A. Cervi 
Administrative Judge 
