 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-00947 
 ) 
Applicant for a Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Benjamin R. Dorsey, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
public trust position to work in the defense industry. Applicant’s financial problems were 
caused by events beyond her control and she has acted responsibly in light of her 
circumstances.  Accordingly, her eligibility to occupy a positon of trust is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 3, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under the financial considerations 
guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant or continue Applicant’s access to sensitive 
information and recommended that the case be submitted to an administrative judge for 
a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust 
position. 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive). The Adjudicative Guidelines for 
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department 
on September 1, 2006, apply to this case. The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on September 24, 2015. A complete copy of the 
file of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive were provided to Applicant. She 
received the FORM on October 23, 2015, and provided a response. The case was 
assigned to me on February 17, 2016. The documents appended to the FORM are 
admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, and the documents provided by 
Applicant are admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C. All documents are 
admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 28, has worked for a federal contractor since August 2014. Her 
position requires access to personally identifiable information (PII), and requires her to 
obtain eligibility to occupy a public trust position. Based on the disclosures in her 
September 2014 eligibility application, and information discovered during her 
background investigation, the SOR alleges that Applicant owes $7,100 in delinquent 
student loans and $6,200 in other delinquent debt.3 
 
Applicant admits owing the student loan debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.c. 
In 2014 and 2015, the Department of Education (ED) intercepted her federal income tax 
refunds, totaling $14,570, and applied them to her outstanding account balances. This 
appears to have resolved her student loan accounts. According to the most recent credit 
report in the record, dated July 2015, Applicant’s student loan balances are $136. In 
December 2015, Applicant filed a hardship claim with the ED; however, the status of the 
claim is unknown. Applicant also admits owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.i 
through 1.j; however, she has not made any payments towards these accounts.4   
 
Applicant denies owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.g, and 1.h., claiming 
to have no knowledge of the accounts. Applicant did not provide any evidence to 
indicate that she has challenged the debts with the reported creditors or with the credit 
reporting agencies. Applicant also denies the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.k. She 
claims that the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f was the result of identity theft. She also claims 
to have hired a company to dispute the debt in SOR ¶ 1.k. Applicant did not provide any 
documentation to corroborate either of these claims.5 
  
Applicant’s financial problems were caused, in-part, by her history of low-paying 
jobs. Until May 2011, Applicant worked as a stay-at-home mother. She began working a 
part-time retail position in May 2011. Applicant worked this part-time position for 1.5 
years before she was able to secure a second part-time position as a nursing assistant. 
Applicant worked the two part-time jobs until at least May 2013, when scheduling 
                                                          
2 GE 2. 
 
3 GE 3, 5-6. 
 
4 GE 2, 6; AE A.  
 
5 AE A-C.  
 
 
3 
 
conflicts between the two jobs caused her to quit the nursing assistant position. In May 
2013, Applicant found full-time employment as a nursing assistant. She worked the full-
time position and the part-time retail job until February 2014, when she was fired from 
the nursing assistant position after her certification lapsed. After losing her full-time job, 
Applicant continued to work the part-time retail position. In August 2014, she began 
working her current job. She continues to work her part-time job. Applicant’s financial 
problems were exacerbated by her on ongoing estrangement from her husband. The 
couple married in June 2010 and separated in July 2012. Applicant does not receive 
child support from her husband. She struggles to support her two children, ages 5 and 
10, on her income alone. 6  
 
The debts alleged in the SOR became delinquent between 2008 and 2012. She 
has not incurred any additional delinquent debt or opened any new consumer credit 
accounts since starting her current job. Applicant believes that with her current income, 
she finally has the means to start repaying her remaining delinquent debts.7  
 
Policies 
 
 Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”8 
“The standard that must be met for . . . assignment to sensitive duties, is that, based on 
all available information, the person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such 
that . . . assigning the person to sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of 
national security.”9 Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to 
the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access 
determination may be made.10 An administrative judge’s objective is a fair, impartial, 
and commonsense decision that embraces all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to a public trust position enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
6 GE 4. 
 
7 GE 4. 
 
8 DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation) ¶¶ 
C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. 
 
9 Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1. 
 
10 See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1. 
 
 
4 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”11  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant owes $13,300 in delinquent debt, including 
$7,100 in student loans. The alleged debts are supported by the credit reports in the 
record, establishing a prima facie case that Applicant has a history of not meeting her 
financial obligations and that she has demonstrated an inability to do so.12 Applicant’s 
financial problems were caused by events beyond her control: a series of low-paying 
jobs; her 2012 separation from her husband; and, his failure to pay child support. She 
has acted responsibly given her circumstances. Since 2011, she has consistently 
worked two jobs when possible. She has not incurred any delinquent debt or opened 
any new consumer credit accounts since beginning her current position. Applicant 
appears to be living within her means. With her student loans resolved, Applicant will 
have the ability to resolve her remaining $6,200 in delinquent accounts.  
 
Based on the record, I have no doubts about Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a 
position of trust. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole-person factors at 
AG ¶ 2. Applicant’s delinquent debts are not indicative of reckless or irresponsible 
behavior. Nor is the delinquent debt and indication that Applicant is incapable of 
handling, protecting, or sensitive information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:    For Applicant 
 
                                                          
11  AG ¶ 18. 
 
12 AG ¶¶ 19(a) and (c). 
 
 
5 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented, it is clearly consistent with the 
interests of national security to grant Applicant access to sensitive information. 
Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a position of trust is granted. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
