 
1 
 
 
                                  `                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: 
  
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02705 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela C. Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant provided adequate documentation to mitigate security concerns for 
financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 5, 2011, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on October 14, 2014. 
(Item 6) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
October 3, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
 
2 
 
 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 
2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 28, 2015. She did not respond with an 
admission or denial to each of the five financial allegations. However, she provided 
documents to establish that she paid the SOR debts. I considered her response to be a 
denial of the debts. She alleges that there are no delinquent debts since the debts have 
been paid. She elected to have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 1) 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on January 15, 2016. 
Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on January 19, 2016, 
and was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant filed a timely reply to the 
FORM. (Item 7, undated) I was assigned the case on May 5, 2016.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview with an OPM agent (Item 6) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over her objection. She was further advised that she could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
she could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a 
Government witness. She was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the 
summary, the Administrative Judge could determine that she waived any objection to 
the admissibility of the Personnel Subject Interview summary. Applicant did not respond 
to the FORM, so she waived any objection to the admissibility of the Personal Subject 
Interview summary. I will consider information in the Personal Subject Interview in my 
decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 50 years old. She is a high school graduate and has completed a 
technical school certification course in property book and supply management. She has 
been employed in the middle east for a defense contractor as a postal clerk since 
January 2010. Prior to that employment, she worked various jobs with defense 
contractors both in the United States and overseas. She worked in Iraq for a defense 
contractor as a supply technician from August 2007 until April 2008. Her first marriage 
ended in divorce. She married again in February 2007 and divorced in November 2011. 
She has two children of her own and two stepchildren. She is not required to pay any 
child support. (Item 2, e-QIP, dated February 5, 2011; Item 6, Personal Subject 
Interview, dated October 14, 2014)  
 
The SOR lists and credit reports (Item 3, dated February 8, 2011; Item 4, dated 
September 26, 2014; and Item 5, dated September 30, 2015) confirm the following 
 
3 
 
 
delinquent debts for Applicant: a state tax lien entered January 2011 for $1,599 (SOR 
1.a); a different state tax lien entered February 2010 for $5,096 (SOR 1.b); a telephone 
debt in collection for $13,679 (SOR 1.c); a medical debt for $350 (SOR 1.d); and a 
telephone debt in collection for $598 (SOR 1.e). The total amount of the delinquent debt 
is approximately $21,322.  
 
Applicant did not list any financial issues on her e-QIP. The OPM security 
investigator in the Personal Subject Interview did not question her extensively about the 
status of her finances. He only inquired into a federal tax lien filed in September 2010 
for $6,033 that was listed on her credit reports. Applicant stated that she started to pay 
the 2009 federal tax debt but lost employment and did not have the financial resources 
to pay the taxes. Applicant started working again in early 2010. She filed her 2010 
federal tax return, and the 2009 tax debt was taken from her 2010 tax refund. The 
federal tax lien has been satisfied. Applicant told the OPM security investigator that she 
had no other financial issues and her debts were current and paid on time. (Item 6, 
Personal Subject Interview, dated February 5, 2011 at 3-4).  
 
Applicant’s response to the SOR included documents showing payment of the 
debts raised in the SOR. She included documents that showed she paid the two state 
tax liens, the $350 medical debt, and the $598 telephone debt. Applicant established 
that she settled the $13,679 telephone debt for $4,000. This telephone bill was incurred 
by both Applicant and her former husband when they both served overseas and were 
placing calls to the United States. Applicant’s response to the SOR shows that she 
made an initial payment of $1,895 towards the settlement and then three monthly 
payments of $702 each. Her response to the SOR shows that she resolved all of her 
share of the delinquent debts. 
 
Department Counsel in the FORM points out that Applicant did not explain why 
she had unpaid bills, whether she was aware of the debts, and why she waited until the 
SOR was issued to make an effort to pay the debts. Department Counsel argued that 
the evidence shows poor judgment by Applicant in ignoring her financial responsibilities 
for a long period of time.  
 
In her response to the FORM, Applicant stated that in 2008 and 2009, she and 
her husband had difficulty finding employment. They found employment overseas at 
different locations in January 2010. After going overseas, her husband was unfaithful 
and she filed for divorce. The legal fees for her divorce cost her over $20,000.  
 
When Applicant completed her e-QIP, she did not know what debts she had 
since her husband managed all of their finances. She learned of the debts after the 
divorce during the security clearance process. After her divorce, she intended to pay the 
debts but she had to assist family members with financial problems. Her mother has 
loaned her some funds that enabled her to pay the state tax liens, settled the large 
telephone debt, and paid the other two smaller debts. The telephone company holding 
the large telephone debt would not provide her with a statement concerning the 
settlement agreement. Applicant provided the telephone company information 
 
4 
 
 
concerning her former husband so they could have him pay his part of the telephone 
bill. (Item 7, Statement, dated March 18, 2016) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage finances in such a way as to meet financial 
obligations.  
 
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant’s credit reports show a history of 
delinquent debts. She denied these debts and presented documents to show the debts 
had been paid. The credit reports and Applicant’s action showing the debts are now 
paid is sufficient evidence to raise security concerns under Financial Considerations 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and AG 
¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). The evidence indicates an 
inability and not an unwillingness to satisfy debt.  
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts.  
 
Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 20(a), (b), and (d) apply. Applicant incurred 
delinquent debt when she was unemployed. Although unemployed, she acted 
reasonably under the circumstance by continuing to seek employment, even 
employment with a defense contractor in the middle east. She was not aware of the 
debts because her former husband managed their finances. She only became aware of 
the debts when confronted with them during the security clearance process.  
 
Applicant established her good-faith initiative to pay his debts. For a good-faith 
effort, there must be an ability to repay the debts, the desire to repay, and evidence of a 
good-faith effort to repay. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation.  
 
Applicant has established her plan to pay the debts and showed a meaningful 
track record of debt payment. She borrowed money from her mother and presented 
supporting information that she has paid all of the delinquent debt listed in the SOR. By 
paying and being current with her debts, Applicant has shown that she acted with 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and an adherence to duty and obligation towards 
her finances. Applicant has shown that she is managing her personal financial 
obligations reasonably and responsibly, and her financial problems are behind her. 
There is ample evidence of responsible behavior, good judgment, and reliability. Based 
on all of the financial information, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated security 
concerns based on financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 
7 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant incurred delinquent debt 
due to some unemployment, which was a condition beyond her control. She presented 
evidence that she paid all of her delinquent debts listed in the SOR. Applicant presented 
sufficient information to establish that she acted reasonably and responsibly towards 
her finances, and that she will continue to responsibly manage her financial obligations. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated security 
concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
