 Exhibit 3.  1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------------------------------ ) ADP Case No. 15-00260
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny him eligibility for a
public trust position. He did not present sufficient evidence to explain and mitigate the
concern stemming from his problematic financial history, which is unresolved and
ongoing. With that said, he did not deliberately omit relevant information about his
financial problems when he completed a 2013 security questionnaire. Accordingly, this
case is decided against Applicant.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and submitted a Questionnaire for National Security
Positions (SF 86 Format) on October 30, 2013.  About two years later on August 31,1
2015, after reviewing the questionnaire and information gathered during a background
investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent Applicant a statement of reasons
(SOR) detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F for financial considerations
 The SOR was issued by the DOD Consolidated Adjudications Facility, Fort Meade, Maryland. It is a separate2
and distinct organization from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals, which is part of the Defense Legal
Services Agency, with headquarters in Arlington, Virginia. 
 The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG3
replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 The file of relevant material consists of Department Counsel’s written brief and supporting documents, some4
of which are identified as evidentiary exhibits in this decision. 
 See Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner ed., 9  ed., W est 2009), for a definition of waiver. 5 th
2
and Guideline E for personal conduct.  The action was taken under Department of2
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Review Program (Jan.
2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of Defense Regulation 5200.2-R,
Personnel Security Program (Jan. 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG)  implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006.3
Applicant replied to the SOR on October 16, 2015.  
Neither Applicant nor Department Counsel requested a hearing, and so the case
will be decided on the written record. On January 30, 2016, Department Counsel
submitted all relevant and material information that could be adduced at a hearing.  The4
file of relevant material (FORM) was mailed to Applicant, who received it on February
11, 2016. He has not replied to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on May 24,
2016. 
Ruling on Evidence
Department Counsel’s FORM includes Exhibit 5, which is a report of investigation
(ROI) summarizing Applicant’s interview that took place during the December 2013
background investigation. The summary, Exhibit 5, is not authenticated as required
under ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive. Department Counsel’s written brief includes a footnote
advising Applicant that the summary was not authenticated and that failure to object
may constitute a waiver of the authentication requirement. Nevertheless, a pro se
applicant’s failure to respond to the FORM does not equate to a knowing and voluntary
waiver of the authentication requirement.  The written record does not demonstrate that5
Applicant understood the concepts of authentication, waiver, and admissibility. It also
does not establish that he understood the implications of waiving an objection to the
admissibility of the ROI. Accordingly, Exhibit 5 is inadmissible and I have not considered
the information in the ROI.  
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 41-year-old help-desk analyst for a health-care contractor to the
Defense Department. He has worked for his current employer since 2013. His
employment history includes two periods of unemployment, the first from November
 Exhibit 3. 6
 Exhibits 4, 6, and 7.   7
 AG ¶¶ 15, 16, and 17 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 8
3
2011 to May 2012, and the second from May 2013 to July 2013.  His educational6
background includes a high school diploma. He has been married and divorced twice.
He has no children. He is seeking to obtain eligibility to occupy a position of public trust
for his current job responsibilities. Eligibility is necessary because his job involves
access to sensitive but unclassified information. The information is sensitive because it
often contains personally identifiable information, commonly referred to as PII. 
The SOR allegations consist of 32 delinquent accounts for a total of about
$65,200. Twenty-three of those accounts are medical collection accounts for about
$56,000. Nine accounts are charged-off or collection accounts for about $9,000. 
The SOR allegations are established by credit reports from 2013, 2014, and
2015.  In his answer to the SOR, he noted that most of the delinquent accounts were for7
medical bills due to injury and a period of hospitalization when he was unemployed and
had no income. He explained that he tried to obtain government assistance, but was
denied. He noted the other delinquent accounts were old. Both in reply to the SOR and
the FORM, he did not submit documentation showing that any of the 32 delinquent
debts were paid, settled, in a payment plan, disputed, cancelled, forgiven, or otherwise
resolved.  
In Section 26 of his 2013 security questionnaire, Applicant did not disclose any of
the delinquent debts in response to the relevant questions. In his answer to the SOR, he
explained that because he completed the questionnaire nearly two years ago, he did not
recall why he failed to report his negative credit history. He further stated that he was
surprised when he learned he had answered the relevant questions in the negative
when those answers were clearly wrong. He stated it would not make sense to do so
when he knew a credit report would be reviewed during the background investigation.
He denied any intention to lie or deceive, and he attributed his incorrect answers to an
honest mistake. 
Discussion
Personal conduct under Guideline E  is a concern because it asks the central8
question if a person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to
properly handle and safeguard sensitive information. The suitability of an applicant may
be questioned or put into doubt when an applicant engages in conduct involving
questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with the
rules and regulations. Of special interest is any failure by an applicant to provide truthful
and candid answers during the process or a failure to cooperate with the process. 
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 9
 ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an applicant10
is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness or recurring
financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted); and see ISCR Case No. 07-09966 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2008) (In
security clearance cases, “the federal government is entitled to consider the facts and circumstances
surrounding an applicant’s conduct in incurring and failing to satisfy the debt in a timely manner.”) (citation
omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  11
4
Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of a material fact in any written
document or oral statement in official governmental matters is a concern. Deliberate
means knowingly and willfully. In other words, the omission, concealment, or
falsification must be done consciously and intentionally. An omission of relevant and
material information, for example, is not deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about
the matter, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, thought the
information did not need to be reported, or otherwise made an honest mistake.  
Applicant is denying the falsification allegation in SOR ¶ 2.a, which alleged that
he deliberately failed to report his numerous delinquent accounts in his 2013 security
questionnaire. He explained, in reply to the SOR, that he did not recall why he
completed the questionnaire as he did, and he attributed his incorrect answers to an
honest mistake. His explanation is not fanciful, disingenuous, or incredible on its face. I
conclude his omission was not deliberate. Accordingly, the falsification allegation is
decided for Applicant. 
    
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant may9
be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern is: 10
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect [sensitive] information.  11
The concern is broader than the possibility that a person might knowingly
compromise sensitive information to obtain money or something else of value. It
encompasses concerns about a person’s self-control, judgment, and other important
qualities. A person who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive information.    
 AG ¶ 19(a) and (c). 12
 AG ¶ 20(a)–(f).13
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).14
5
The written record supports a conclusion that Applicant has a problematic
financial history within the meaning of Guideline F.  I have also considered six12
mitigating conditions under Guideline F,  and the following are most pertinent:13
AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the [person’s] current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; and 
AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or death, divorce, or
separation), and the [person] acted responsibly under the circumstances.  
I am persuaded that Applicant experienced financial problems due to a
combination of unemployment and uninsured medical expenses. The vast majority of
the delinquent accounts in the SOR are medical collection accounts. Those matters
receive less weight in my analysis because the debts were incurred for necessary
medical care and treatment. The debts were not incurred due to frivolous or
irresponsible spending, consistent spending beyond one’s means, or financial problems
linked to drug abuse, alcoholism, gambling, or other issues of concern. Accordingly, the
concern stemming from the medical collection accounts is decided for Applicant.
Nevertheless, the nine charged-off or collection accounts for about $9,000 are
wholly unresolved. Applicant has provided no documentation for those debts, and it
appears he has made no effort to resolve them. Likewise, he did not submit
documentation establishing a reasonable plan to resolve the debts in the foreseeable
future. Accordingly, the concern stemming from the charged-off or collection accounts is
decided against Applicant.  
Because Applicant chose to have his case decided on the written record, I am
unable to evaluate his demeanor or sincerity. He also chose not to respond to the
FORM with relevant and material facts about his circumstances, which may have
helped to rebut, extenuate, mitigate, or explain the concern.
The concern over Applicant’s problematic financial history creates doubt about
his current reliability, trustworthiness, good judgment, and ability to protect sensitive
information. In reaching this conclusion, I weighed the evidence as a whole and
considered if the favorable evidence outweighed the unfavorable evidence or vice
versa. I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I conclude14
6
that he did not meet his ultimate burden of persuasion to show that it is clearly
consistent with the interests of national security to grant him eligibility for access to
sensitive information.   
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b–1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.f–1.h: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.j–1.o: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.p: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.q–1.aa: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.bb–1.ff: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the interests of
national security to grant Applicant eligibility for access to sensitive information. 
        
  
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
