1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 15-00894
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Charles Hale, Esq., Department Counsel
Nicole Smith, Esq.,  Department Counsel
For Applicant: Eric Eisen, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
 
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant mitigated the drug involvement and personal conduct security
concerns. Clearance is granted.
Statement of the Case
On August 18, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications
Facility (DOD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security
concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement, and Guideline E, personal conduct. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by
the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant answered the SOR on September 17, 2015, admitting subparagraph
1.b, and denying subparagraphs 1.a and 2.a. He requested a hearing, and the case was
assigned to me on March 3, 2016. On March 8, 2016, a notice of hearing was issued
scheduling the case for March 30, 2016. The hearing was conducted as scheduled. I
received five Government exhibits (GE 1-5), three Applicant exhibits (AE A-E), and I
considered Applicant’s testimony. Also, I took administrative notice of the information
set forth in four documents, identified as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I through IV. The
transcript was received on April 7, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 45-year-old single man. He graduated from college in 1993. While
in college, he was a member of the U.S. Army Reserve Officer Training Corps. After
finishing college, he served in the U.S. Army Reserves through 2010, when he was
honorably discharged. (Tr. 70)
Applicant is an information technology consultant. Since 1995, he has owned a
consulting business. Currently, his company has three employees. Applicant also co-
owns a real estate business with his parents. (AE B at 4)
Applicant is highly respected by both his clients and his employees. According to
one client, the president of a non-profit company, Applicant performed his consultant
work effectively and concisely. Moreover, recognizing the non-profit company’s limited
financial means, he has demonstrated a “generosity of . . . spirit” by providing free
follow-up services over the years. (AE B at 2) One of Applicant’s employees
characterizes him as a patient mentor with an unimpeachable work ethic who is
dedicated to helping his employees reach their full potential. (AE B at 3)
Applicant has attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and occasional
problems sleeping. (AE A) His doctor, with whom he has received treatment since 2008,
has been prescribing him sleeping medications since 2010. (AE A) He never took the
medicine daily, preferring instead, to manage his insomnia with herbal teas. (Tr. 22)
Between October 2013 and December 2014, Applicant experienced a particularly
intense period during his career when he was travelling frequently, while also balancing
the responsibilities of his consulting business and his real estate business. During this
period, he took Ambien, prescribed by his doctor, approximately five times per month.
(GE 3 at 2; AE A, Tr. 31) There is conflicting record whether he filled the Ambien
prescription from his doctor, or used Ambien prescribed to his domestic partner.
(Compare AE A, GE 1 at 34, and Tr. 31)
ADHD is a malady that is typically more common in children than adults.
Because Applicant’s symptoms did not manifest themselves until he was an adult, his
doctors initially misdiagnosed him, prescribing him with “a bevy of drugs” before making
the ADHD diagnosis. (Tr. 63) In 2008, Applicant’s doctor prescribed Applicant with the
ADHD medication Adderall. (Tr. 63). Like many other ADHD medications, Adderall has
many potentially dangerous side effects, including agitation, insomnia, and changes in
Applicant’s doctor was aware of Applicant’s ADHD diagnosis and would have prescribed Adderall if Applicant1
had asked him. (AE A)
3
pulse. (GE 6 at 2; HE III) As a person with hypertension, Applicant was particularly wary
of taking Adderall daily. (Tr. 64) Consequently, Applicant stopped taking the Adderall
and opted to attempt to control his ADHD with therapy instead of medication. (Tr. 64)
Despite therapy, Applicant continued to struggle with ADHD symptoms in large
social settings, like parties, and parades. (Tr. 25-26) Such events are overstimulating,
as he receives external inputs “from all over the place,” causing him to become
overcome with anxiety. (Tr. 23, 67) Consequently, he continued to take Adderall
approximately once per year during such social events between 2009 and 2012. (Tr. 24)
During this period, Applicant did not get a prescription for Adderall from his doctor.1
Instead, he used Adderall that had been prescribed to his domestic partner. He chose
not to get a prescription from his doctor because the medication is extremely expensive,
and to the best of his knowledge, prescriptions are only filled in 30-dose increments.  He
opted to use the Adderall prescribed to his partner because he did not use it enough to
justify the expense of filling a prescription for himself. (Tr. 26-27, 62, 65)
Applicant has not used Adderall in this manner since 2012. He recognizes that
such uses raises the issue of whether he was abusing a prescription drug recreationally,
and raises questions regarding his “readiness to follow rules [and] regulations.” (AE C)
In March 2016, Applicant executed an affidavit promising never to engage in the
practice of using drugs prescribed to others in the future, with the understanding that
doing so will result in the automatic revocation of his security clearance. (AE C)
Applicant completed a security clearance application in 2013. (GE 2) He
answered “no” in response to Section 23, which, in part, asked whether he had ever
illegally used, or otherwise misused, any prescription drug. (GE 2 at 31-32) Applicant
completed another security clearance application in 2014. (GE 1) In response to the
same question regarding misuse of prescription drugs, Applicant disclosed his use of
Ambien and Adderall that was prescribed to someone else. (GE 1 at 34) Applicant listed
it on the second application because, upon further thought, he concluded that his use of
his partner’s prescription drugs could be construed as misuse. (Tr. 20-21)   
Approximately five years ago, Applicant inadvertently overbilled a client. An
employee of the client submitted the service invoice, not recognizing the discrepancy.
When Applicant received his payment, he immediately recognized the mistake, notified
his client of the overbilling. Before the client could offer a remedy to satisfy the
overpayment, Applicant credited the entire overpayment, totalling $10,300 to his client.
(AE B at 1) Per the client, if Applicant did not contact her, “this error would have gone
undetected until an annual audit was conducted.” (AE B at 1)  
 
4
Policies
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are
required to be considered in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified
information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
Under this guideline, “. . .  misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair
judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to
comply with laws, rules, and regulations,” (AG ¶ 24) Drug abuse is “the illegal use of a
drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.”
(AG ¶ 24(b))
Applicant’s doctor prescribed Ambien to Applicant during the period that
Applicant was taking it.  There is record evidence that indicates that Applicant may have
opted to use Ambien that was prescribed to his domestic partner, rather than filling his
own prescription. Given the short period that Applicant used this medication, and the
minimal amount that he took it, I conclude that whether or not he filled his doctor’s
prescription for Ambien before taking it has no security significance. 
Conversely, Applicant’s use of Adderall without a prescription triggers the
application of AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse.” Applicant only took Adderall from his
partner’s prescribed supply once per year over a five-year period. His last inappropriate
use of Adderall occurred four years ago. Now, he recognizes the negative security
ramifications of using this medication without his doctor  prescribing it, and he signed an
5
affidavit swearing not to use it again in this manner. The following mitigating conditions
apply:
AG ¶ 20(a), the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; and
AG ¶ 20(b)(4), a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation.
Applicant has mitigated the drug involvement security concern.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.” (AG ¶ 15) Moreover, “of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to
cooperate with the security clearance process.” (Id.) Applicant’s omission of his misuse
of prescription drugs from his 2013 security clearance application raises the question of
whether AG ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities,” applies.
Applicant completed another security clearance application in 2014. He testified
that upon reviewing the same question and considering his response on the previous
application, he concluded that his use of Adderall without a prescription could, in fact,
constitute misuse. Consequently, in an abundance of caution, he listed it. Considering
that this disclosure occurred before his investigative interview, and considering the
extraordinary record evidence of his integrity - returning approximately $10,300 to a
customer that was inadvertently overbilled - I conclude that Applicant’s testimony is
credible, and that he did not intentionally omit the prescription drug information from his
2013 security clearance application. AG ¶ 16(a) does not apply, and there are no
personal conduct security concerns.  
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
6
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Although Applicant used a medication without his doctor’s prescription, it was a
medication that he had been prescribed in the past, and he was using it for its intended
purpose - to treat symptoms associated with ADHD, a malady that he had earlier been
diagnosed. He was not using it for intoxication, to experience euphoria, or to hallucinate.
Although Adderall certainly has potentially hazardous side effects and requires a
prescription because of these side effects, Applicant’s misuse was infrequent, and has
not occurred in four years. Given his credibility, his good character, the minor nature of
the misuse compared to other types of prescription drug misuse, and the amount of time
that has elapsed since the last misuse, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the security
concerns.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
