 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01662 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrea M. Corrales, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Sean M. Bigley, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the drug involvement security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 6, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. The DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 7, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) on December 23, 2015. The FORM 
 
2 
 
 
was mailed to Applicant and he was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He received the FORM on January 6, 
2016. His counsel submitted a brief (marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I) and exhibits 
(AE) A through E in response to the FORM. Applicant’s counsel objected to Item 4 of 
the Government’s offered evidence based upon authentication. I am sustaining that 
objection and have not considered that evidence. The Government’s remaining 
evidence (Item 3) is admitted.1 Applicant’s exhibits are admitted into evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on May 4, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegation in his answer to the SOR. That admission is 
adopted as a finding of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and 
evidence submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. He has never been married and has no children. He 
has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since 1985. He earned a 
bachelor’s degree in 1993. He has never served in the military, but has held a security 
clearance since at least March 2005.2  
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR concerning Guideline H includes 
using marijuana approximately three to four times in December 2013 after being 
granted a security clearance in 2005. He admitted to a substance abuse social worker 
that he used marijuana three times over Christmas vacation while he was home alone. 
He obtained the marijuana from an acquaintance who gave him the marijuana for his 
personal use. He further stated that he used the marijuana because he “was curious to 
see what it was all about.” He tried it the first time and it did not do anything to or for 
him. The second time he smoked it, he found it to be an unpleasant experience. The 
third use was to finish off the amount he was given. He stated the experience was 
unpleasant and he had no intention of smoking marijuana again. He also reported that 
he felt guilty about his use of marijuana and confessed his actions to his priest. He did 
not inform his employer about his marijuana use until he was required to complete a 
security clearance application in June 2014, when he admitted his usage while holding 
a security clearance. Since Applicant chose to have his case decided on the written 
record in lieu of a hearing, I am unable to make a credibility determination of Applicant.3 
  
 Applicant provided a written statement of intent not to use any illegal controlled 
substances in the future. Additionally, he supplied a report from a suitably licensed 
substance abuse social worker. The report contains the social worker’s opinion on 
various topics to include her opinion that Applicant “does not present a threat to 
                                                          
1 Items 1 and 2 are the SOR and Answer and are considered pleadings, not requiring admission. 
 
2 Items 2-3. 
 
3 Item 2; AE D. 
 
 
3 
 
 
National Security or the possession of a Security Clearance.” I give no weight to that 
opinion since it is not within her purview. I do give some weight to her opinion regarding 
whether the Applicant’s use was a one-time event. I also considered the results from the 
drug abuse screening test (DAST), which indicated no abuse, dependence, or 
addiction.4     
 
 Applicant was recognized for his 30 years of employment by his employer. His 
overall performance assessment for 2015 was a “3” (achieves expectations). Four 
coworkers/managers recommend Applicant for a security clearance. They also attest to 
his honesty, reliability, and work ethic.5   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
4 AE D. 
 
5 AE A-B. 
 
 
4 
 
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the drug involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 25 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance. 
 
 Applicant illegally used marijuana three times in December 2013 while 
possessing a security clearance. I find that the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under drug involvement AG ¶ 26 and found the following relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
5 
 
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
 Applicant’s admitted marijuana use happened as recently as December 2013. 
His drug use at his age, education level, and security background is troubling and a 
cause for concern. I do not find persuasive his claim of future intention not to use based 
upon his “unpleasant” experience when this so-called unpleasant experience involved 
three separate uses. If it was so unpleasant to him, why did he continue to use it two 
more times? I also find his reason for use—to satisfy his curiosity—demonstrative of 
poor judgment. He is an educated, mature man who has worked for the same defense 
contractor for 30 years and has held a security clearance since 2005. That he was 
willing to jeopardize his career for satisfying his “curiosity” speaks not only to his poor 
judgment, but how easily he was willing to engage in prohibited activity. These 
circumstances lead me to conclude that his actions cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. Applicant receives partial 
credit for completing a statement of intent not to smoke marijuana in the future, but I am 
not persuaded that he will honor his statement given how easily he succumbed to using 
marijuana previously. The social worker’s opinions were not persuasive to me. AG ¶ 
26(b) partially applies. Applicant was evaluated by a licensed clinical social worker, but 
there is no evidence that he participated or completed a prescribed drug treatment 
program. AG ¶ 26(d) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
6 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, including his job performance 
evaluation and his coworker recommendations. Applicant engaged in recent drug use 
that, given his age, education level, and security clearance status, calls into question his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
Subparagraph  1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
