 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01757 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not provided sufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 7, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on September 30, 2014. 
(Item 3) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
October 11, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 13, 2015. He admitted 13 of the 14 
allegations of delinquent debt with explanations. He noted that three debts were paid in 
full, and five additional debts were being paid under payment plans. He did not have 
knowledge of one debt so he denied knowledge of that debt. The remaining debts he 
admitted without explanation. He elected to have the matter decided on the written 
record. (Item 1) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on 
December 30, 2015. Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on 
February 12, 2016, and he was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit 
material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant did not 
respond to the FORM. I was assigned the case on May 5, 2016.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview with an OPM agent (Item 3) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
he could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the summary. Applicant did not respond to the FORM so he did not raise any 
objection to consideration of the information in the Personal Subject Interview. Any 
objection to the information is waived. I will consider information in the Personal Subject 
Interview in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 28 years old. He graduated from high school in 2006 and completed 
a two year certificate course as an automobile technician in 2008. He has not served in 
the military. He has never married and has no children.  He has been employed as a 
security guard since May 2014.  Prior to that, he had periods of employment in retail 
stores, as a laborer, or head mechanic. He also had periods of unemployment from 
March 2010 to October 2010, from December 2008 until January 2009, from April 2007 
until October 2007, and from July 2006 until September 2006. There is no information to 
determine if he received unemployment compensation while unemployed. (Item 2, e-
QIP, dated July 7, 2014; Item 3, Personal Subject Interview, dated September 30, 2014)  
 
The SOR lists, and credit reports (Item 4, dated July 18, 2014, and Item 5, dated 
August 25, 2015) confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: student loans in 
collection for $963 (SOR 1.a), $1,000 (SOR 1.b), $2,625 (SOR 1.c), $3,500 (SOR 1.d), 
 
3 
 
 
$2,252 (SOR 1.e), $3,002 (SOR 1.f), and $858 (SOR 1.g); medical debts in collection 
for $577 (SOR 1.h), $942 (SOR 1.i), $1,296 (SOR 1.j), and $30 (SOR 1.k); a credit card 
debt in collection for $53 (SOR 1.l); an insurance debt in collection for $97 (SOR 1.m); 
and a bank service fee in collection for $180 (SOR 1.n). The amount of the delinquent 
debt is approximately $17,348. 
 
Applicant claims he did not have sufficient funds remaining from his salary after 
paying his normal living expenses to pay delinquent student loans and other debts. He 
also attributes his delinquent debts to periods of unemployment and low paying jobs. 
Applicant informed the OPM investigator that his financial problems started when one of 
the student loan creditors incorrectly garnished his salary to pay for his delinquent 
student loans. 
  
In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated that he had paid three of the debts 
in full. He did not provide documents to substantiate his payments. He stated he is 
paying five of the debts under payment plans. He did not provide any documents to 
verify his payments under the plan. Department Counsel noted Applicant’s failure to 
provide proof of payment in the FORM. Despite this warning, Applicant still did not 
provide any payment information or documents when he did not respond to the FORM.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
4 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage finances in such a way as to meet financial 
obligations.  
  
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant has a history of delinquent debts 
as documented in his credit reports, by his admissions to the OPM investigator, and his 
response to the allegations in the SOR. The one debt Applicant denied is listed as 
delinquent on the credit reports. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns 
under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The information raises both an inability and an unwillingness to pay 
delinquent debt.  Once the Government has established delinquent debt, the Applicant 
has the responsibility to refute or mitigate those debts. 
 
5 
 
 
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 The mitigating conditions do not apply. Even though Applicant had low paying 
jobs and periods of unemployment, he did not establish that his delinquent debt was 
incurred as a result of these conditions. +3 
+ Applicant claims to have paid or is paying most of his delinquent debts. He did 
not provide any information to establish that he is paying or has paid any delinquent 
debts. He has not shown that he acted reasonably and responsibly to resolve his 
financial problems. The evidence does not support responsible management of his 
finances. His financial problems are not under control. Based on Applicant’s 
acknowledgment of his debts and his failure to verify his stated arrangements to pay his 
debts, it is clear that he has not been reasonable and responsible in regard to his 
finances. His lack of reasonable and responsible action towards his finances is a strong 
indication that he will not protect and safeguard classified information. Applicant did not 
present sufficient information to mitigate security concerns for financial considerations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
6 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
credible documentary information to show that he paid or is paying his delinquent debts. 
He did not establish that he has taken reasonable and responsible action to resolve his 
financial problems. Applicant did not demonstrate appropriate management of his 
finances and a consistent record of action to resolve financial issues. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his suitability for access to 
classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns arising from his financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.n:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
