 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-02163 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
    For Government: Julie Mendez, Esquire 
       For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case 
 
On September 24, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an undated response, Applicant admitted six of the seven allegations raised 
under Guideline F, and failed to address one allegation. He also requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA). I was assigned the case on April 12, 2016. The matter was scheduled on April 
29, 2016, for a May 18, 2016, hearing. The hearing was convened as scheduled.  
 
The Government offered three documents, which were accepted without 
objection as exhibits (Exs.) 1-3. Applicant offered testimony and two items, which were 
accepted without objection as Exs. A-B. The record was held open through May 23, 
2016, in the event the parties wished to submit additional material. The transcript (Tr.) 
 
 
 
 
2 
was received on May 26, 2016. On May 24, 2016, the Government forwarded an 
additional item received from Applicant, a credit report, accepted without objection as 
Ex. C. The record was then closed. After review of the record as a whole, I find that 
Applicant failed to mitigate financial considerations security concerns.  
 
     Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old computer support specialist who has worked in the 
same position for 13 years. He completed high school and earned an associate’s 
degree in computer science. He has worked in the computer field since 1983. Applicant 
is married and has three children, one of whom is married and lives apart from the 
family. At issue is a $57,000 second mortgage as well as several consumer debts 
totaling about $9,600.  
 
 Between 2006 and 2007, Applicant first encountered financial difficulties when he 
found himself overextended on the mortgages to a new home he purchased. That 
house ultimately went into foreclosure in 2008. Following this event, other debts were 
acquired. There is no documentary evidence reflecting any efforts to address his 
obligations during this time. Then, in or before 2014, his salary was reduced from about 
$70,000 to $40,000. His approximately $1,400 net monthly income is supplemented by 
his wife’s income as a teacher’s assistant, although her income is unknown.  
 
 Applicant was recently tentatively approved for a new home loan, with hopes to 
move from their $1,500 a month apartment rental by the end of June 2016 when their 
current lease expires. A local lender told him that if he satisfied about $7,500 in 
delinquent debts, obligations still appearing on his current credit reports, he could 
qualify for a mortgage between $250,000 and $350,000.1 At this point, however, he has 
not personally met with the potential lender or ascertained what his approximate 
monthly payments will be.2 He is unaware of what the interest rate will be on the loan, 
leaving the details to his wife to discover. Applicant and his wife were set to meet with 
the potential lender after the hearing, as they prepare to discover a way to satisfy the 
$7,500 in debts posing concern with the bank. They hope to acquire that sum by 
borrowing money from family members. They will not have money for a down payment, 
so the home will be entirely financed. His daughter is planning on moving in with them 
to help them defray expenses. 
 
 No longer maintaining a savings account, Applicant does not have a retirement 
account. He is unaware of what balances he has in his checking account after monthly 
obligations have been paid. He agreed that the family is living “paycheck to paycheck.”3 
                                                          
1 Tr. 42. 
 
2 Applicant concedes that he cannot afford a monthly mortgage payment of more than $1,500, the amount 
he currently expends on rent. Tr. 45. 
 
3 Tr. 45. 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
He concedes that he needs to get another job because his present employment does 
not pay him a sufficient income. Before his pursuit of a new home and his discovery that 
he could be eligible for a mortgage if he satisfied about $7,500 in delinquent debt, 
Applicant remembers, at some point, trying to address his smaller debts, but he has no 
documentary evidence indicating any such attempts.4 He has not received financial 
counseling.5 He does not appear to understand that a credit report entry deleted due to 
its age does not necessarily relieve the debtor of the underlying financial obligation. 
 
The debts at issue are reflected in the SOR as follows: 
 
1.a – Adverse judgment from 2011 in the approximate amount of $1,350. 
Applicant does not know the basis for this judgment. He does not think it has been 
satisfied.6 He has not checked with the court or the creditor to verify the status of the 
debt. He believes he made some payments on this and other debts, but does not know 
exactly because his wife is the one who made bill payments in the family.  
 
1.b – Charged off credit card account in the approximate amount of $869. It was 
subsequently sold to another lender. He believes the balance was lowered by the 
lender, but provided no documentary evidence to that effect.7 
 
1.c – Bank-related account past due 120 days or more in the approximate 
amount of $48,532 with a balance of $57,942. This debt is related to a home purchased 
in 2006 with the aid of two mortgages and an unknown portion of the approximately 
$200,000 in proceeds he received from the sale of his previous residence. The balance 
of the proceeds from the sale of his prior home was put into cash reserves. This debt 
concerns the smaller, second mortgage. By 2007, he was unable to make payments on 
the mortgage.8 An attempt at a short sale was unsuccessful, and a 2008 foreclosure 
followed, which satisfied the larger, first mortgage. Applicant notes that the mortgage at 
issue no longer appears on his credit report. He has never received any 
correspondence from the lender or a successor indicating that the debt was written off 
or forgiven, nor has he attempted to contact the original lender. 
 
1.d – Collection account in the approximate amount of $208. Applicant does not 
know the status of this delinquent debt.9 
 
                                                          
4 Tr. 46-47. 
 
5 Tr. 50. 
 
6 Tr. 22. 
 
7 Tr. 24-25. “They lowered it. Once they gave it to another person I think they cut it in half or something.” 
 
8 Tr. 28. 
 
9 Tr. 32. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
1.e – Collection account for a utility company in the approximate amount of $972. 
Applicant does not believe that this has been paid.10  
 
1.f – Collection account for telecommunications entity in the approximate amount 
of $1,010. This is related to charges remaining on a two-year contract for service that 
continued after Applicant discontinued service. In 2014, he tried to negotiate a 
settlement with the company, but to no avail. The amount is still outstanding.  
 
1.g – Charged-off account in the approximate amount of $5,205. The mini-van at 
issue was repossessed in 2009. Applicant has not contacted the company, noting “this 
has to be a mistake because they took the car and we . . . we haven’t received any mail 
. . . about this after that.”11 No evidence of payments toward this debt was presented. 
 
Applicant recently decided to look into the prospect of buying a new home. They 
were apprised of negative entries on Applicant’s credit report. He introduced a recent 
credit report reflecting fewer negative entries.12 In order to address the cited problems, 
he entered into an agreement with a debt consolidator, with which he met shortly before 
the hearing. Before that, he and his wife discussed making an arrangement with a debt 
consolidator, but never settled on one.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
                                                          
10 Tr. 33. 
 
11 Tr. 39. 
 
12 Ex. C. 
 
 
 
 
5 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall 
be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
Here, there is credible evidence showing Applicant has acquired delinquent 
debts in excess of $58,000, invoking financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
  
Five conditions could mitigate these finance related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
Applicant’s initial financial distress began when he purchased a home in 2006 for 
which, apparently, he did not properly budget and which, inevitably, he could not afford. 
Within two years, it went into foreclosure. Today, he is poised to acquire a new home 
with a new mortgage based on his current credit report, which no longer reflects all the 
debts at issue, due to the age of the obligations, not their satisfaction. He does not yet 
know what his monthly payment obligations will be or what interest rate range will be at 
issue. Moreover, he is borrowing money to satisfy the $7,500 debt the lender noted in 
Applicant’s current credit report, thus transferring that financial obligation from creditors 
to family members. At this stage in his search for a new home, which is to be 100% 
mortgaged with no money down, it is unclear what he can afford to purchase and how 
he will stay timely on his current income.  
 
The delinquent debts at issue are multiple in number, with many being years old. 
He did suffer a notable decrease in salary in 2013 or 2014. He failed to offer any 
documented evidence, however, of efforts to pay for or manage his needs on the 
reduced income or to work with his lenders. Therefore, AG ¶ 20(b) only applies in part. 
 
Applicant has not received financial counseling. There is little to no documented 
evidence that any of the debts at issue have been addressed or are currently in the 
process of being repaid. At best, he is now poised to repay those accounts which are 
still reflected on his credit report because they pose an obstacle to his obtaining a new 
mortgage. As a strategy, this fails. First, it fails to address all of the debts at issue, which 
appear to still be owed and undisputed. Second, it simply transfers his financial 
obligations from professional creditors to family. With no concrete evidence of progress 
made or a reasonable plan for addressing his debt, no other mitigating conditions apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate 
determination must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Here, I considered the 
 
 
 
 
7 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I incorporated my comments under the guideline 
at issue in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed 
under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a highly credible, straight-forward, and hard-working man who has 
suffered financial obstacles over the past decade. Unfortunately, the delinquent debts at 
issue did not disappear when they were deleted from his credit report, but remained 
existent and largely unaddressed. In this process, their deletion does not establish a 
track record of financial responsibility. Further, while he did suffer from a reduction in 
salary in the past few years, he presented no documentary evidence showing what he 
did to compensate for this drop, although he did mention his hopes to find another job, 
have his daughter move in with his family, and purchase a new home rather than rent. 
 
This process expects that an applicant employ a reasonable plan to address his 
delinquent debts. It then requires documentary evidence that the plan was successfully 
implemented. Applicant failed to do that. He also failed to pursue financial counseling, 
which might have given him better insight into the credit reporting process, the 
budgeting aspects of acquiring a realistic mortgage, and strategies for addressing the 
debts at issue. Under these facts, however, I find that Applicant has not mitigated 
financial considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:         AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:        Against Applicant 
 
          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
