 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case: 15-01783  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant remains indebted to five creditors for debts that accumulated between 
2009 and 2012, in an approximate amount of $28,850. Resulting security concerns 
were not mitigated. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for 
access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of Case 
 
 On September 27, 2012, Applicant submitted a security clearance application 
(SF-86). On September 18, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), effective within the DOD after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 22, 2015 (Answer), and requested that 
his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing. 
(Item 1.) On December 8, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
written case. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM), containing six 
Items, was mailed to Applicant on December 9, 2015, and received by him on 
December 22, 2015. The FORM notified Applicant that he had an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of 
his receipt of the FORM. He did not submit additional information or file objections to the 
Government’s FORM by the January 21, 2016 deadline. Hence, Items 1 through 6 are 
admitted into evidence. DOHA assigned the case to me on April 22, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer, Applicant admitted the ten medical delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR, including one judgment, and his delinquent student loan. His admissions to the 11 
allegations are incorporated into these findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 26 years old and unmarried. Since September 2012 he has worked 
as a machinist for a Federal contractor. Prior to this position, he held several positions 
with different private employers, and experienced periods of unemployment from June 
2009 to June 2010. (Item 2.)  
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBRs) from October 2012, January 2015, and 
December 2015, the SOR alleged 11 delinquent debts, which totaled $30,127, and 
included a judgment. The debts became delinquent between 2009 and 2012. (Items 4, 
5, 6.) In his Answer, he provided evidence that he paid six SOR-alleged debts: 1.e for 
$180; 1.f for $175; 1.g for $161; 1.h for $17; 1.i for a $610 judgment; and 1.j for $134. 
These payments totaled $1,277. He stated that he was making payments on the largest 
debts, alleged in 1.a for $10,365 and 1.k for $15,804, but did not provide documentary 
proof. (Item 1.)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable guidelines in 
the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. The 
 
 
3 
 
 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.  
 
 According to Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
 A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
 
 
4 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.1 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant has a history of delinquent debts. From 2009 to 2012, he accumulated 
11 delinquent accounts totaling over $30,000. That ongoing pattern of delinquent debts, 
and history of inability or unwillingness to pay debts, raise security concerns under the 
above disqualifying conditions, and shift the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or 
mitigate those concerns.  
  
 The guideline includes four conditions in AG ¶ 20 that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from Applicant’s ongoing financial difficulties: 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant provided insufficient evidence that circumstances beyond his control 
contributed to the delinquent debts or that he attempted to responsibly manage the 
debts while they were accumulating. AG ¶ 20(b) does not provide mitigation of the 
security concerns. There is no evidence that he participated in financial counseling or 
that his financial problems are under control. Thus, he failed to establish mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(c). He submitted evidence that he resolved six of the eleven debts 
                                                 
1 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
5 
 
 
indicating a good-faith effort to repay those debts. He did not corroborate his statements 
that he is paying the two largest debts, which total $26,169. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the 
six resolved debts, but not the remaining five. Applicant did not dispute any of the 
alleged debts; thus, AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility 
for a security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines, and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult, 
who is responsible for his choices and conduct that underlie the security concerns 
expressed in the SOR. The alleged delinquent debts arose between 2009 and 2012. He 
resolved 6 of the 11 debts. He said he is paying the largest two debts, but did not 
submit documentation of those payments, despite being notified in the FORM of the 
absence of evidence and given an opportunity to submit corroborating information. He 
did not present evidence of credit or financial counseling, a budget, or a plan for 
addressing the remaining debts. The likelihood that similar problems will continue 
remains a security issue, such that the potential for pressure, coercion, or duress is 
undiminished. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubt as to Applicant’s 
judgment, eligibility, and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial considerations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.e through 1.j:  For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                   
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
