KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: A credibility determination based solely on a written record is not entitled to the same
deference as one based observing a witness’s demeanor.  Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 15-01031.a1
DATE: 06/15/2016
DATE: June 15, 2016
In Re:
---------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 15-01031
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Bryan Olmos, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
The Department of Defense (DoD) declined to grant Applicant a security clearance.  On
September 15, 2015, DoD issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the basis for
that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department
of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a decision
on the written record.  On March 4, 2016, after considering the record, Defense Office of Hearings
and Appeals (DOHA) Administrative Judge David M. White granted Applicant’s request for a
security clearance.  Department Counsel appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issue on appeal:  whether the Judge’s decision was
arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.1  Consistent with the following, we reverse.
The Judge’s Findings of Fact  
Applicant is a 58-year-old employee of a defense contractor.  In his security clearance
application dated July 29, 2014, he disclosed that he had not filed his 2011, 2012, and 2013 Federal
income tax returns in a timely manner and explained that he calculated he would receive a tax refund
for each of those years. 
Applicant filed his 2011 Federal income tax return in December 2013 and received a $2,074
tax refund.  He filed his 2012 Federal tax return in September 2014 and his 2013 Federal tax return
in October 2015.  He received Federal tax refunds of $3,664 for 2012 and $1,013 for 2013. 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated, “my decision to delay filing was completely
unrelated to any financial over-extension or unpaid debt circumstances encountered on my behalf. 
I delayed filing a tax return specifically due to the fact that, in each case, I pre-determined that I
would receive a tax refund.  The pre-determined calculation was based on my known tax deductions
for each year.”  He also stated he regretted failing to file his tax returns in a timely manner,
understood that filing late because he expected a refund was an unacceptable practice, and pledged
to file his tax return before the April 15 deadline. 
The Judge’s Analysis
The Judge found that Applicant’s failure to file his 2011, 2012, and 2013 Federal income tax
returns in a timely manner established security concerns under disqualifying condition 19(g).2  The
Judge concluded that Applicant was under the impression that there was nothing legally wrong with
filing his income tax returns late as long as he paid more taxes than was owed.  He noted that
Applicant filed his 2011 Federal income tax return before submission of his security clearance
application and the other two tax returns after becoming aware of the potential security concerns for
not having done so.  He determined that Applicant correctly understood that he was entitled to a
refund for each year and concluded Applicant’s late filing of Federal income tax returns was not
serious because it merely delayed his receipt of substantial refunds for each year.  He stated that
1 Department Counsel also raised the issue of whether the Judge erroneously excluded Applicant’s personal
subject interview from the record.  We need not address that issue to decide this case. 
2 Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 19(g) states, “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as
required or the fraudulent filing of the same.”
2
Applicant’s credible statement of intent to file timely in the future indicates that recurrence is
unlikely.  He concluded that Applicant’s tax filing problems were fully resolved and the security
concerns were fully mitigated. 
Discussion
Department Counsel argues that the limited record in this case does not support the Judge’s
favorable credibility and mitigation analysis. He points out that Applicant did not file his 2012
Federal income tax return until after submission of his security clearance application and did not file
his 2013 tax return until after issuance of the SOR.  He contends that the Judge, in limiting his
analysis to the resolution of the tax filing obligations, failed to assess adequately the overriding
issues of Applicant’s lack of judgment and his history of failing to abide by rules and regulations.
He asserts that Judge took the position of “no harm, no foul,” which the Appeal Board has
discounted in the past.3  Department Counsel’s arguments have merit. 
A Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation
for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371, U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’”   Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  The Appeal Board may reverse the Judge’s
decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law. 
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.
There is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See
Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  After
 the Government presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to
rebut or mitigate those concerns.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  “The application of disqualifying and
mitigating conditions and whole person factors does not turn simply on a finding that one or more
of them apply to the particular facts of a case.  Rather, their application requires the exercise of
sound discretion in light of the record evidence as a whole.”  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 05-03635 at
3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 2006).
3 ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). (“The fact that Applicant has purportedly corrected
his federal tax problem, and the fact that he is now motivated to prevent such problems in the future, does not preclude
careful consideration of Applicant’s security worthiness in light of his longstanding prior behavior evidencing
irresponsibility. . . .  Department Counsel argues that the Judge took a “no harm, no foul” approach to Applicant’s course
of conduct and employed an “all’s well that ends well” analysis that did not give appropriate weight to Applicant’s multi-
year inaction regarding his income tax filing and payment duties. The Board concludes that these are fair
characterizations of the Judge’s resolution of the case. . . .  By failing to analyze and discuss these matters in any depth,
the Judge has failed to consider an important aspect of the case.”) (Citations omitted).  
3
In deciding whether the Judge’s rulings or conclusions are erroneous, we will review the
Judge’s decision to determine whether:  it does not examine relevant evidence; it fails to articulate
a satisfactory explanation for its conclusions, including a rational connection between the facts
found and the choice made; it does not consider relevant factors; it reflects a clear error of judgment;
it fails to consider an important aspect of the case; it offers an explanation for the decision that runs
contrary to the record evidence; or it is so implausible that it cannot be ascribed to a mere difference
of opinion.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-02563 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 2015).
Security requirements include consideration of a person’s judgment, reliability, and a sense
of his or her legal obligations.  Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers Union, Local 473 v. McElroy, 284
F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 886 (1961).  Failure to comply with Federal and/or
state tax laws suggests that an applicant has a problem with abiding by well-established Government
rules and regulations.  Voluntary compliance with rules and regulations is essential for protecting
classified information.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016).  In his
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted “that over the past years I have not been in compliance with
filing an annual Federal tax return prior to the April deadline.  In addition, I admit that, in some
cases, I have delayed filing a tax return for two or three years.”  By failing to file his 2011, 2012,
and 2013 Federal income tax returns in a timely manner, Applicant did not demonstrate the high
degree of good judgment and reliability required of persons granted access to classified information. 
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 12-05053 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 30, 2014).  
Much of the Judge’s mitigation analysis is predicated upon his conclusion that Applicant has
resolved his tax filing problems. Applicant’s tax filing delinquencies were not due to conditions
beyond his control. Department Counsel questions why someone would calculate their taxes,
determine they are owed a refund, and delay filing for that refund.  Department Counsel also
correctly points out the record does not support the Judge’s conclusion that “Applicant was under
the impression that there was nothing legally wrong with filing his income tax returns late as long
as he had already paid more taxes than were owing for that year.”  Additionally, the timing of
resolution of financial problems is relevant in determining the extent to which an applicant has
demonstrated mitigation.  ISCR Case No. 09-07551 at 4 (App. Bd.  Mar. 1, 2011).  Even though
Applicant stated in his security clearance application that his delinquent tax returns had either been
filed or were “in progress,” he thereafter failed to comply with the filing requirement for his 2013
Federal income tax return for over a year and did so only after issuance of the SOR.  This delay was
not explained and caused Department Counsel to question whether Applicant had previously
calculated his taxes.  Overall, the Judge’s favorable mitigation determination runs contrary to the
weight of the limited record evidence and is not sustainable.
Department Counsel also challenges the Judge’s determination that Applicant made a
“credible” statement to file timely tax returns in the future.  When an applicant waives a hearing and
chooses to have his or her case decided on the written record, the Judge has no ability to make a
credibility determination based on observation of the applicant’s demeanor.  Accordingly, a
credibility determination based solely on a written record is not entitled to the same deference on
appeal as a credibility determination based on observations of a witness’s demeanor.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 04-12680 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2007).  Department Counsel notes that Applicant has
4
not provided proof that he has fully complied with Federal income tax filing requirements for 2014. 
The absence of such evidence undercuts the Judge’s determination that Applicant’s assurance of
reform and rehabilitation is credible. 
We conclude that the Judge’s decision failed to consider important aspects of the case and
improperly relied on a credibility assessment in place of record evidence.  The decision ran contrary
to the weight of the record evidence.  Furthermore, we conclude that the record evidence, viewed
as a whole, is not sufficient to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under the Egan standard. 
Order
The Decision is REVERSED.  
Signed: Michael Ra’anan        
Michael Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields           
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James F. Duffy               
James F. Duffy
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
5
