 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
-------------------------1 )       ISCR Case No. 15-01949 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline E. Heintzelman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
 
On December 4, 2012, Applicant submitted her Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On October 17, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
                                            
1
 Applicant signed her Answer as -------, resuming her maiden name after her latest divorce. The SOR is captioned with her married 
name based on the 2012 e-QIP.  
 
 
 
 
 
2 
On December 12, 2015, Applicant submitted a written Answer to the SOR. 
Applicant requested her case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On January 25, 2016, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 7, 
was provided to the Applicant on February 1, 2016. She was given the opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the file on February 8, 2016. Applicant did not file a Response to the FORM 
within the 30-day time allowed that would have expired on March 9, 2016.  
 
 Department Counsel submitted seven Items in support of the SOR allegations.  
Item 4 is inadmissible. It will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the 
summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the 
Office of Personnel Management on January 23, 2013. Applicant did not adopt it as her 
own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this 
Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating 
witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
 
I received the case assignment on May 12, 2016. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in Subparagraphs 1.j, 1.o, 1.r, and 1.u. and 
admitted all other allegations contained in the SOR under both guidelines. (Items 2-6)  
 
Applicant is 34 years old, has one child, and has been divorced twice. Applicant 
takes care of her disabled mother. She attends college on the internet. She works for a 
defense contractor and has since 2012. Applicant claims some of the debts were 
incurred when she was young, a new parent, and was financially irresponsible. The 
credit reports show the earliest delinquency as occurring in 2008, and the others 
accumulating over the years until 2015. (Items 1-3, 5-7) 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists 24 delinquent debts totaling $19,288. She admits 15 debts 
(Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.e, 1.k, 1.l, 1.m, 1n, 1.q, 1.s, 1.t, 1.v, and 1.w) totaling $17,660, 
and claims to have resolved four debts (Subparagraphs 1.f to 1.i) totaling $794. She 
denies four allegations (Subparagraphs 1.j, 1.o, 1.r, and 1.u) totaling $438. She stated 
in her Answer that she is not aware of those debts, so she denied them.  Applicant 
claims Subparagraphs 1.f and 1.x, both for $514, are duplicate accounts and she 
resolved them. She did not submit any documentary evidence to prove that any debts 
are resolved. (Items 1, 2) 
 
 The debts in Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.n are for cars that were repossessed or 
used by her second ex-husband. A September 24, 2013 divorce decree ordered those 
two debts to be paid by her former husband (at page 5 of the decree). That divorce 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
decree was entered after Applicant submitted her e-QIP in December 2012. (Items 1-3, 
5-7) 
 
 Applicant’s Answer states she bought a car and maintained the payments after 
obtaining her current position. She never missed a payment and later gave the car to 
her mother. Then she purchased another car for herself in November 2014 and has not 
missed a payment.  In December 2013, Applicant paid $4,900 for a down payment on a 
house she was renting as part of rent-to-own program. She made the first part of that 
payment with a cashier’s check for $3,000 from her bank account. Applicant did not 
demonstrate why she could not have used some or all of that money to resolve her 
delinquent debts, especially the 22 delinquent debts that are each under $1,000. Eight 
of these debts are under $100, and total $456. (Items 1-3, 5-7; Answer) 
 
 Applicant stated her daughter injured herself during sporting events, and two 
alleged debts are related to medical care for her daughter. The ambulance bill for $311 
(possibly Subparagraph 1.q) and the emergency room bill for $50 (Subparagraph 1.b) 
are for those services. They are not resolved and Applicant stated she would work on 
getting them resolved in 2016. (Items 1-3, 5-7; Answer) 
 
 Applicant was unemployed from November 2010 to March 2011, and March 
2002 to May 2003. She has been employed by her current company since December 
2012. (Items 1-3) 
 
 Applicant’s Answer states she did not intentionally falsify her e-QIP answer in 
Section 26 inquiring as to whether she had any delinquent debts or was subject to 
collection efforts. She states she mentioned “having debt and repossessions in part of 
the Section 26 just not in the summary section.” She claims she did not pay attention or 
did not fully understand the question. However, Applicant answered all parts of Section 
26 with a negative response and did not disclose any debts or repossessions in that 
section or the rest of the e-QIP. (Items 1-3) 
 
     Applicant did not submit any documentation that she has participated in credit 
counseling or budget education. She provided no evidence concerning the quality of her 
job performance. She submitted no character references or other evidence tending to 
establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate her 
credibility, demeanor, or character in person since she elected to have her case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline at AG & 19 contains nine disqualifying conditions that could raise 
security concerns. From these nine conditions, two conditions are applicable to the facts 
found in this case: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c)  a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From 2008 to the present, Applicant accumulated 24 delinquent debts, totaling 
$19,288 that remain unpaid or unresolved. AG ¶ 19 (a) and (c) are established. The 
evidence raises all of the above security concerns, thereby shifting the burden to 
Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
The guideline in AG ¶ 20 contains six conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Only one mitigating condition might have 
partial applicability. 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
AG ¶ 20 (b) would apply if the loss of employment was shown by Applicant to 
have had a substantial effect on her ability to repay her debts. In the past six years, 
Applicant has been unemployed 19 months. She also was divorced for the second time 
in September 2013. She did not demonstrate that she acted responsibly under the 
circumstances regarding her debts. In fact, she spent nearly $5,000 on a rent-to-own 
house purchase and paid for two cars, one she gave to her mother and the second she 
purchased for herself. Applicant explains her debts in her Answer, but does not offer 
any plan to pay them. Even if she had a plan for the future, it is not a substitute for a 
track record of paying debts in a timely manner and otherwise acting in a financially 
responsible manner. Applicant failed to meet her burden of proof on that issue. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes a condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant did not disclose her financial delinquencies as alleged in SOR 
Paragraph 2. She disclaims any intentional action in doing so. However, her debts were 
known to her before she answered the e-QIP because she was preparing for her 
second divorce and the splitting of the property and debts. Her Answer states she 
answered part of Section 26 of the e-QIP with information about debts and 
repossessions, but there is no such information on the e-QIP. Her Answer is false on 
this issue also. Applicant made a deliberate falsification on her e-QIIP. AG ¶ 16 (a) 
applies. 
 
There are seven mitigating conditions listed in the Guideline in ¶ 17. None of 
them apply to Applicant.  
 
Applicant has not made good-faith efforts to correct the falsification. Her Answer 
claimed she did not intentionally falsify her e-QIP, but she then states she listed debts 
but not in the summary section that does not exist in Section 26 of the e-QIP. 
Applicant’s explanation is not logical or supported by the evidence. AG ¶ 17 (a) is not 
established.  
 
She did not depend on inadequate advice from an attorney or authorized person 
in falsifying her answers to Section 26. AG ¶ 17 (b) is not established.  
 
Falsifying answers on an e-QIP from a person seeking a security clearance  is 
not a minor offense, and the totality of Applicant’s  answers cast serious doubt on her 
trustworthiness, reliability, and good judgment. AG ¶ 17 (c) is not established. 
 
Applicant has not acknowledged her falsification behavior or obtained counseling 
to correct it. AG ¶ 17 (d) is not established. 
 
Applicant has not reduced her vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress from her falsification of her debts on an official government form. AG ¶ 17 (e) is 
not established.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
The information about Applicant’s false answers on the e-QIP is substantiated by 
the credit reports and the e-QIP. There is no allegation of criminals being involved in 
this falsification matter. Therefore, AG ¶ 17 (f) and (g) are not established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was an adult when 
she incurred the debts. She has not taken any action to resolve her delinquent debts. 
This inaction leaves her vulnerable to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress based 
on the magnitude of her financial obligation. Applicant’s lack of action continues to this 
day, and is obviously voluntary. Her inaction will continue based on her past 
performance. Applicant displayed a lack of good judgment incurring the debts.  Next, 
she exhibited a continued lack of appropriate judgment by failing to make payments on 
any of her delinquent debts during the past eight years. 
 
Applicant deliberately falsified her financial information in response to the 
questions in Section 26 of the e-QIP. Subsequently, she gave an unpersuasive 
explanation of why she failed to disclose her debts in her Answer.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising under the guidelines 
for Financial Considerations, and Personal Conduct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.x:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
