 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02310 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, 
and Guideline C, foreign preference, but failed to mitigate them under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 25, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B, foreign influence, Guideline C, foreign preference, and 
Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 16, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 31, 2016. The 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 21, 
2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 10, 2016. The Government offered 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through G, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. The record was held open until May 24, 2016, to allow 
Applicant to submit additional documents, which he did. They were marked AE H 
through L and admitted into evidence without objections.1 DOHA received the hearing 
transcript (Tr.) on May 18, 2016.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR requesting ¶ 1.c be added to 
read: “Your mother is a dual citizen of Nigeria and the United States, residing in 
Nigeria.”  
 
Department Counsel also moved to amend SOR ¶ 3.d to accurately conform to 
the evidence, adding tax years 2008, 2012, and 2013. SOR ¶ 3.d would then read “tax 
years 2008 through 2013.” There was no objection to the motion and it was granted.2  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 2.a, 3.a, 3.e, and 3.f. He 
denied the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.b, 3.b, 3.c, 3.d, and 3.g. His admissions are 
incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 49 years old. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 1990. He was born in 
Nigeria and lived there until he immigrated to the United States in 1981. He became a 
naturalized citizen of the United States in 1995. He married in 1994 and divorced in 
2011. He has three children, ages 21, 19 and 10. They were all born in the United 
States. The two older children attend college and the youngest child lives with his 
mother. Applicant pays $700 monthly for child support for the youngest child and his 
other children attend college on scholarships. He provides them with spending money.3  
 
 Applicant holds a Nigerian passport that he renewed in 2014. In the past, he 
used it for convenience to travel to Nigeria. He estimated he made annual trips to 
Nigeria using his Nigerian passport. He last traveled there in 2014. Applicant believed 
that when he became a U.S. citizen it meant that he renounced his Nigerian citizenship. 
Applicant surrendered his valid passport to his facility security officer (FSO) for 
                                                          
1 Hearing Exhibits I and II are Department Counsel Memoranda. Although there were no objections, 
Department Counsel commented on some of the exhibits. 
 
2 Tr. 116-119. 
 
3 Tr. 23-26, 87-90; GE 1. 
 
3 
 
 
safeguarding while he is employed with the company. If Applicant requests access to 
the passport, the FSO will notify the DOD prior to releasing the passport.4 
 
 Applicant’s mother is a dual citizen of Nigeria and the United States. She 
immigrated to the United States in 1970 and retired in about 2007. She moved back to 
Nigeria in about 2010 or 2011. She spends more than half the year in the United States 
and the remainder of the year in Nigeria. Applicant had an uncle who was a tribal king in 
Nigeria with whom he maintained contact. His uncle has since passed away and left 
Applicant a plot of undeveloped land in Nigeria. Applicant testified that when a tribal 
king owns land and gifts it to another it is not to be sold, but to be developed for the 
benefit of the community. It is not acceptable to sell a gift. Applicant estimated the land 
is about two acres, and he is unsure of its value. He has not yet decided what to do with 
the land. His mother also received land and she is using it for a school. Applicant’s 
father is deceased and he has no other immediate family members in Nigeria. He stays 
with his mother when he visits Nigeria.5 
 
 Applicant failed to timely file his 2008 through 2013 federal and state income tax 
returns. Tax liens were entered against him in 2012 (SOR ¶ 3.e, $68,011) and 2013 
(SOR ¶ 1.f, $28,347) by the federal government. Applicant testified that two years ago 
his federal tax debt was about $120,000. A letter he sent to the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) in January 2016 indicated he and his wife owed $102,000 for delinquent 
taxes for tax years 2008, 2009 and 2010. As of March 2016, he believes the debt is 
about $97,000. He testified that his last payment was in January 2013 for $300. It is 
unclear how the tax debt was reduced based on the information he provided. He did not 
provide corroborating documents regarding the current amount owed.6  
 
 When Applicant married in 1994, his wife owned house A. They built house B in 
1998. They had two children and one income. They purchased three rental properties. 
In 2006 their debts began to increase due to unreliable tenants. They sold the rental 
properties before Applicant’s tax problems arose. Applicant’s wife used credit cards to 
pay expenses. Applicant wanted his wife to return to work. She did not.7 
 
 In 2008, Applicant decided if he withheld paying his taxes for one year he could 
reduce his other debts. Before 2008, he was working for an employer who withheld 
taxes from his pay. After 2008, he was working as a contractor and taxes were not 
being withheld from his pay, and he decided not to pay them as required. His reasoning 
was that he could use the two houses he and his wife owned to pay the taxes later 
because of the amount of equity they had in the houses. He was more concerned about 
their credit card debts. Applicant testified he told his wife they needed to downsize. She 
                                                          
4 Tr. 26-29, 91-101; GE 1; AE A, H. 
 
5 Tr. 101-112, 119. 
 
6 Tr. 43-45, 52-54, 69-75. 
 
7 Tr. 30-35, 66-67. 
 
4 
 
 
refused, and he filed for divorce in 2011. He did not timely file or pay his federal and 
state income taxes from 2008 to 2013. He stated that he paid second mortgages and 
other credit card bills.8  
 
Applicant testified that he and his ex-wife had an agreement to sell house B, but 
she changed her mind. The divorce decree awarded Applicant house A and his wife 
house B. Applicant stated that the houses remain in both of their names and he cannot 
refinance them. He stated that he contacted the IRS and the state tax office and asked 
them to place liens on the houses. He explained that by doing this it ensured that the 
IRS would receive the amount of tax owed when the properties were sold. Applicant’s 
January 2016 letter to the IRS states that the properties are still held jointly in both 
Applicant and his wife’s name, but they each have signed “over our respective quid pro 
quo claim rights to each other.”9  
 
 Applicant testified that he filed his delinquent federal and state income tax 
returns. In 2011, he entered into an installment agreement with the IRS to pay $1,600 
monthly. He stated he made 15 payments from 2011 to 2016. He could not afford to 
make regular payments. Another agreement was entered in 2014 to pay $1,950 a 
month. He has not made regular payments. His last payment to the IRS was in January 
2016 for $300. Applicant provided documents showing some installment payments to 
the IRS. Applicant provided copies of an IRS application for discharge of lien for house 
A, but it is unsigned and unexecuted. It is his intention that once he sells the property he 
can use the money to pay the lien and have it released. Applicant has not listed the 
property for sale because it needs repairs. He has ceased payments to the IRS so he 
can use the money for repairs. Applicant admitted he did not understand how tax liens 
worked. He underestimated how long it would take him to pay the IRS.10 
 
 Applicant provided one-page copies of federal and state income tax worksheets 
for 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013. These worksheets included personal 
information for Applicant and his spouse, dependency status, whether he was going to 
file married filing jointly or single, and information for the dependent earned income 
credit. Additional pages of the worksheet were not provided. No other information was 
provided.11 
 
 Applicant also provided letters from his accountants and tax preparers for 2011, 
2012, and 2013, and an undated letter that refers to his 2013 federal and state income 
tax return. It appears from the July 2011 letter that the accountants prepared Applicant’s 
2008, 2009, and 2010 state and federal tax returns. The letter indicated that Applicant 
paid the fee for the tax preparation. Applicant used the same accountants for his 2011 
                                                          
8 Tr. 35-37, 56-58, 62-65. 
 
9 Tr. 37-41, 76-77AE C, F, G. Applicant’s letter is unsigned.  
 
10 Tr. 46-55, 70-75; AE D, E, J, K. 
 
11 AE K.  
 
5 
 
 
tax returns. Their letter is dated September 2012.12 Applicant used different accountants 
to prepare his 2012 federal and state tax returns. The letters are confusing as they refer 
to tax liabilities owed and refunds, but the total amounts indicated are not reflective of 
the amounts listed. The letters do not confirm whether the returns were filed 
electronically for Applicant or whether Applicant filed them on his own. Applicant 
admitted he has had a lackadaisical attitude regarding filing his income tax returns in 
the past because he always got a refund before 2008.13  
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.a ($7,783) is a credit card debt. Applicant testified he 
cannot afford to pay this debt until he resolves his tax debt with the IRS. It has been 
delinquent since 2011. He in unfamiliar with the medical debt in SOR ¶ 1.b ($316) and 
he has not contacted the creditor to pay it or dispute it. He denies he owes the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.c ($159), but has not provided information regarding his actions to dispute the 
debt. Applicant testified that in 2014 he paid the judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g 
($2,671), but did not provide corroborating documents to verify it is paid. The debts in 
the SOR are supported by credit reports from August 2013 and February 2015.14 
 
Nigeria 
 
 The United States has had diplomatic relations with Nigeria since 1960, following 
its independence from the United Kingdom. After years of military coups and civil wars, 
a civilian president was inaugurated in 1999 and relations with the United States 
improved. Although it has had successful elections, it faces formidable challenges in 
consolidating democratic order, including terrorist activities, sectarian conflicts, and 
public mistrust of the government. Nigeria has yet to develop effective measures to 
address corruption, poverty, and to mitigate the violence. It is plagued with the terrorist 
activity of Boko Haram that continues to carry out kidnappings, killings, bombings, and 
attacks on civilian and military targets, resulting in thousands of deaths and injuries, and 
significant destruction of property. Boko Haram has pledged allegiance to the Islamic 
State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL).15  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
12 AE L.  
 
13 Tr. 56-61. 
 
14 Tr. 78-85; GE 2, 4. 
 
15 http//www.state.gov/j/ct/rls/crt/2015/257514/htm#; http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/2836.htm. 
 
 
6 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
  
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern for foreign preference is set out in AG ¶ 9: 
 
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
 
7 
 
 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 10. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: (1) possession of a current 
foreign passport; and 
 
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an 
American citizen.  
 
 Applicant applied for and was issued a Nigerian passport after becoming a 
naturalized citizen of the United States. He repeatedly used his Nigerian passport to 
travel to Nigeria. He has a current Nigerian passport. The above disqualifying conditions 
apply. 
 
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
is potentially applicable:  
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
Applicant believed that when he became a citizen of the United States it was a 
renunciation of his Nigerian citizenship. He surrendered his Nigerian passport to his 
FSO who will hold it, and if Applicant requests its return, the FSO will notify the DOD. 
The above mitigating condition applies.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them. The following conditions potentially apply:  
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(e) require evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile 
to the United States. 
 
The United States has a compelling interest in protecting and 
safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether 
that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the 
United States.16 
 
Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security.”17 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the nature of a 
nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record 
are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue.18  
 
                                                          
16 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
17 ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **16-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
18 See generally; ISCR Case. No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) reversing decision to grant 
clearance where administrative judge did not consider terrorist activities in area where family members 
resided. 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant’s mother is a dual citizen of the United States and Nigeria and a part-
time resident of Nigeria. Applicant inherited a parcel of land in Nigeria from his uncle 
that is to be used for the benefit of the community. I find that these factors marginally 
rise to the level of creating a heightened risk. The above disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
I have analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions for 
this security determination under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interest is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
Applicant’s mother is a dual U.S. and Nigerian citizen. She resides part-time in 
Nigeria. She is retired and works with a school. Applicant visits infrequently as his 
mother also lives part-time in the United States. There is no evidence that she has 
contact with the government more than any other resident. She has strong ties to her 
family in the United States. It is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a position of having 
to choose between the interests of his mother and the United States. Applicant has lived 
in the United States since 1981 and has been a citizen since 1995. There is no conflict 
of interest because Applicant’s mother is also a U.S. citizen and all of Applicant’s 
immediate family were born in the United States and are citizens. There is sufficient 
evidence to conclude Applicant would be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the United States. AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) apply.  
 
Applicant inherited a small parcel of land in Nigeria. He does not know its value, 
but explained that culturally he is required to use it for the benefit of the community. 
Applicant’s family and assets are located in the United States. I find that the property 
interest is such that it is unlikely to result in a conflict of interest and could not be used 
effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure Applicant. AG ¶ 8(f) applies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG & 19, and the following three are 
potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
 (g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as 
required or the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
Applicant failed to timely file his federal and state income tax returns from 2008 
through 2013. He intentionally decided to withhold paying his taxes because he wanted 
to pay other debts first. He has two federal tax liens totaling $96,358. He has other 
delinquent debts. The above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
11 
 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of action s to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant has tax liens and other delinquent debts that are unpaid. His tax 
problems were the result of him deciding not to timely file or pay his federal and state 
taxes so he could use the money to pay other debts. His behavior casts doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant’s decision to repeatedly not timely file or pay his federal and state taxes 
was within his control. His wife’s overuse of credit cards was somewhat beyond his 
control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly 
under the circumstances. Applicant decided to not file and pay his taxes because he 
had other debts he wanted to pay, and his intention to use the equity in his houses to 
eventually pay the IRS is not acting responsibly. Although he has made some 
inconsistent payments to the IRS, his tax debts are not resolved and he has not 
provided proof that he has addressed any of the other debts alleged in the SOR. I find 
AG ¶ 20(b) marginally applies.  
 
 Applicant provided letters from accountants that apparently prepared his 
delinquent federal and state tax returns, but did not provide evidence that all of his 
delinquent state and federal returns have been filed. He has had an installment 
agreement with the IRS to pay his delinquent taxes, but repeatedly failed to make 
consistent payments. It is unknown if his installment agreement is still in effect because 
his last payment was in January 2016, and was for considerably less that the 
agreement required. There is no evidence that Applicant received financial counseling. 
The evidence is insufficient to conclude Applicant’s financial problems are under control. 
He has not provided evidence of his actions to resolve or dispute the remaining debts 
alleged in the SOR. Applicant’s inconsistent payments to the IRS cannot be construed 
as good-faith efforts to resolve his debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c), 20(d) and 20(e) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
12 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B, C, and F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 49-year-old educated man. He mitigated the security concerns 
raised under the foreign preference guideline by surrendering his Nigerian passport to 
the FSO. The foreign influence guideline is also mitigated because of his loyalty and ties 
to the United States. He has not mitigated the security concerns under the financial 
considerations guidelines because he repeatedly failed to timely file his state and 
federal tax returns and has failed to pay these taxes. He has made inconsistent 
payments towards his tax debts and owes large tax liens. He has other delinquent debts 
that remain unresolved. Applicant’s conduct raises serious questions about his 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns 
arising under the financial considerations guideline. The security concerns raised under 
the foreign preference and foreign influence guidelines are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
     
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   2.a:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
  Subparagraphs 3.a-3.g:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
