 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive).1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-01350
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant did not carry his burden of producing information that mitigates the
security concerns raised by multiple filings of bankruptcy petitions between 2004 and
2015. Applicant’s  request for eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
On November 5, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (EQIP) to obtain or renew eligibility for access to classified
information required as part of his employment with a defense contractor. After
reviewing the completed background investigation, Department of Defense (DOD)
adjudicators could not determine that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
Applicant to have access to classified information.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included 11 exhibits (Items 1 - 11) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case. Additionally, the SOR originally included allegations of fact at SOR 2.a and
2.b that might raise security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). However, at FORM page 3,
Department Counsel amended the SOR by withdrawing both Guideline E allegations. Accordingly, only the
Guideline F security concerns have been examined in this case.
2
On August 27, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  Applicant timely responded to the SOR and2
requested a decision without a hearing. On November 30, 2015, Department Counsel
for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant
Material (FORM)  in support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on December 5,3
2015, but did not submit any additional information withing the 30 days allowed. The
record closed on January 4, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on April 1, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline F, the Government alleged that in October 2004, Applicant filed
for Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge of his debts, which occurred in January 2005 (SOR
1.a); that in February 2005, Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition that was
dismissed in July 2007 for failure to make required filings (SOR 1.b); that in July 2010,
Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition that was dismissed in May 2012 for
failure to make required payments (SOR 1.c); and that in May 2015, Applicant filed for
Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge of his debts, which occurred in August 2015. In his
Answer, Applicant admitted, with explanations, all of the allegations. (FORM, Item 1)
The SOR allegations are further supported by the Government’s documents at FORM,
Items 6 - 11. In addition to the facts thus established, I make the following findings of
fact.
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked since October 2012. He served in the U.S. Army on active duty and in the Army
Reserve from 1982 until 1991. Applicant has been steadily employed in a variety of jobs
since April 1990. (FORM, Item 5)
Applicant and his wife have been married since May 1992. They have two
children, ages 22 and 15. The younger child was born with, and has always required
treatment for, several significant medical conditions. Applicant’s wife was injured in 2006
in a natural gas explosion at their home. She was unable to work for an unspecified
length of time because of her injuries, but was again working when Applicant was
interviewed for his clearance in December 2012. (FORM, Items 5 and 11)
During the December 2012 interview, Applicant discussed his then most recent
bankruptcy petition. He cited his child’s health issues and his wife’s previous inability to
earn income as factors contributing to his financial problems. Nonetheless, he told the
investigator that, at that time he was able to meet all of his financial obligations, in part,
because his wife had been able to return to work. (FORM, Item 11)
 Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
3
In response to the SOR, Applicant attributed his most recent bankruptcy filing to
his child’s ongoing medical problems, and to his wife’s medical problems that have
arisen since his 2012 interview, and which have rendered her unable to work. She is
receiving unspecified long-term disability benefits that constitute a reduction in her
income. Applicant estimates he spends about $13,000 annually in medical insurance
and deductible costs. (FORM, Item 4)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls6
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
4
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such8
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Financial Considerations
The Government met its burden of production in support of the allegations in the
SOR. The facts established herein raise a security concern addressed, in relevant part,
at AG ¶ 18 as follows:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
More specifically, available information requires application of the disqualifying
conditions at AG ¶¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and 19(c) (a history
of not meeting financial obligations). This record presents reasonable security concerns
about Applicant’s repeated use of bankruptcy protection to resolve his financial
problems.
By contrast, I also have considered the following pertinent AG ¶ 20 mitigating
conditions apply:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g. loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
5
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control; and
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts.
None of these mitigating conditions apply. The fact that he again was discharged
of his debts through bankruptcy within the past 12 months shows that Applicant’s
financial problems are recent and ongoing. Although he can claim that his financial
problems are caused or exacerbated by factors beyond his control, repeated resort to
bankruptcy protection does not constitute reasonable action under the circumstances,
or a good-faith effort to resolve his debts. There is no indication in this record that
Applicant sought financial counseling or other professional assistance, that he tried to
negotiate with any of his creditors, or that he has actually made any direct payments to
his creditors. Finally, Applicant did not present information about his current finances
that would support a finding that, after his most recent discharge of debts, he is unlikely
to again be unable to meet his regular financial obligations. On balance, Applicant has
not mitigated the security concerns about his finances.
In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative
factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). I have considered Applicant’s Army service, his
steady record of employment, and the difficult circumstances with which he has been
presented. Nonetheless, Applicant did not carry his burden of presenting sufficient
information to refute the SOR allegations or to mitigate the security concerns
established by the Government’s information. Without such information, doubts remain
about his suitability for access to classified information. Because protection of the
national interest is the principal focus of these adjudications, those doubts must be
resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.d: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: WITHDRAWN
Subparagraphs 2.a - 2.b: Withdrawn
6
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a
security clearance is denied.
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
