 
1 
 
 
                                  `                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: 
  
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01409 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to provide adequate documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 16, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 2) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on June 18, 2012. (Item 
3) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
October 19, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
 
2 
 
 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 
2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 19, 2015, admitting both allegations 
of delinquent debt. She elected to have the matter decided on the written record. (Item 
2) Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on January 15, 2016. 
Applicant received a complete file of relevant material (FORM) on January 19, 2016, 
and was provided the opportunity to file objections and to submit material to refute, 
extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying conditions. Applicant did not file a reply to the 
FORM. I was assigned to case on May 5, 2015.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview with an OPM agent (Item 6) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over her objection. She was further advised that she could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
she could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a 
Government witness. She was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the 
summary, the Administrative Judge could determine that she waived any objection to 
the admissibility of the Personnel Subject Interview summary. Applicant did not respond 
to the FORM, so she waived any objection to the admissibility of the Personal Subject 
Interview summary. I will consider information in the Personal Subject Interview in my 
decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 54 years old, and has been an information assurance engineer for a 
defense contractor since February 2012. She served on active duty in the Navy from 
December 1985 until July 1997, and in the inactive reserve from August 1997 until 
August 2000, when she was honorably discharged. She has taken college level courses 
while employed full time. She married in May 1982 and divorced in June 1986. She 
married her present husband in June 1993. She has one child. She was granted access 
to classified information while on active duty in February 1986.  (Item 2, e-QIP, dated 
May 16, 2012; Item 3, Personal Subject Interview, dated June 18, 2012)  
 
The SOR lists, and credit reports (Item 4, dated September 24, 2015; Item 5, 
dated January 30, 2015; and Item 6, dated May 2, 2012) confirm the following 
delinquent debts for Applicant: a telephone company debt in collection for $594 (SOR 
1.a); and an Internal Revenue Service (IRA) tax lien for $10,085 (SOR 1.b).  
 
Applicant informed the OPM agent in the Personal Subject Interview that she and 
her husband file their taxes jointly. Her husband advised her that their taxes were paid. 
 
3 
 
 
He never advised her that they were behind on their taxes or that there was a tax lien. 
In her response to the SOR, Applicant stated that she relied on her husband to take 
care of their IRS matters. She did not know about the tax lien and she would be more 
proactive in the future in regard to her financial matters. She also acknowledged the 
debt at SOR 1.a. She relied on her husband to pay their bills. She stated that the bill 
would be paid soon. Applicant did not present any information concerning contact with 
the IRS or payments made on the tax lien. She also did not present any information on 
correspondence with the telephone company concerning the debt she owed them. 
 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
 
4 
 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage finances in such a way as to meet financial 
obligations.  
 
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant’s history of delinquent debts is 
documented in her credit reports and her admissions to the allegations in the SOR. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under Financial Considerations 
Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts), and AG 
¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations). The information raises both an 
inability and an unwillingness to pay delinquent debt.   
 
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Condition under AG 
¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
5 
 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provided 
documented proof to substantial the basis for the dispute or provide 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s unpaid debts are a 
continuous course of conduct and thus current. Applicant claimed ignorance of the two 
SOR debts stating that her husband was responsible for the family finances and taxes. 
She knew of the debts as of June 2012 when questioned about them by the security 
investigator. In her November 2015 response to the SOR, Applicant stated she would 
resolve the debts and be more proactive in regard to finances in the future. Applicant 
did not present any information or documentation concerning her efforts to resolve the 
delinquent debts. 
 
 Applicant has not presented a reasonable plan to assume responsibility for and 
resolve her financial problems. With evidence of delinquent debt and no documentation 
to support responsible management of her finances, it is obvious that Applicant’s 
financial problems are not under control. Applicant's lack of documented action is 
significant and disqualifying. Based on the acknowledged debts and the failure to make 
arrangements to pay the debts, it is clear that Applicant has not been reasonable and 
responsible in regard to her finances. Her failure to act reasonably and responsibly 
towards her finances is a strong indication that she will not protect and safeguard 
classified information. Applicant has not presented sufficient information to mitigate 
security concerns for financial considerations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
6 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s active duty 
and reserve service in the Navy and her honorable discharge. Applicant presented no 
evidence of any action she has taken to resolve his delinquent debts. She has not 
provided sufficient credible documentary information to show reasonable and 
responsible action to address delinquent debts and resolve financial problems. 
Applicant has not demonstrated responsible management of her finances or a 
consistent record of actions to resolve financial issues. Overall, the record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. She has not established her suitability for access to classified 
information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security 
concerns arising from her financial situation.  
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.b:  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
