1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [REDACTED] )  ISCR Case No. 15-02408 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Chris Morin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HESS, Stephanie C., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Due to circumstances beyond his control, Applicant experienced 
financial difficulties, but mitigated the concern by acting responsibly under the 
circumstances. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP) on July 20, 2014. 
On October 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR), alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant answered the SOR on November 23, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on February 
8, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on March 14, 2016. On March 23, 2016, the 
2 
 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified Applicant that the hearing was 
scheduled for April 13, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government 
Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant 
testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A through I and AX K, which were 
admitted without objection.1 DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 22, 2016. 
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 On Department Counsel’s motion, and without objection, I amended the SOR by 
striking ¶¶ 1.i through 1.l:  SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j are the same as the debt alleged in SOR¶ 
1.e; SOR ¶ 1. k is same as the debt alleged in ¶ 1.d; and SOR ¶ 1.l is the same as the 
debt alleged in ¶ 1.b. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
The amended SOR alleges eight delinquent debts totaling approximately 
$18,615. The delinquent debts include two vehicle loans, three medical bills, a cellular 
telephone bill, and, two cable service bills. In his Answer, Applicant admitted each of the 
allegations. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact. The delinquent debts 
are reflected in Applicant’s credit bureau reports (CBR) dated February 2015 and 
December 2012. (GX 2; GX 3.)  
 
Applicant is a 57-year-old information technology (IT) security specialist being 
sponsored by a defense contractor. The job he has been offered requires a security 
clearance. Currently, he does not have an active clearance, however, he previously 
held a clearance while employed by a different defense contractor. He served honorably 
in the U.S. Army from August 1978 until September 1980. He received his associate’s 
degree in 1997 and bachelor’s degree in education in 2004. He received a certificate of 
completion in computer security in 2013. (GX 1.) He taught career technology in a 
public middle school, and was an IT coordinator for another school, from 2002 until 
2006, when he was laid off due to budget cutbacks. (GX 1; Tr. 32.) He married in 1985, 
separated in 2006, and he and his wife divorced in 2009.  He has one adult daughter, 
who is currently attending medical school, and is financially independent from Applicant. 
(GX 1; Tr. 27.) He was an active participant in a fraternal organization and in his church 
for many years. (Tr. 46-49.) He is deeply trusted by his family and friends. (AX K.) 
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties arose in 2006, as a result of his separation from 
his wife, and his loss of employment from the public school system. (Tr. 29.) While still 
employed by the school system, he financed the purchase of a vehicle. After losing his 
job, he was unable to make the requisite monthly payments. He maintained contact with 
the lender, promising to resume payments as soon as he found employment. Ultimately, 
the vehicle was repossessed and sold at auction. The $8,945 debt in SOR ¶ 1.a is owed 
to the collection agency for the deficiency balance. (GX 2; Tr. 33.) 
                                                            
1 I inadvertently skipped the letter “K” when marking and admitting Applicant’s exhibits. 
3 
 
The $5,582 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is for a vehicle loan that Applicant took out 
on behalf of a friend in 2006. The friend was a homebuilder, who, at the time, had three 
houses on the market, all of which were later foreclosed. The friend was unable to repay 
the loan, and Applicant became solely responsible for the debt. (GX 2; Tr. 33-34.)  
 
The $1,691 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is a medical debt. (GX 2.) Applicant’s 
medical care is covered by the Veteran’s Administration (VA), and he usually seeks 
care at the VA hospital. In this instance, he was treated at a local hospital. Usually, 
under such circumstances, the hospital submits the bill to the VA for payment. Applicant 
called the VA to inquire about this bill and was informed that the VA never received the 
bill. He called the hospital to request that the hospital resubmit the bill to the VA, and 
was informed that the hospital would not do that. (Tr. 34-35.) He was treated for cancer 
at the VA approximately four or five years ago, and continues to have follow-up 
examinations. (Tr. 43.) 
 
The $818 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is owed to a cellular telephone company. 
(GX 2.) This debt was incurred by Applicant when he prematurely terminated his two-
year contract. He was working as a contractor and had bid and won a contract on a 
project that was funded by the state and federal governments. He purchased two 
cellular telephones, one for himself and one for his employee, and signed a two-year 
contract. The funding for his program was cut, and his contract was not funded. He 
contacted the cellular telephone company, explained the circumstances, and asked to 
cancel the contract, and pay on a month-to-month plan. The company did not agree to 
Applicant’s request, and charged him approximately $700 as an early termination fee. 
(Tr. 35-36.) 
 
The $672 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is an unresolved medical debt. (GX 3.) 
Applicant will resubmit this bill to the VA for payment. The $525 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.f is for a cable service contract that Applicant entered on behalf of one of his brothers, 
who lives in another state, and, due to his own financial woes, was unable to secure the 
account in his own name. His brother then failed to make the required payments. The 
$119 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is also for a cable service contract that Applicant 
entered on behalf of his brother. The $263 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is for an unpaid 
medical bill incurred by Applicant’s ex-wife prior to their divorce. (GX 2; Tr. 37-39.)  
 
Prior to his separation from his wife and his period of unemployment in 2006, 
Applicant lived within his means and had good credit. (Tr. 29.) Since 2006, he has been 
unable to secure full-time employment. (GX 1; Tr. 29; Tr. 41-42.) He works sporadically, 
and only part-time hours, for another Government contractor, when the company has 
work for him. (Tr. 44.) There are few full-time IT-related jobs available near his home, 
and the potentially positions available require a security clearance. (Tr. 29-30.) Despite 
his very limited and unreliable income, Applicant has not incurred any significant 
delinquent debt in nearly 10 years. (Tr. 41; GX 3.) As part of the divorce settlement, he 
quit-claim deeded his interest in the house to his wife. (Tr. 41.) In an effort to minimize 
his expenses, he moved in with his mother in 2013. (GX 1.) He inherited his father’s 
2003 truck, which is paid off, and his only truck-related monthly bills are for gasoline and 
4 
 
insurance. (Tr. 44.) He has a month-to-month cellular phone with no contract, he uses 
his brother’s computer and internet service, and he no longer participates in the 
fraternal organization because he cannot afford the dues. (Tr. 46.)   
 
Applicant testified candidly and sincerely about his financial circumstances and 
his eagerness and willingness to resolve each of his debts, stating that he “was raised 
up…to do the right thing.” (Tr. 30.) He has maintained his account numbers for each of 
his delinquent accounts and the contact information for each of the creditors. He will pay 
his delinquent accounts as soon as his income permits. (Answer; Tr. 34; Tr. 52.) He 
accepts responsibility for each of the debts, including the debt he incurred for a friend, 
those he incurred for his brother, and the medical bill owed by his ex-wife. (Answer; Tr. 
30-31.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant’s meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
5 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).  
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
  
 Applicant’s testimony, corroborated by the record evidence, establishes two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
6 
 
 However, an individual may mitigate concerns about his ability to handle and 
safeguard classified information raised by his financial circumstances by establishing 
one or more of the mitigating conditions listed under the guideline. The relevant 
mitigating conditions in this case are: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is established. Applicant’s debts are not recent. Given that Applicant 
has been without reliable income for about 10 years, and has managed not to incur any 
significant debt in that timeframe, his delinquent accounts do not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
  
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Through no fault of his own, Applicant has 
experienced extensive periods of unemployment and underemployment. The medical 
debts arose from circumstances beyond his control. Approximately $2,363 of his 
medical debt is owed for treatments that should have been covered by the VA, and 
$263 is owed for a medical debt incurred by his ex-wife.  He acted responsibly by 
contacting his creditors and trying to negotiate with them, and by maintaining the 
account numbers and his creditors’ contact information, to enable him to resolve his 
debts as soon as he is gainfully employed. He also acted responsibly by not incurring 
any additional debt, and by taking extreme measures to reduce his monthly expenses.   
  
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. Applicant acted in good faith by contacting his 
creditors and informing them of his unemployment and resulting financial 
circumstances, before he defaulted on payments. His efforts to negotiate with these 
creditors were made in good faith. Applicant did not intentionally stop paying his 
creditors, he simply was unable to continue. Even with his very limited income, he is 
current on all his ongoing financial obligations. He plans to pay each of the delinquent 
debts alleged in the SOR as soon as his income permits.  
 
7 
 
 “Good faith” means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, 
honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 WL 
1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). A security clearance adjudication is an 
evaluation of an individual’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-
collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) A person is 
not required to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. He or she need 
only establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to 
implement the plan. The adjudicative guidelines do not require that an individual make 
payments on all delinquent debts simultaneously, nor do they require that the debts 
alleged in the SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 
2008). 
  
 AG ¶ 20(e) is established. Applicant contacted both the VA and the treating 
hospital in an effort to resolve the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but I 
have also considered the following: 
 
 Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Army. Despite the unpredictability of his 
income, Applicant lives within his means. He will have the ability to pay his  
delinquencies once he is gainfully employed, and was sincere in his determination to do 
so. I am confident that Applicant will continue his good-faith efforts to resolve his 
delinquent debts. 
  
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
8 
 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his delinquent debts. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant him eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
As required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, I make the 
following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
  
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.h:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.l    Withdrawn 
   
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
Stephanie C. Hess 
Administrative Judge 
 
