1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-00630 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 16, 2014. On 
August 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F. The DOD acted under Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 15, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
November 2, 2015, and the case was assigned to me on February 22, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
February 29, 2016, scheduling the hearing for March 24, 2016. I convened the hearing 
2 
 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A through H, which 
were admitted without objection. I kept the record open until April 8, 2016, to enable 
Applicant to submit additional evidence. He timely submitted AX I through P, which were 
received without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 4, 2016. 
 
Amendment of SOR 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to add an allegation that 
Applicant filed a petition for Chapter 13 bankruptcy. Applicant did not object, and I 
amended the SOR by adding SOR ¶ 1.f, alleging that Applicant filed a petition for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy in about May 2015. (Tr. 18-19.) 
 
Withdrawal of SOR ¶ 1.d 
 
 During the hearing, Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR ¶ 1.d on the 
ground that it alleged the same debt as SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant did not object, and I 
granted the motion. (Tr. 78-79.) 
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations. His admissions 
in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 64-year-old employee of a defense contractor, working as an 
operations analyst since 2006. He has been employed by defense contractors since 
September 2002. He has held a security clearance since December 2003. 
 
 Applicant served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from August 1979 to November 
1995, when he retired as a lieutenant commander. He retired before completing 20 
years of active duty under a program in effect at the time that authorized early 
retirement. (Tr. 88.)  
 
Applicant has a bachelor’s degree, master’s degree, and professional 
certifications from the Joint and Combined Staff Officer School and the Navy 
Postgraduate School. He had a distinguished military career, serving in four operational 
flying tours and completing 2,800 flight hours and 660 arrested carrier landings. He flew 
35 combat missions during Operation Desert Storm. He also served as a staff officer in 
numerous key positions, including service as a senior member of the staff of the Chief 
of Naval Operations. He has received two awards of the Air Medal for Valor, the 
Meritorious Service Medal, six awards of the Navy-Marine Corps Commendation Medal 
(including one award for valor), and the Navy Achievement Medal. (Enclosure 12 to 
Answer; AX G.) 
                                                          
1 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to other documents in the record. 
3 
 
Applicant married in June 1988 and divorced in May 2013. He and his ex-wife 
have two adult sons, ages 26 and 22. When they divorced, the court declined to allocate 
the property interests in the marital home or allocate the debt associated with the 
property.2 The divorce decree recites that the parties will continue to hold title to the 
marital home as tenants in common. Applicant was ordered to pay his ex-wife spousal 
support of $2,250 per month for 12 months and $2,000 per month thereafter. He also 
was required to pay $17,500 for her attorney’s fees. (Enclosure 1 to Answer at 4-5; Tr. 
43.) Applicant’s ex-wife lived in the marital home, and Applicant was required to obtain 
her permission to visit it. (Tr. 43.) 
 
Applicant erroneously believed that his ex-wife’s status as a tenant in common 
and a joint borrower imposed a legal obligation on her to pay one-half of the mortgage 
payments. (Tr. 44.) She made no payments. He was financially unable to make the full 
payments, and he allowed the house to go into foreclosure. (Tr. 43-45.) Applicant 
testified that the property was foreclosed in February 2016, but it had not been sold as 
of the date of the hearing. (AX L; Tr. 72-76, 86.) In his post-hearing submission, he 
stated that there were no buyers at the auction and the property likely reverted to the 
Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae). His Equifax credit report of March 
25, 2016, reflects that the property was transferred and sold and that the past-due debt 
payments are included in the bankruptcy. (AX O at 4.).  
 
In April 2015, Applicant retained a law firm to represent him in a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy proceeding. He completed the required financial counseling in April and July 
2015. The bankruptcy petition was filed in May 2015. The bankruptcy file lists the 
creditors (or their successors) alleged in the SOR and Fannie Mae. However, the 
documents indicate that neither the mortgage lender nor Fannie Mae had made a claim 
as of March 2016. (AX C.) Applicant made an initial payment of $1,064 to the 
bankruptcy trustee in May 2015 and began making monthly $1,086 payments in June 
2015 by payroll deduction. His payments were current as of the date of the hearing. 
(Enclosures 2-6 to Answer; AX A through D.) 
 
 In June 2015, an independent monitor overseeing a settlement agreement 
between the mortgage lender and the U.S. Department of Justice notified Applicant that 
his obligations under a second mortgage on the marital home were forgiven and any 
liens on the property were extinguished. (Enclosures 9-10 to Answer.) This debt was 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b and is resolved. 
 
 Applicant’s current salary is about $109,000 per year, and he receives about 
$20,000 in military retired pay. He contributes about $6,000 per year to his 401(k) 
retirement account, which has a current balance of about $75,000. (Tr. 63.) He testified 
that his take-home pay, including his military retirement, is about $5,000 per month, 
                                                          
2 There is a handwritten notation on the divorce decree that is barely legible but appears to say, “Pursuant 
to the court’s oral ruling on 4-5-13, Respondent is no longer required to make any mortgage payments 
due after April 5, 2013.” It is not clear who made the notation, when it was made, or whether the judge 
approved it. Other notations on the decree by both attorneys reflect disagreements with portions of the 
decree, including the ex-wife’s attorney’s objection to the judge’s failure to allocate the property or debt 
associated with the marital home. 
4 
 
after deductions including the $2,000 in alimony and $1,084 payments to the bankruptcy 
trustee. His payments on his truck, rent, utilities, and his son’s student loan are current. 
(Tr. 47.) His net monthly remainder is about $3,000. He has an average balance in his 
checking account of about $3,000. (Tr. 84-85.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
5 
 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges a mortgage loan that is past due for about $33,056 (SOR ¶ 
1.a); a home-equity line of credit that was charged off for $115,313 (SOR ¶ 1.b); a 
delinquent credit-card account that was charged off for about $11,213 (SOR ¶ 1.c); and 
an installment account for furniture that was charged off for about $1,266 (SOR ¶ 1.e). 
SOR ¶ 1.d was withdrawn because it duplicated SOR ¶ 1.c. The SOR was amended at 
the hearing to allege that Applicant filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in May 2015 
(SOR ¶ 1.f).3 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
                                                          
3 In his answer to the SOR and his post-hearing submission (AX I), Applicant argued that 11 U.S.C. § 515 
prohibits the U.S. Government from considering his Chapter 13 bankruptcy in determining his eligibility for 
a security clearance. Applicant has a legal right to file a bankruptcy petition, but the Government is not 
precluded from considering the negative security implications of the financial difficulties underlying his 
bankruptcy petition. ISCR Case No. 08-00435 (App. Bd. Jan. 22, 2009), citing ISCR Case No. 01-27082 
(App. Bd. Aug. 5, 2003) 
6 
 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions and the documentary evidence submitted in his answer to 
the SOR and at the hearing establish two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not 
meeting financial obligations”). The following mitigating conditions under this guideline 
are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s debts are numerous, not yet resolved, 
and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is established. Applicant’s debts were the result of his divorce and his 
ex-wife’s refusal to share in payment of debts incurred during the marriage. Applicant 
acted responsibly by attempting to pay the debts by himself, resorting to a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy when he was unable to pay the debts, and complying with his Chapter 13 
payment plan for more than a year. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is established. Applicant completed the financial counseling required 
by the bankruptcy court, and his Chapter 13 payment record provides “clear evidence” 
that his financial problems are under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established. Applicant made a good-faith effort to pay the marital 
debts by himself. When he was unable to carry the financial load of his failed marriage 
7 
 
alone, he resorted to a Chapter 13 bankruptcy and has made the required payments for 
more than a year. Based on his reputation for reliability and devotion to duty, along with 
his track record in resolving the marital debts, I am confident that he will resolve any 
deficiency after the foreclosure and sale of the marital home, either through the 
bankruptcy process or by a separate transaction.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not fully established. Although Applicant disputed his legal 
obligation to pay the joint marital debts, he has not disputed the validity of the debts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant was indignant about what he perceived as an attack on 
his loyalty, reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment; however, he was candid, 
sincere, and credible. He had a long and distinguished military career, followed by 
impressive service as an employee of a defense contractor. He is meeting his 
obligations under the Chapter 13 payment plan as well as his current living expenses. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial problems. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
8 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Consideration): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.c:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Withdrawn 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e-1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant 
eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
