 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DOD Directive 5220.6 (Directive).1
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
[NAME REDACTED] )       ISCR Case No. 15-02208
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant did not meet his burden of producing information that mitigates the
security concerns about his long history of criminal conduct and adverse personal
conduct. His request for continued access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
Applicant has worked for the same defense contractor since August 1997. He
first received a security clearance in September 1997. On June 27, 2012, Applicant
submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (EQIP) to renew his
eligibility for access to classified information. After reviewing the completed background
investigation, Department of Defense (DOD) adjudicators could not determine that it is
clearly consistent with the national interest for Applicant to continue to have access to
classified information.1
 See Directive, Enclosure 2. See also 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006).2
 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included seven exhibits (Items 1 - 7) proffered in3
support of the Government’s case.
2
On October 27, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging facts
that raise security concerns addressed under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested2
a decision without a hearing. On January 7, 2016, Department Counsel for the Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM)  in3
support of the SOR. Applicant received the FORM on January 11, 2016, and timely
submitted additional information. (Response to FORM). The record closed on February
10, 2016, and the case was assigned to me on May 2, 2016.
Findings of Fact
Under Guideline J, the Government alleged that in October 1998, Applicant was
arrested and charged with assault and battery (SOR 1.a); and that in June 2003 (SOR
1.b), June 2005 (SOR 1.c), and August 2007 (SOR 1.d), he was arrested and charged
with assault and battery on a family member. It was further alleged that in August 2007,
Applicant was charged with speeding and driving on a suspended license (SOR 1.e);
and that on October 20, 2012, he was arrested and charged with driving under the
influence of alcohol or drugs, for which he was convicted in January 2013 (SOR 1.f).
Under Guideline E, the Government cross-alleged as adverse personal conduct the
allegations at SOR 1.a - 1.f (SOR 2.a). In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted with
explanations all of the Guideline J allegations, and by reference, all of the Guideline E
allegations. (FORM, Item 1) In addition to the facts established by his admissions, I
make the following findings of fact.
Applicant is 38 years old. After graduating from high school in 1997, he enrolled
in his employer’s apprenticeship school. He successfully completed this vocational
training in August 2001. Applicant and his wife were married in June 1999. They
separated in July 2008, and Applicant filed for divorce in January 2016. They have three
children, ages 16, 12, and 9. The assault charges alleged in SOR 1.b - 1.d occurred in
connection with domestic arguments with his estranged wife. Each time, Applicant was
given probation and ordered to complete anger management counseling. He complied
with all of the court’s orders. (FORM, Items 1 - 4)
The 1998 assault charge arose from a bar fight involving Applicant and his
friends. He was given a one-year suspended jail sentence. (FORM, Items 1 and 3)
In October 2010, Applicant was pulled over for speeding on his way to work. His
license was found to have been suspended. Applicant was later convicted of both
offenses but regained his driving privileges six months later. (FORM, Items 1 - 3)
On October 20, 2012, four months after submitting his EQIP, and five days
before his personal subject interview with a Government investigator, Applicant
consumed alcohol at his home before driving to his girlfriend’s house. On the way, he hit
 Directive. 6.3.4
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).5
3
a parked trailer but left the scene and continued on to his destination. After several
hours there he drove home. On the way, he was stopped by police and administered a
breathalyser test, which he failed. He was arrested and charged with DUI and leaving
the scene of an accident. He was convicted of the DUI in January 2013. (FORM, Items
1 and 3)
Applicant claims he has learned from his past mistakes, especially his most
recent alcohol-related infraction. He attended court-ordered Alcoholics Anonymous (AA)
and alcohol safety and awareness training. He also had his driver’s license suspended
for one year, but now has regained his driving privileges. He repeatedly expressed
remorse for his arrests and the impact they had on his family. (FORM, Item 1;
Response to FORM)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,4
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the adjudicative
guidelines. Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the
new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole-person” concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is
clearly consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue5
to have access to classified information. Department Counsel must produce sufficient
reliable information on which DOD based its preliminary decision to deny or revoke a
security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, Department Counsel must prove
 Directive, E3.1.14.6
 Directive, E3.1.15.7
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.8
 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).9
4
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  If the Government meets its burden, it then falls6
to the applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the case for disqualification.  7
Because no one is entitled to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy
burden of persuasion to establish that it is clearly consistent with the national interest for
them to have access to protected information.  A person who has access to such8
information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and
confidence. Thus, there is a compelling need to ensure each applicant possesses the
requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness of one who will protect the nation’s
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to
classified information in favor of the Government.9
Analysis
Criminal Conduct
Available information is sufficient to support the SOR allegations under this
guideline. Applicant has a long history of criminal conduct, some, but not all, of which,
was related to his marriage. Even after separating from his wife and re-applying for his
security clearance, Applicant continued to violate the law. The facts established by
Applicant’s admissions and by the information contained in the FORM reasonably raise
a security concern addressed, in relevant part, at AG ¶ 30 as follows:
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Specifically, the record requires application of the disqualifying condition at AG ¶
31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses). I have also considered the
following pertinent AG ¶ 32 mitigating conditions:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment; 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; and
5
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
Appellant’s last criminal offense occurred two-and-a-half years ago and might not
otherwise be considered recent. However, his record of criminal conduct spans most of
the past 20 years, and he only completed the terms of his DUI sentence in early 2014.
Not enough time has passed to support application of AG ¶ 32(a). His change of marital
status also does not support mitigation here. Three of the six offenses documented here
had nothing to do with his marriage. AG ¶ 32(b) does not apply. Finally, all of the
foregoing precludes application of AG ¶ 32(d). On balance, Applicant has not mitigated
the security concerns about his criminal conduct.
Personal Conduct
Available information also reasonably raises a security concern about Applicant’s
overall judgment and reliability. Someone who is willing to repeatedly disregard laws
regarding physical violence and public safety may also disregard rules and procedures
for safeguarding classified information. The security concern in this regard is stated at
AG ¶ 15 as follows:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
Because Applicant’s conduct is directly addressed and is disqualifying under the
criminal conduct guidelines at AG ¶ 31, none of the specific AG ¶ 16 disqualifying
guidelines is applicable. Nonetheless, mitigation under the following AG ¶ 17 mitigating
conditions is potentially available:
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.
For the same reasons that preclude application of the mitigating conditions at AG
¶¶ 32(a), 32(b) and 32(d), there can be no mitigation under this guideline. Applicant’s
conduct has been serious and repeated since 1997. His violent behavior recurred
despite multiple anger management classes. Not enough time has passed since his last
6
criminal offense, and he has not produced any independent information to support a
conclusion that he is rehabilitated. The security concerns about Applicant’s personal
conduct remain.
In addition to evaluating the facts and applying the appropriate adjudicative
factors under Guideline F, I have reviewed the record before me in the context of the
whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant had the burden of presenting
sufficient information to refute or mitigate the resulting security concerns. Without such
information, unresolved doubts are established about his continued suitability for access
to classified information. Because protection of the national interest is the principal
focus of these adjudications, those doubts must be resolved against the Applicant.
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.f: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all available information, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest for Applicant to have access to classified information. Applicant’s security
clearance is revoked.
                                        
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
