 
1 
                                                              
                         DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-02153 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations trustworthiness concerns. 
Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 22, 2015, Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing trustworthiness 
concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under DOD 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); DOD Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel 
Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
On November 2, 2015, Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 31, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on April 21, 2016, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on May 11, 2016. 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
 
2 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted 
without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 23, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR except for ¶ 1.x, which she denied. 
Her admissions were incorporated into the findings of fact. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. She has an associate’s degree earned in 2006. She 
was married from 2005 to 2012. She has children from her ex-husband whose ages are 
20, 18, 17, and 14. The two youngest children reside with her. She has an informal child 
support agreement that her ex-husband provides money when she needs it. She 
remarried in 2013. There are two stepchildren that reside with her and her spouse, ages 
19 and 17. The elder works and the younger is in school. Applicant has been employed 
by a federal contractor since February 2014.1  
 
 Applicant attributed her financial difficulties to being a young single parent with 
four children. Her mother passed away in 1998. She was living paycheck to paycheck. 
Her husband was not reliable. She was paying student loans at one time, but did not 
recall how long she paid them. She stated the student loan alleged in SOR ¶ 1.t 
($4,102) is in forbearance. She disputed the student loan debt in SOR ¶ 1.x ($5,932) 
believing it is a duplicate. She did not provide corroborating information to show the 
debt is a duplicate. Credit reports from May 2014 and January 2015 substantiate the 
alleged debts and the two student loans. Applicant also attributed her financial problems 
to being unemployed and underemployed. She estimated that her annual income in 
2015 was approximately $22,000. Her spouse’s annual income is not known. Applicant 
was unemployed from August 2011 to April 2013. She was employed from 2007 to 
2011. She relocated to a new state when her spouse moved and had difficulty finding a 
job. They file their tax returns separately.2  
 
 Applicant testified that she and her spouse filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case in 
November 2015. She provided a letter dated January 14, 2016, from the bankruptcy 
court that is titled: “Notice Concerning Your 2015 Tax Return and Potential Motion to 
Dismiss Your Case.” The Trustee requested a copy of Applicant’s 2015 federal income 
tax return including all supporting schedules within 30 days of filing the return, but not 
later than April 30, 2016.3 Applicant testified that she filed her 2015 federal income tax 
return in February 2015 and received a refund. She believed her spouse provided a 
copy of the tax return. Because they file their tax returns separately and filed their 
bankruptcy jointly, it is unclear if both parties provided copies of their tax returns. The 
letter also indicated that the terms of the Chapter 13 may require Applicant to pay the 
federal tax refund to the Chapter 13 Trustee to be distributed to the creditors. Applicant 
                                                          
1 Tr. 19-25, 38. 
 
2 Tr. 26, 32-35, 38-43; GE 2, 3. 
 
3 AE A. 
 
3 
did not provide the Trustee with the refund she received. She stated she was “working 
on it.”4  
 
 Applicant testified she has not paid any of the delinquent debts alleged in the 
SOR and that they are all included in her Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. She indicated her 
student loan is in forbearance due to the bankruptcy. She does not have any credit 
cards. She completed the mandated financial counseling required to file bankruptcy. 
She does not have a written budget, but stated she knows where the money is going. 
She plans on continuing making the Chapter 13 bankruptcy payments through 
completion of the plan.5  
 
 Applicant did not know the amount of total liabilities she and her spouse listed in 
the bankruptcy or the amount for secured debts, unsecured debts, assets, and other 
information included in the filings. Her spouse makes a payment of $184 every two 
weeks to the bankruptcy trustee that began in December 2015. The payments come 
directly out of her spouse’s paycheck. She provided proof that a payment was 
withdrawn in December 2015, and two payments were withdrawn in April 2016. She 
was not certain how long the Chapter 13 plan will run, but thought it was five years. 6  
 
 Applicant testified that some of her delinquent debts are old from when she was 
a single mother. She could not identify which debts alleged fall into that category. The 
SOR alleges 25 delinquent debts totaling approximately $20,015. 
  
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.” 
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
                                                          
4 Tr. 27, 43-50; AE A. The letter also advised Applicant to review the requirements with her bankruptcy 
attorney. 
 
5 Tr. 50-58. 
 
6 Tr. 27-32, 47; AE B. 
 
4 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise sensitive information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
sensitive information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding sensitive 
information.7 
                                                          
7 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has 25 delinquent debts totaling approximately $20,015. Applicant is 
unable or unwilling to pay or resolve her delinquent debts. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations trustworthiness concerns 
are provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant recently filed bankruptcy with her spouse to resolve her delinquent 
debts. Her spouse is making payments. She does not know the amount of liabilities 
claimed in the bankruptcy. It is unknown if all of the debts alleged in the SOR are 
included in the bankruptcy. Applicant was required to comply with an order from the 
bankruptcy trustee to provide her refund by a certain date. It is unknown if both her and 
her spouse’s tax returns were submitted to the trustee. Applicant did not provide the 
refund. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that future financial problems are 
unlikely to recur. Her behavior casts doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 
6 
 Applicant attributed her financial problems to being a young single mother at one 
time. She testified that she receives child support from her ex-husband when she needs 
money. Therefore, this is not a condition beyond her control. She was married to her ex-
husband from 2005 to 2012 and was employed from 2007 to 2011. She also attributed 
her financial problems to unemployment and underemployment. These were conditions 
beyond her control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. She did not provide evidence of other actions she 
may have taken before filing bankruptcy to resolve her debts. She did not comply with 
the bankruptcy trustee’s order to provide her tax refund to the court. AG ¶ 20(b) partially 
applies.  
 
 Applicant testified she completed the mandated financial counseling for the 
bankruptcy case. She indicated she knew where her money was being spent, but she 
did not know the specifics about her bankruptcy and did not have a written budget. 
Bankruptcy is a legal means to resolve debts. The payments being made under the 
Chapter 13 plan show some effort to resolve her debts. Applicant has only been 
participating in the Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan for several months. She failed to timely 
comply with the bankruptcy trustee’s order and the current status of her bankruptcy is 
unknown. There is an insufficient financial track record at this time to conclude 
Applicant’s financial problems are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) partially apply.  
 
 Applicant disputed the student loan debt in SOR ¶ 1.x indicating it is a duplicate. 
Her credit reports reflect two different loan amounts and account numbers. She did not 
provide documented proof to substantiate her dispute or any efforts she made to 
resolve it. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public 
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
 
7 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 Applicant has numerous delinquent debts. She filed a Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
case in November 2015, but was uncertain about the specifics of it. She had not 
complied with an order from the bankruptcy trustee, which may put her bankruptcy in 
jeopardy. It also raises questions about her willingness to comply with the requirements 
of the Chapter 13 case. It is unknown what debts are included in the Chapter 13 
payment plan, and her total liabilities. Applicant is making an effort to resolve her debts, 
but at this time, she does not have a sufficient track record of fiscal responsibility and 
her financial issues remain a concern. 
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a public trust position. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated financial considerations trustworthiness concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.y:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
