 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 15-02813 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns raised by her past illegal drug 
involvement and dishonesty about it during the security clearance process. 
Notwithstanding the presence of some favorable evidence, her conduct raises questions 
about her security clearance eligibility. Clearance is denied.  
 
History of the Case 
 
On October 17, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated 
Adjudications Facility (CAF) sent Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging that 
her conduct raised security concerns under the drug involvement and personal conduct 
guidelines.1 Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing to establish her 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
1 This action was taken under Executive Order (E.O.) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 
 On June 9, 2016, a date mutually agreed to by the parties, a hearing was held.2 
Applicant chose to testify, and Exhibits 1 – 3 and A – H were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was received on June 16, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old high school graduate employed by a defense 
contractor. She is a single mother of two minor children. She has earned information 
systems certificates through successful completion of courses of studies offered by 
technical training schools, including while unemployed. She was unemployed from 
March 2011 to August 2014, when she was hired by her current employer. Her current 
work duties primarily consist of providing information technology (IT) support to the 
military. She submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in August 2014 in 
connection with her current job. She has not previously held a clearance.3 
 
 Applicant was asked in the SCA whether she had used any illegal drugs, 
including marijuana, in the past seven years. Applicant answered “no.”4 This response 
was false, as Applicant later admitted during a security clearance background interview 
that she had used marijuana from about 1992 to 2014. This interview occurred less than 
a month after Applicant submitted her SCA. Specifically, under questioning by the 
investigator, Applicant admitted the following: 
 
Subject first used marijuana in 1992 as a result of peer pressure. When 
Subject was asked for details, she said that she used it weekly on and off 
for many years. When asked to provide details of “many years” she said 
that she couldn’t recall due to the passage in time. When asked whether 
she smoked marijuana in the past seven years, she readily admitted that 
she last smoked marijuana in June 14. She smoked marijuana weekly 
from Apr 14 until Jun 14. Subject declined to elaborate. After questioning, 
she said that she didn’t smoke marijuana for three years prior to Aprl 14. 
Prior to that, she had been smoking on and off from 1992 until 2011. . . . 
The marijuana made her “paranoid.” When asked why she smoked it if it 
made her paranoid, she said she was a social marijuana smoker and it 
relaxed her. In Jun 14, Subjected stopped smoking marijuana and stopped 
associating with individuals that smoked marijuana. Subject stopped 
smoking marijuana because she no longer wanted to be part of that 
lifestyle. Subject has no future intent to use marijuana. Subject declined to 
provide any names of individuals who could verify her marijuana use.5  
 
                                                          
2 Correspondence with the parties, the notice of hearing, and the case management order (CMO) are 
attached to the record as Appellate Exhibits (App. Exh.) I – III, respectively.  
 
3 Tr. 21-22; Exhibit 1.  
 
4 Exhibit 1 at 26.  
 
5 Exhibit 2 at 13. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was sent a copy of the summary of the background interview during the 
course of the current security clearance review. She was asked to verify the contents of 
the summary. She reviewed the summary and indicated that certain portions of it were 
incorrect. She made no corrections or edits to the above cited passage. She did state, 
however, since the interview was her first experience going through a security clearance 
background interview and the interview was conducted at her place of employment that 
she felt “intimidated and nervous.” She did not indicate that her admission to the 
investigator about her past illegal drug involvement was false.6 
 
 Applicant now recants her admission to the background investigator. She claims 
that she last used or was involved with marijuana in 1995 or 1996, when she was 
arrested and convicted of illegal drug possession. She admits that she made the above 
cited statement to the investigator, but claims that it was the result of undue pressure 
and coercion by the investigator.7 She submitted no evidence to corroborate her claims. 
She further claims that she did not deliberately falsify her SCA when she responded no 
to the drug history question.8 Applicant’s recantation and claims are not credible.  
 
 Applicant submitted letters from a coworker, recruiter, and a social reference who 
provide a favorable opinion regarding her work performance, reliability, and overall good 
character. The references are not aware of the SOR allegations.9 Applicant also 
submitted evidence noting her good work performance and volunteer activities. She is a 
spokesperson for a community organization that helps underprivileged persons regain 
their economic and social footing.10  
 
Policies 
 
“[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). Individual applicants are eligible for access to 
classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest” to authorize such access. E.O. 10865 § 2. 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations, the guidelines list potentially disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions. The guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies the guidelines in a  
commonsense manner, considering all available and reliable information, in arriving at a 
fair and impartial decision.  
                                                          
6 Exhibit 2. 
 
7 Tr. 20-21, 23-36; Answer. 
 
8 Tr. 43-46. 
 
9 Exhibits A, G, H; Tr. 39-40. 
 
10 Exhibits B-F; Tr. 42. 
 
4 
 
 
Department Counsel must present evidence to establish controverted facts 
alleged in the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. Applicants are responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
the applicant or proven . . . and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a 
favorable clearance decision.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  
 
Administrative judges are responsible for ensuring that an applicant receives fair 
notice of the security concerns at issue, has a reasonable opportunity to address those 
concerns, and is not subjected to unfair surprise. ISCR Case No. 12-01266 at 3 (App. 
Bd. Apr. 4, 2014). In resolving the ultimate question regarding an applicant’s eligibility, 
an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being 
considered for access to classified information . . . in favor of national security.” AG ¶ 
2(b). Moreover, recognizing the difficulty at times in making suitability determinations 
and the paramount importance of protecting national security, the Supreme Court has 
held that “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
 An individual who is granted access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of 
trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. 
Security clearance decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an 
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Such 
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather 
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern regarding illegal drug involvement is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant admitted during her background interview that she used marijuana from 
approximately 1992 to 2014, with her last use occurring about two months before she 
submitted the SCA. I found Applicant’s admission to the investigator credible. 
Applicant’s extensive history of illegal drug involvement, including past conviction for 
illegal drug possession, raises the drug involvement security concern and the following 
disqualifying conditions: 
 
 
5 
 
 
AG ¶ 25(a): any drug abuse;11 and 
 
AG ¶ 25(c): illegal drug possession . . . or possession of drug paraphernalia.  
 
 Once disqualifying conditions are established, the burden shifts to Applicant to 
present evidence demonstrating extenuation or mitigation sufficient to warrant a 
favorable security clearance decision. ISCR Case No. 15-01208 at 4 (citing Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15). The adjudicative guidelines set forth a number of potential conditions that may 
mitigate the drug involvement security concern. I have considered all the applicable 
mitigating conditions, including the following:  
 
AG ¶ 26(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not 
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
AG ¶ 26(b): a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as:  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s illegal drug involvement ended about two years ago. However, her 
dishonesty on the SCA and during the course of the security clearance process about 
her past drug involvement undercut the mitigating value of the passage of time and 
other favorable record evidence. Specifically, I find that AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) apply. 
Although AG ¶ 26(a) and 26(b) have some applicability, they are insufficient to mitigate 
the drug involvement security concern.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The personal conduct security concern is explained at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The SOR alleges at 2.a that Applicant deliberately falsified her SCA when she 
denied using illegal drugs, to include marijuana, in the past seven years. The security 
clearance process is contingent upon the honesty of all applicants. It begins with the 
answers provided in the SCA and continues throughout the security clearance process. 
                                                          
11 The Directive defines “drug abuse” as the “illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that 
deviates from approved medical direction.” See AG ¶ 24(b). 
 
6 
 
 
The omission of material, adverse information standing alone is not enough to establish 
that an applicant intentionally falsified his or her SCA. An omission is not deliberate if 
the person genuinely forgot the information requested, inadvertently overlooked or 
misunderstood the question, or sincerely thought the information did not need to be 
reported. An administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances 
surrounding the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.12 
 
 Applicant falsified her SCA when she deliberately omitted the negative 
information about her marijuana use. Although she revealed her past drug conviction on 
the SCA and then within a month of submitting the SCA revealed the adverse 
information about her past drug use, she later recanted this admission. She now claims 
her admission to the background investigator was false and the byproduct of coercion or 
pressure. Her self-serving claims are not credible or supported by any reliable evidence. 
Applicant, who had been out of work for three years before starting her current job, 
deliberately falsified her SCA to secure a position requiring a security clearance. She 
did not want to reveal she had stopped using marijuana just two months earlier and that 
her recent use was part of a long history of illegal drug involvement. 
 
 After considering all the evidence, including Applicant’s age, education, and the 
straightforward nature of the question involved, as well as her demeanor at hearing, I 
find that she deliberately falsified the SCA as alleged in SOR 2.a. I further find that AG ¶ 
16(a)13 was established by the evidence. I have considered all the applicable mitigating 
conditions listed at AG ¶ 17. However, Applicant’s dishonesty about her past drug 
involvement during the course of the current security clearance review counters against 
application of any of the available mitigating conditions. Overall, unresolved doubts 
about Applicant’s honesty, reliability, and trustworthiness remain.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). I hereby incorporate my above analysis and highlight some 
additional whole-person factors.  
 
 I gave due consideration to Applicant’s strong work ethic, good employment 
record, charitable volunteer efforts, and other favorable record evidence. However, the 
favorable record evidence is insufficient to mitigate and outweigh the serious security 
concerns raised by her conduct, notably, her dishonesty during the security clearance 
process. The Appeal Board has held that such dishonesty “strikes at the heart of the 
                                                          
12 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005). 
 
13 AG ¶ 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel 
security questionnaire . . .  or similar form used to conduct investigations . . . determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
7 
 
 
security clearance process.”14 Furthermore, the Directive specifically states that failure 
to provide truthful responses on an SCA “will normally result in an unfavorable 
clearance action.” AG ¶ 15. Consequently, the record evidence leaves me with doubts 
about Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement):       AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:        Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):       AGAINST Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:          Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
14 ISCR Case No. 09-01652 at 7 (App. Bd. Aug. 8, 2011). 
