 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02094 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Carroll J. Connelley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 29, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 3, 2015, and elected to have her 
case decided on the written record. On December 20, 2015, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, and it was received on January 4, 2016. Applicant was afforded an 
 
2 
 
 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government evidence and did not offer any additional 
information. The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 5 are admitted 
into evidence. The case was assigned to me on May 2, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR, except she failed to respond 
to ¶ 1.d; therefore it will be considered a denial. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 65 years old. She is a high school graduate. She married in 1979 
and divorced in 1994. She has two adult children ages 36 and 33. She has been 
employed by a federal contractor since 1995.1 
 
 The SOR alleged 11 delinquent debts totaling over $41,000, of mostly consumer 
debt. The debts are included in credit bureau reports from August 2012 and February 
2015. Applicant admitted she owed the debts alleged in the SOR, except she noted that 
the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h “has been taken as a write-off per [the creditor] on 11/17/2015.” 
She further noted that she no longer owes the balance on the debt and that she did not 
agree with it. She did not provide supporting documentation to substantiate her 
position.2 
 
 During Applicant’s background interview by a government investigator in June 
2012, she attributed her financial problems, in part, to providing financial support for her 
adult son and his family, while maintaining her own living expenses. She intends to 
resolve all of her financial problems when her son becomes more self-sufficient. She did 
not provide updated information regarding her family situation. She advised the 
government investigator that she would continue to make partial payments on all her 
outstanding accounts. She did not provide evidence of partial payments she may have 
made on any of the alleged debts.3 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, she explained about six years ago she 
contacted a debt-reduction company to help resolve her delinquent debts. The company 
helped to some degree, and she was able to pay a reduced balance for some of her 
debts. She stated that she will try and get these debts paid during the next few years. 
She further stated that she is not proud of her delinquent debts, but they would not 
interfere with her ability to protect national security or her loyalty to the United States.4 
 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Items 1, 4, 5. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
4 Items 1, 3. 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.5 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has 11 delinquent debts that total approximately $41,000. She began 
accruing the majority of them in approximately 2010. The delinquent debts are unpaid 
and unresolved. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
                                                          
5 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant failed to provide evidence that any of the debts in the SOR have been 
paid or resolved, despite being put on notice in 2012 during her background interview 
that said delinquencies created security concerns. There is insufficient evidence to 
conclude that her financial problems are unlikely to recur. Her failure to timely address 
her delinquent debts casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply 
 
In 2012, when Applicant was interviewed by a government investigator, she 
indicated her financial problems were due to providing support for her son and his family 
and paying her own living expenses. She did not provide amplifying information about 
her son and his inability to be self-sufficient. She did not provide updated information 
from 2012 regarding the state of her finances. Due to the sparse information provided, I 
will consider Applicant’s financial assistance for her son and his family to be somewhat 
beyond her control. However, for the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must 
provide evidence that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. It appears about 
six years ago she engaged the assistance of a debt consolidation company to help 
reduce her debt. Although she explained it helped she failed to specifically address the 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR or how the company assisted in the resolution of 
her financial problems. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that she received financial counseling. There 
is insufficient evidence to conclude she made good-faith payments to creditors or 
otherwise resolved her delinquent debts. There are not clear indications that Applicant’s 
financial problems are being resolved or under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not 
apply. 
 
Applicant said she disagreed with the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h, and it was written-off by 
the creditor, so she no longer owed the balance. She did not provide documented proof 
 
6 
 
 
that the debt is paid, resolved, or that she is no longer responsible for it. AG ¶ 20(e) 
does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 65 years old. She has worked for a federal contractor since 1995. 
She attributed her financial difficulties to providing support for her adult son and his 
family and paying her own living expenses. She did not provide amplifying information 
about her family situation. She has been aware since her background interview in 2012 
that her financial delinquencies were raising security concerns. She has failed to meet 
her burden of persuasion. Applicant does not have a track record of financial stability. 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.k:  Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
