 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01659 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant provided insufficient documentation to mitigate security concerns about 
financial considerations under Guideline F. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 28, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 3) This was his first application to be 
granted access to classified information. Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on September 11, 2014. 
(Item 4) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
September 21, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
 
2 
 
 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 5, 2015. Of the eight allegations of 
delinquent debt, Applicant admitted two (SOR 1.a and 1.b), denied five (SOR 1.d – 1.h) 
as paid or being paid, and disputed one (SOR 1.c). He elected to have the matter 
decided on the written record. (Item 2) Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on January 11, 2016. Applicant received a complete file of 
relevant material (FORM) on January 21, 2016, and he was provided the opportunity to 
file objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. Applicant did not respond to the FORM. I was assigned the case on May 5, 
2016.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview with an OPM agent (Item 4) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
he could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the summary. Applicant did not respond to the FORM so he did not raise any 
objection to consideration of the information in the Personal Subject Interview. Any 
objection to the information is waived. I will consider information in the Personal Subject 
Interview in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 58 years old, and has worked as a crane operator and rigger for a 
defense contractor since July 2014. He completed a journeyman crane operator course 
in 1979, and was employed by civilian companies as a journeyman crane operator until 
July 2014. He is married with two adult children. (Item 3, e-QIP, dated July 28, 2014; 
Item 4, Personal Subject Interview, dated September 11, 2014)  
 
The SOR lists, and credit reports (Item 5, dated August 7, 2014, and Item 6, 
dated August 17, 2015) confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a credit 
card charged off for $4,621 (SOR 1.a); a delinquent mortgage past due for $14,897 on a 
balance of $150,877 (SOR 1.b); a charged-off credit union account for $1,212 (SOR 
1.c); a credit card in collection for $2,040 (SOR 1.d); a student loan in collection for 
$122 (SOR 1.e); a credit card in collection for $6,053 (SOR 1.f); a charged-off credit 
card account for $909 (SOR 1.g); and a student loan in collection for $6,555 (SOR 1.h). 
 
3 
 
 
The total amount of the alleged delinquent debt is approximately $172,389, of which 
$150,877 is the home mortgage. 
 
Applicant attributes his delinquent debts to his lack of funds. He claims he did not 
have sufficient funds to continue to pay the student loans he co-signed for his 
daughter’s education. He stopped paying the loans when he did not have sufficient 
income to make payments. He purchased his house in 2002 and became delinquent on 
mortgage payments in 2012. Applicant told the security investigator that he was making 
additional payments to catch up on his mortgage and would be current with his 
mortgage by November 2014. Applicant claims that he paid or is paying the remaining 
delinquent debts. He did not provide any documentation to corroborate the status of his 
mortgage or any other debt payments. He reiterated that he would resolve all of his 
debts by November 2014. Department Counsel noted Applicant’s failure to provide 
proof of payment of any of the debts in the FORM. Despite this warning, Applicant still 
did not provide any payment documents by not responding to the FORM.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
4 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage finances in such a way as to meet financial 
obligations.  
  
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant’s has a history of delinquent debts 
as documented in his credit reports, by his admissions to the OPM investigator, and his 
response to the allegations in the SOR. The one debt Applicant denied is listed as 
delinquent on the credit reports. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns 
under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The information raises both an inability and an unwillingness to pay 
delinquent debt.  Once the Government has established delinquent debt, the Applicant 
has the responsibility to refute or mitigate those debts. 
 
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20: 
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 These mitigating conditions do not apply. Applicant claims to have paid or is 
paying most of his delinquent debts. He claims to be current with his mortgage, but he 
did not provide any information to establish that he is paying or has paid any delinquent 
debts. He did not provide any information to establish that his mortgage is current.  He 
failed to show that he acted reasonably and responsibly to resolve his financial 
problems. The lack of payment information does not support a finding of responsible 
financial management. His financial problems are not under control. Based on 
Applicant’s acknowledgment of his debts and his failure to verify his stated 
arrangements to pay his debts, it is clear that he has not been reasonable and 
responsible in regard to his finances. His lack of reasonable and responsible action 
towards his finances is a strong indication that he will not protect and safeguard 
classified information. Applicant did not presented sufficient information to mitigate 
security concerns for financial considerations.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
6 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
credible documentary information to show that he paid or is paying his delinquent debts. 
He did not establish that he has taken reasonable and responsible action to resolve his 
financial problems. Applicant did not demonstrate appropriate management of his 
finances and a consistent record of action to resolve financial issues. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with questions and doubts concerning Applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his suitability for access to 
classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the 
security concerns arising from his financial situation.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
