                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-02896
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se 
June 7, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing
dated September 5, 2014.  (Government Exhibit 2.)  On November 2, 2015, the
Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the
security concerns under Guideline H for Applicant. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, “Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry” (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, “Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program” (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of
Defense after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on December 8, 2015, and elected to
have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.  Department Counsel
submitted the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to Applicant on or about
January 11, 2016.  Applicant received the FORM on January 26, 2016.  Applicant was
instructed to submit information in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of
receipt.  Applicant submitted a reply to the FORM dated February 22, 2016, consisting
of four documents, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through D.  This case was
2
assigned to the undersigned on April 26, 2016.  Based upon a review of the pleadings
and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.   
FINDINGS OF FACT
Applicant is 52 years old and unmarried.  He has a doctorate degree in
Philosophy with an emphasis in electrical engineering.   He is employed by a university
as a Professor and Chair of a department.  He is seeking to retain a security clearance
in connection with his employment.
Paragraph 1 (Guideline H - Drug Involvement). The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he abuses illegal drugs.
Applicant admitted the allegation set forth under this guideline.  (See Applicant’s
Answer to the SOR.)   
Applicant has been a faculty member at a university since 1996.  He was initially
hired as an Assistant Professor in 1996; was promoted to Associate Professor in 2001;
then to full Professor in 2008; and in 2013, he was appointed as Department Chair, a
position he currently holds.  Prior to that he worked for a defense contractor for three
years.  
Applicant indicates that the university does not engage is a lot of classified work.
On occasion, it sponsors a faculty member for a security clearance to work on classified
research projects.  Applicant was that sponsored faculty member.  In 2004, Applicant
received an interim clearance, which became final in 2006.  For the past twelve years,
he has held a security clearance for the purpose of conducting classified research
projects.  Applicant’s education background indicates that he has attended three
Universities in the United States, one of which is an Ivy League school.  He ultimately
obtained his doctorate degree related to his field of expertise.  Applicant has no military
service.    
Applicant self-reported that he used marijuana on two occasions while
possessing a DoD security clearance on his e-QIP dated September 1, 2014, and then
he described the incidents to an investigator during his security background
investigation in October 2014.  Applicant explained that in January 2009, he was on
travel in Amsterdam and he smoked a marijuana cigarette or “joint” at the coffee shop
where he purchased it.  Five years later, in January 2014, he consumed THC, which is
a derivative of marijuana, via a drink in his hotel room.  He explained that on each
occasion, he used this drug out of curiosity.  He rationalized that marijuana was legal in
the state or country in which he purchased and used it.  Applicant states that the first
time he used marijuana he felt high.  The second time he used it, by drink, he felt ill,
which is one of the reasons he states that he does not plan to ever experiment with
THC or marijuana again.  Applicant claims that he has no future intent to ever use
marijuana or any other illegal drug again.  
3
Applicant claims that although he has held a security clearance since 2004, he
has only used his clearance on three occasions.  In September 2005, and March 2010,
he attended a meeting and a workshop at the collateral secret level, and in May 2014,
he reviewed a report in support of a proposal to fund a classified project.  He states that
his access to classified information has been limited, and he has yet to work on a
classified project or program.  All of his research as a university professor has so far
been unclassified.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)  
Applicant submitted a statement of intent dated February 23, 2016, wherein he
indicates that he has no interest in ever using any illegal drug again.  In the event that
he does, he agrees that is should result in automatic and immediate loss of his security
clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit B.)
A letter of recommendation from the Director of the Office of Export Controls,
(which falls under the Office of the Vice President of Research and Innovation for the
ten-campus University system), and who also serves as the University’s Facility
Security Officer, has known the Applicant for nine years, and recognizes him for his
outstanding performance as a Professor.  Namely, his dedication to his students.  He is
also commended for his extensive research record that is highly regarded by the
University.  Applicant is considered by all to be an expert in his field in both industry and
academia.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)
A number of testimonials used for the purpose of a nomination package, which
Applicant received from the University in 2015 for his exceptional mentoring of graduate
students, collectively reflects that he is well respected by all who know him.  He is
dedicated in every sense of the word, as a professor, advisor, mentor and friend.  He
works harder than others, making more sacrifices, and giving more of his time to
students in the effort to help them fulfill their goals.  Overall, he consistently shows a
sincere passion, commitment and dedication to his students, their field of expertise, and
their future successes.  (Applicant’s Exhibit D.)      
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline H (Drug Involvement)
The Concern.  Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
4
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
25.(a) any drug abuse; and
25.(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
25.(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
26.(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as; (4) a
signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct, which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with
the national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified
information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person
is an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is
5
predicated upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The
adjudicative process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the
whole-person concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and
present, favorable and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”
The Administrative Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have
reasonable and logical basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw
inferences or conclusions based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in
nature.  Finally, as emphasized by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865,
“Any determination under this order . . . shall be a determination in terms of the
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted
to civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in illegal drug abuse that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government met its initial burden of proving that the Applicant
has engaged in drug involvement (Guideline H).  The totality of this evidence indicates
poor judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.
Because of the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a
nexus or connection with his security clearance eligibility.  Considering all of the
evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the Government's case under Guideline H of
the SOR.  
Applicant used marijuana or THC on two occasions while possessing a security
clearance.  Applicant is not a recent college graduate, without sufficient experience or
the know-with-all to comprehend the law and the seriousness of his actions.  Instead
the Applicant is a 52-year-old, highly educated man with a doctorate degree, who has
held a security clearance for the past twelve or more years.  He obviously knew, or
should have known, that the use of marijuana is against Federal law, the DoD and his
university.  To think otherwise is incomprehensible.  This conduct is not only wrong and
illegal, but it clearly demonstrates a lapse in sound judgment that is quite puzzling and
6
raises serious questions about his judgment, reliability and trustworthiness.  His
repeated use of marijuana, in 2009, and then again in 2014, both occurring while he
travelled out of the state or country, calls into question his maturity, character,
judgment, and ability to follow rules and regulations.    
Applicant was hired by his most recent employer in November 1996, with the
common sense understanding that he would follow university policy.  Clearly, Applicant
knew that his university prohibited the use of illegal drugs, and that it was against DoD
policy and of course, against the law. This conduct shows extreme immaturity and
raises serious security concerns about his reliability and trustworthiness.  Under
Guideline H, Drug Involvement, Disqualifying Conditions 25.(a) any drug abuse; 25.(c)
illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, purchase, sale
or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia, and  25.(g) any illegal drug use
after being granted a security clearance apply.  Although Mitigating Condition 26.(b) a
demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as; (4) a signed
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation is
applicable, it is not controlling here.  Applicant’s misconduct is so egregious that it can
only be mitigated by more of a demonstration of longer drug-free time.
 
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  He does not demonstrate the level of
maturity, responsibility, or the characteristics expected of an employee who works for
the defense industry and wants access to classified information.  Applicant’s illegal
conduct is too recent, and a clear indicator of poor judgment and unreliability that
preclude him from security clearance eligibility at this time.
  
Under the particular facts of this case, the totality of the conduct set forth under
all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a whole-person assessment of poor
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of candor, an unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics indicating that the person may
not properly safeguard classified information.  
A security clearance is a privilege, not a right.  In order to meet the qualifications
for access to classified information, it must determined that the Applicant is, and has
been, sufficiently trustworthy on the job and in his everyday life to adequately protect
the government’s national interest.  Based upon the conduct outlined here, this
Applicant has demonstrated that he is not sufficiently trustworthy, and he does not
meet the eligibility requirements for access to classified information.       
On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant has failed to overcome the
Government's case opposing his request for a security clearance.  Accordingly, the
evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the factual and conclusionary
allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.
7
FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
   
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
