 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01862 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Mary M. Foreman, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 21, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 12, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
on the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on 
January 11, 2016. Applicant received the FORM on January 14, 2016. Applicant had 30 
days to submit a response to the FORM. He timely submitted a response to the FORM. 
(Item 11)  Department Counsel did not object to his submission. (Item 12) On February 
18, 2016, the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on March 
29, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Rulings on Evidence 
 
 Items 5 and 6 of the FORM are portions of the Report of Investigation (ROI) from 
the background investigation of Applicant. They are summaries of Applicant’s Personal 
Subject Interviews conducted on September 16, 2013, and April 30, 2014. They are 
both unsworn and unauthenticated. DOD Directive 5220.6, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20 
states, “An ROI may be received with an authenticating witness provided it is otherwise 
admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence.” (see ISCR Case No. 11-13999 (App. 
Bd., February 3, 2014)).  
 
Although Applicant, who is representing himself, has not raised the issue via an 
objection, I am raising it sua sponte because Items 5 and 6 are not properly 
authenticated. While Department Counsel mentions the authentication requirement of ¶ 
E3.1.20 of the Directive in Footnote 1 of the FORM without directly citing it, I cannot 
conclude Applicant expressly waived this rule because he did not submit a response to 
the FORM. Waiver means “the voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or 
implied – of a legal right or advantage; the party alleged to have waived a right must 
have had both knowledge of the existing right and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s 
Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. Garner, editor-in-chief, 9th ed., West 2009). In 
accordance with the Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20, Items 5 and 6 are not admissible 
and will not be considered in this decision.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 
1.d, and 1.e and denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. (Item 2)    
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking to maintain his security 
clearance. He has worked for his current employer since April 2004 and currently holds 
a top secret security clearance. He has a high school diploma. He served on active duty 
in the U.S. Navy from 1993 to 1999.  He divorced in November 2011 and has three 
children. (Item 3)   
 
On August 9, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). In response to Section 26 – Delinquency Involving 
Routine Accounts, Applicant listed several delinquent accounts. (Item 3, section 26) A 
subsequent background investigation revealed the following delinquent accounts which 
are alleged in the SOR: a $268,759 mortgage more than 180 days past due in the 
amount of $14,759 (SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 5 at 1; Item 6 at 3); a delinquent computer account 
in the amount of $2,977 that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 5 at 2; Item 6 at 
4); a delinquent credit card account that was charged off in the amount of $925 (SOR ¶ 
1.c: Item 5 at 2); an $83 medical account that was placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 
5 at 2); and a $2,200 judgment filed against Applicant in August 2009. (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 
5 at 3). 
 
 
3 
 
 
In his response to the SOR, Applicant provided the following information 
regarding the debts: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a:  $268,759 mortgage loan, delinquent more than 180 days in the 
amount of $14,759: Applicant denies this debt. He believes there is an error on his 
credit report. This debt was related to a house that he and his wife owned that was sold 
in a short sale in 2010 after they divorced.  He provided a copy of the settlement 
statement.  The mortgage debt was resolved.  (Item 2 at 3-6) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b:  $2,977 delinquent computer account placed for collection: Applicant 
admits this debt.  He paid off the debt in full. (Item 2 at 2, 7) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: $925 charged-off credit card account: Applicant denies this debt. He 
contacted Capital One and they verified the only account Applicant has with them is the 
Capital One account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: $83 delinquent medical account: Applicant admits this debt. He paid 
off the debt in full. (Item 2 at 8) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e:  $2,200 judgment entered against Applicant in 2009 in the amount of 
$2,200 for a delinquent credit card account.  He paid off the debt in full. (Item 2 at 9-10) 
 
In his response to the FORM, Applicant admits that his debts are unfortunate and 
embarrassing.  All of the debts were incurred during a difficult period in his life. He also 
asserts two of the debts were not debts, but actually errors on his credit report.  
 
From age 17 to 23, Applicant served in the Navy. He was deployed a majority of 
his time in the service. His wife would handle the finances. She was not good at 
managing the finances, and Applicant struggled with paying down the significant credit 
card debt that his wife incurred. In 2009, after 15 years of marriage, he and his wife 
separated. Being the product of multiple divorces, Applicant wanted to minimize the 
impact to his children. He rented a room and agreed to pay combined child and spousal 
support of 100% of his income.  His wife maintained control of the household finances 
and he supported himself by working additional odd jobs. (Item 11 at 2) 
 
In 2010, Applicant’s wife decided to move to another state with the children and   
sell the family home. Applicant discovered that his wife was short-selling the house 
because she had not paid the mortgage for eight months. The short sale was approved. 
Applicant also discovered his wife had failed to pay utility and other bills. He paid them 
for her. 
 
Applicant has not incurred any unmanageable debt in the past five years. The 
spousal support portion of his divorce settlement has ended and he has more income. 
He missed no rent payments or utility payments, and his credit card statements are paid 
in full. He has never missed a child support payment. He says he will be homeless 
before that happens. He was recently able to rent a three bedroom house so that his 
 
4 
 
 
children can come visit him for extended periods of time. He was able to pay his 
delinquent debts from money he had been saving for his daughter’s college expenses. 
(Item 11 at 2) 
 
Applicant admits that there was a failure to pay debts. He states he played a 
passive role about his wife’s spending habits in order to keep a peaceful home for his 
children. He regrets that he did not pay the remaining delinquent accounts earlier. He is 
in control of his finances. He claims the pattern of financial irresponsibility stopped 
abruptly at the time of his separation and divorce. Applicant is grateful that he was able 
to maintain his clearance during the hardest years. He hopes to be allowed to maintain 
his clearance now that his financial situation has stabilized. (Item 11 at 3)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
 
5 
 
 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
encountered financial problems during his marriage which were aggravated when he 
and his wife separated and eventually divorced in 2009. The SOR alleges five  
delinquent accounts. Both AG &19(a) and AG &19(c) apply.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raised 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
 
6 
 
 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive ¶ 
E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances);  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control);  
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and  
 
AG & 20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and 
provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue). 
 
AG & 20(a) applies because Applicant’s financial problems were caused during 
his marriage. It has taken Applicant several years to recover from his divorce. He has 
resolved four of the five delinquent accounts. The debt alleged in SOR & 1.c appears to 
have been an error on his credit report. While Applicant has a history of financial 
problems, his financial situation is now stable.  His past financial problems do not cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. 
 
AG & 20(b) applies, because Applicant’s financial problems were aggravated as 
a result of his 2009 separation and 2010 divorce. Applicant’s ex-wife’s spendthrift ways 
caused several delinquent accounts. Her refusal to make the mortgage payment on the 
family home for eight months, even though Applicant was giving her all of his salary, 
caused the home to be sold at a short sale.  Applicant did not incur additional delinquent 
accounts after the divorce. It took him awhile to get on a solid financial footing. While he 
could have paid some of the delinquent accounts earlier, he was able to pay the debts 
 
7 
 
 
with the money he was saving for his daughter’s college education. Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.   
 
AG & 20(c) applies because Applicant’s financial situation is now under control. 
He is able to pay his debts and has resolved all of his delinquent accounts.   
 
AG & 20(d) applies because Applicant demonstrated that he made a good-faith 
effort to resolve his delinquent accounts. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was resolved 
when Applicant’s home was sold at a short sale in 2010. He paid the debts alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.d, and 1.e.  He looked into the debt alleged in SOR & 1.c and believes it 
was an erroneous entry on his credit report because the creditor informed him the only 
account that they had in his name was the judgment alleged in SOR & 1.e. It took 
Applicant some time to resolve his delinquent accounts, but he was eventually able to 
do so.   
 
AG & 20(e) applies with respect to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.c. 
Applicant provided proof that the delinquent mortgage alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was 
resolved by a short sale of the home. He contacted the creditor in SOR ¶ 1.c. and was 
told that they did not recognize that account and had only one open account in 
Applicant’s name. Applicant did not provide documentation verifying this, but can 
formally dispute the entry on his credit report. If the credit reporting agencies verify the 
debt, Applicant is likely to resolve it based on his track record of paying his other 
delinquent accounts. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 I considered Applicant’s service in the United States Navy and his 12 years of 
employment with a DOD contractor. While it took Applicant some time to resolve his 
 
8 
 
 
delinquent debts, he eventually resolved all of the delinquent accounts. The delinquent 
accounts were incurred at the time of Applicant’s separation and divorce from his wife. 
To his credit, Applicant took steps to provide for his children to his personal financial 
detriment. His financial situation is now stable. The security concerns raised under 
financial considerations are mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    For Applicant 
  
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
