 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02073   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to revoke his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to meet his burden to 
mitigate the financial concerns raised by a $40,000 federal tax lien filed against him in 
December 2011. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 31, 2015, the DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under the financial considerations guideline.1 DOD adjudicators were 
unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s 
security clearance. 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing.2 The 
Government submitted its written case on January 20, 2016. Applicant received a 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) and the Directive was provided to 
Applicant on February 1, 2016. Applicant responded with a short statement. The 
documents appended to the FORM are admitted as Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 
through 2, and 4 through 6 without objection. The document marked for identification as 
GE 3, is excluded for the reasons explained below. The document provided by 
Applicant is admitted as Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A. The case was assigned to me on 
April 22, 2016.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 GE 3 is a report of investigation (ROI) summarizing the interview Applicant had 
with a background investigator during his June 2014 investigation. The interview, which 
contains adverse information, is not authenticated as required under ¶ E3.1.20 of the 
Directive. Footnote 1 of the FORM advises Applicant of that fact and further cautions 
Applicant that if he fails to object to the admission of the interview summary in his 
response to the FORM that his failure may be taken as a waiver of the authentication 
requirement. Applicant’s failure to respond to Footnote 1 in the FORM does not 
demonstrate that he understands the concepts of authentication, or waiver and 
admissibility. It also does not establish that he understands the implications of waiving 
an objection to the admissibility of the interview. Accordingly, GE 3 is inadmissible and I 
have not considered it. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 50, has worked for his employer, a federal contractor since July 2013. 
This is his first application for a security clearance. On his security clearance 
application, dated April 2014, Applicant disclosed his failure to pay federal taxes in 1996 
and 1997. The ensuing investigation revealed that Applicant had tax liens filed against 
him in September 2007 and in December 2011, as well as two delinquent accounts 
totaling $396. In addition to the 2011 federal tax lien ($40,976, SOR ¶ 1.a) and the two 
delinquent accounts ($211 SOR ¶ 1.b, $185 SOR ¶ 1.c), the SOR alleges that Applicant 
failed to file federal income tax returns for 2006, 2007, 2008, 2011, and 2013 (SOR ¶ 
1.d). Applicant admits owing the December 2011 tax lien, but disputes the amount 
owed. He denies that he failed to file his federal tax returns as alleged, explaining that 
his filings were returned because of a missing signature. Applicant claims that he 
corrected the deficiencies on each return and refiled them. He admits owing the two 
delinquent accounts, which he promises to resolve.3  
 
 Applicant blames his financial issues on his divorce. Applicant married his ex-
wife in 1999. The couple divorced in March 2010. During his marriage, Applicant was 
self-employed. He shuttered his company in September 2008, after 11 years of 
business. Applicant explains that he also had financial problems related to his business. 
                                                          
2 GE 2. 
 
3 GE 1-2, 4-6. 
 
3 
 
A review of Applicant’s credit reports shows that in 2007, the IRS filed two liens against 
him for $10,900 and $3,200, respectively. Both liens were released in 2008. He admits 
having owed the $40,976 in past-due taxes, but claims that he has been in a payment 
plan and the balance is now $4,426. Applicant believes that after the IRS intercepts his 
income tax refund for 2015, the balance will be under $3,000. He did not provide any 
corroborating documentation about the IRS payment plan or show any proof of ongoing 
payment.4 
 
To date, Applicant has not resolved the two other delinquent accounts alleged in 
the SOR. Both accounts are for medical bills. Applicant claims that the bill alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.b. belongs to his ex-wife and he is disputing it. He takes responsibility for the 
debt alleged in ¶ 1.c and reiterates his promise to pay the debt, which he hopes to do by 
the end of the year.5  
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Under Directive ¶ 
E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged 
in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is responsible for presenting 
“witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by 
applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant has the ultimate burden 
of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
                                                          
4 GE 1-2,4; AE A. 
 
5 GE 1; AE A.  
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved delinquent debt is a serious security concern because failure to 
“satisfy debts [or] meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.”6  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file federal income tax returns for 2006, 
2007, 2008, 2011, and 2013. Applicant denies the allegation, which shifts the burden to 
the Government to establish the now-controverted fact.7  The Government failed to 
present any information to establish a good-faith basis for the allegation or any evidence 
to substantiate it. Accordingly, SOR ¶ 1.d. is decided in Applicant’s favor. However, the 
record does support a finding against Applicant on the remaining SOR allegations. 
Applicant’s admissions and the three credit reports in the record establish that the IRS 
filed a $40,976 lien against Applicant in December 2011 and that he owes two unpaid 
medical accounts. The Government has established its prima facie case that Applicant 
has a history of not paying his bills, and that he had an inability to do so.8  
 
Although Applicant’s financial problems may have been caused by financial 
issues from the business he ran from 1997 to 2008 and the dissolution of his marriage, 
he has not provided any evidence to show that he has acted responsibly in light of his 
circumstances, that he is making a good-faith effort to address his delinquent debt, or 
that his finances are otherwise under control. Accordingly, none of the financial 
mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Applicant failed to meet his burdens of production and persuasion. In requesting 
an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the written record. In doing 
so, however, he failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to supplement the 
record with relevant and material facts regarding his circumstances, articulate his 
position, mitigate the financial concerns, or establish evidence of financial rehabilitation. 
The security concerns raised in the SOR remain. Following Egan9 and the clearly-
consistent standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security.  
                                                          
6  AG ¶ 18. 
 
7 DOD Directive ¶ E3.1.14. 
 
8 AG ¶¶ 19(a), (c), and (g). 
 
9 Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
5 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:     Against Applicant 
 
Subparagraph 1.d:      For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
_________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
