 
 
1 
 
 
                                                                      
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )       ISCR Case No. 15-03251 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se  
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant began accumulating delinquent debts in 2012, after leaving military 
service and becoming unemployed. He mitigated the financial security concerns and 
refuted the personal conduct concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 On September 4, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On November 6, 2015, the Department of Defense 
(DoD) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The 
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DoD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 On November 27, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR (Answer), and 
requested a hearing. On February 12, 2016, the Department of Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) assigned Applicant’s case to me. On February 16, 2016, 
DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the case for March 2, 2016. At the hearing, 
Department Counsel offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 into evidence. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through M into evidence. All 
exhibits were admitted without objections. The record remained open until March 25, 
2016, to give Applicant time to submit additional information. Applicant timely submitted 
three exhibits, to which Department Counsel had no objection. I marked those exhibits 
as AE N, O, and P.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 14, 2016.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations contained in the SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.g, and 
denied those in SOR ¶ 2.a. His admissions are accepted as factual findings. 
 
 Applicant is 26 years old and single. He has earned about 100 college credits. 
Since September 2015 he has worked as a federal contractor. His annual salary is 
$45,000. (Tr. 20-23.) 
 
 In October 2008, at the age of 18, Applicant enlisted in the military after 
graduating from high school. He received his first security clearance at that time. He 
was on active duty until March 2012, when he received an honorable discharge. His 
paygrade was an E-3. In April 2011, before his discharge, he received a Uniform Code 
of Military Justice Article 15 hearing and was charged with failure to train. He received 
30 days of extra duty, and a suspended reduction in rank for six months. (Tr. 24-25.) 
 
 After his discharge Applicant was unemployed until May 2014. During that time 
he attended college and lived with his mother, who helped support him financially. (Tr. 
30-31; GE 1.) In May 2014 he took a low-paying position with a private company. In 
May 2015 he started working as a consultant for a state department contractor and went 
to the Middle East in June for three months, where he earned $7,000 a month. He left 
that position in August 2015. (Tr. 33, 39.) 
 
 Applicant explained that his financial problems started after his discharge from 
the military. While serving, he earned $42,000 annually and received many benefits, 
including medical care and a housing allowance. Applicant used the GI bill for 
educational expenses, but it was not enough to cover all of his expenses and debts 
while he was unemployed. Through the GI bill, he received a monthly stipend of $1,250, 
in addition to educational expenses. (Tr. 41-42, 66.)  
                                                 
1
 AE M and O are the same character references from Applicant’s supervisor. AE N is a performance 
evaluation. AE P is an email from Applicant’s supervisor transmitting the character reference.  
 
 
3 
 
 
 In early 2014, Applicant learned that he had a child with a former girlfriend. The 
child was two years old and the mother sued him for child support. After confirming 
paternity, the court ordered Applicant to pay child support and arrearages from the date 
of the child’s birth. In later 2014 the prosecuting attorney informed Applicant that he 
owed $2,300 for the paternity action and the court ordered a garnishment of his wages 
for unpaid child support. At the time he was earning $10 per hour, and working 25 to 30 
hours a month while attending college. Applicant testified his net paycheck for two 
weeks was $10 to $15, after child support payments were deducted. (Tr. 35-39, 68.) 
 
 Based on credit bureau reports (CBR) from September 2014, October 2015, and 
February 2016, the SOR alleged seven delinquent debts totaling $9,719, which 
accumulated between 2012 and 2014. Included in those debts are three medical bills 
that total $4,043, one judgment, and three collection accounts. (GE 2, GE 3, GE 4.) The 
status of the SOR debts is as follows:   
 
1. (SOR 1.a) The 2015 judgment for $1,001 is unpaid. Applicant contacted the 
credit card creditor in August 2015. The company is unwilling to negotiate a 
payment plan. Applicant does not have the money to pay this debt in full. (Tr. 47-
48.) 
 
2. (SOR 1.b) The $1,865 medical debt is unpaid. It relates to a 2013 emergency 
room visit for a medical condition, at which time Applicant did not have medical 
insurance to cover services either at non-Veterans Affairs (VA) hospitals or 
through the VA. He said he had applied for coverage when he left the service, 
but had not received confirmation that he was covered through the VA. (Tr. 48, 
65.) 
 
3. (SOR 1.c) The $2,022 medical debt is unpaid. It relates to a 2013 emergency 
room visit for the same medical condition noted above, at which time he did not 
have medical insurance. Applicant stated that he paid other medical bills related 
to those visits, but has been unable to pay the larger bills. (Tr. 48-49.) 
 
4. (SOR 1.d) The $2,594 credit card debt is unpaid. Applicant said he has had 
difficulty locating the correct creditor, as it had been transferred to different 
collection agencies. (Tr. 49-50.) 
 
5. (SOR 1.e) The $1,930 debt relates to a bicycle he purchased while attending 
college and participating in its bicycling program. He said he made three 
payments to the original creditor in August 2015, who did not process them. It is 
unresolved. He has not formally disputed the account with the credit bureau 
because he is unfamiliar with the dispute process. (Tr. 52-53.) 
 
6. (SOR 1.f) The $156 medical debt was paid in August 2015. (Tr. 55; AE D.)  
 
7. (SOR 1.g) The $151 car insurance debt was paid in July 2015. (Tr. 56; AE L.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant explained that while working in the Middle East for three months, 
beginning in June 2015, he used his pay for his child support obligations, and to resolve 
other debts not alleged on the SOR. (Tr. 47.) In September 2015 Applicant completed 
payment on child support arrearages and became current. (AE C.) He repaid a $2,000 
loan from his mother; a $2,000 loan from his girlfriend; a credit card debt of $763; a cell 
phone bill of $188; and his military star card balance of $1,947. He also paid $1,279 for 
an automobile loan, bringing it current. He said his student loans are current but 
deferred. (Tr. 69; AE A, AE E, AE G, AE L; GE 4.)  
 
 Applicant’s net monthly income is $2,558, after paying taxes and $200 for child 
support. (Tr. 40.) His expenses are $2,475. He has about $80 remaining at the end of 
the month. (AE L.) He said that he intends to pay the outstanding delinquent debts 
when he has more money available. He received an offer for a much higher paying 
position with a defense contractor. (Tr. 70-71; AE I.)  
 
 When Applicant completed his e-QIP in September 2014, he did not disclose any 
of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant testified that he did not realize he 
had debts over 120 days delinquent. (Tr. 56.) During an investigative interview in 
December 2014, Applicant discussed a 2013 tax lien, and delinquent debts listed on his 
credit report. In response to the investigator’s inquiry as to why he did not disclose that 
information, Applicant said he was unaware of the delinquent debts when he completed 
the e-QIP. He did not disclose the $399 tax lien filed in July 2013 because he had paid it 
in October 2013 when he learned of it. He did not review his credit report before 
completing the e-QIP. (Tr. 50-51, 58-63.) In his response to the SOR, Applicant stated 
that he had no intention to be dishonest on the e-QIP (Answer). 
 
 Applicant’s supervisor for the past eight months submitted a letter of 
recommendation. He stated that Applicant has worked on projects containing sensitive 
and classified information. He has found Applicant to be professional and respectful of 
privacy issues. He has no reason to question Applicant’s trustworthiness. (AE M.) 
Applicant submitted his most current performance review. He received an overall rating 
of “exceeds expectations” from his manager. (AE N.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
 
 
5 
 
 
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable 
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept. 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the 
Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and 
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant 
or proven by Department Counsel, and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to 
obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides: 
“[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” 
 
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The security concerns relating to the guideline for financial considerations are set 
out in AG ¶ 18, which reads in pertinent part:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
 
6 
 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information.2 
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s inability to satisfy financial obligations occurred between 2013 and 
2015, and continues to date. The evidence is sufficient to raise both disqualifications, 
thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those concerns.  
 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
                                                 
2
 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began after he left military service in 2012 and no 
longer had a stable income or the benefits associated with service. Such problems are 
unlikely to recur given his current employment and the steps he has taken to slowly 
resolve his financial obligations. His reliability and trustworthiness in managing 
delinquent debts does not remain a concern. The evidence supports the application of 
AG ¶ 20(a).  
 
 Applicant provided evidence that the financial problems alleged in the SOR arose 
when he became unemployed in March 2012 and did not obtain full-time employment 
until May 2015, when he worked for a couple months for a state contractor. In early 
2014 he learned that he had a child out of wedlock. Sometime later he began paying 
child support and arrearages, which affected his finances. This situation, in addition to a 
period of unemployment and the lack of medical insurance, were circumstances beyond 
his control that contributed to his financial difficulties. He provided some evidence that 
he took a high paying overseas position for three months in 2015 in an attempt to pay 
his debt.  AG ¶ 20(b) has some application. 
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant sought credit or financial counseling. He has 
addressed two of the seven debts alleged, and several other debts not alleged in the 
SOR. He intends to address the remaining SOR debts as soon as he earns more 
money. There is evidence to conclude that his finances are coming under control, as a 
consequence of his good-faith efforts to resolve several debts. The evidence 
establishes mitigation under AG ¶ 20(c) and AG ¶ 20(d). He testified that he disputes 
the debt owed in SOR 1.e because he made payments on the debt; however, he did not 
submit sufficient information to corroborate his statement. The evidence provides 
minimal mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d). 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concerns pertaining to the personal conduct guideline are set out in 
AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a that Applicant deliberately falsified 
answers to financial questions on his September 2014 e-QIP, by failing to disclose a 
paid tax lien and debts more than 120 days delinquent. The Government contended that 
those falsifications constituted a potential disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 16: 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
 
8 
 
 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant acknowledged that he did not disclose his delinquent debts, but denied 
that he intentionally misled the Government. When a falsification allegation is 
controverted or denied, as in this case, the Government has the burden of proving it.  
Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s state of 
mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must consider the record 
evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence 
concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time the omission occurred.3 See ISCR 
Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 
02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
Applicant’s explanation that he did not intentionally attempt to deceive the 
Government by not disclosing delinquent debts was credible. He stated that he was 
unaware that the debts were 120 days delinquent and he did not think he was required 
to disclose a paid tax lien. He proffered this explanation during an investigative interview 
in 2014, in his 2015 Answer, and while testifying. After listening to Applicant testify and 
observing his demeanor, I find that his consistent explanations for failing to disclose 
specific information as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.a are adequate and credible. Applicant 
successfully refuted the personal conduct security concern. SOR ¶ 2.a is found in his 
favor. As a consequence, a discussion of the applicability of mitigating conditions is not 
warranted.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
                                                 
3
 See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-
23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment, based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is an intelligent 26-
year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has worked since September 
2015. He served in the military for four years, and held a security clearance during that 
time. He has gained the support and trust of his supervisor and manager based on his 
performance over the past eight months. His financial difficulties started in 2012 after he 
left the service. Although five of the seven SOR-alleged debts remain unresolved, 
Applicant provided proof that he resolved other financial obligations subsequent to 
leaving service. He used the money he earned in the summer of 2015 to resolve many 
outstanding bills and loans, and become current on his child support obligations. 
Applicant credibly indicates that he will pay the remaining debts, which total about 
$9,000, as he earns more money.  
 
In ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008), the Appeal Board 
noted: 
 
That an applicant is not required to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for 
paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously. All that is required is 
that an applicant act responsibly given his [or her] circumstances and 
develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied by “concomitant 
conduct,” that is, actions which evidence a serious intent to effectuate 
the plan.  
 
 After considering Applicant’s military service, his current job performance 
evaluation, the number of debts that he has resolved including child support, and the 
small amount of delinquent debt that is unresolved, there is nothing in the record that 
persuades me to conclude that Applicant is a security risk based on unpaid debts. While 
testifying, he was credible. I have no reason to believe he will not continue to resolve his 
delinquent debts. Overall, the record evidence leaves me without doubts as to 
Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant met his 
burden to mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for financial 
considerations and refuted the security concerns for personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.g:        For Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:         For Applicant 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
