 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
    )  ISCR Case No. 15-00306 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Daniel A. Corbin, Esq. 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 In January 2014, the single delinquent account listed on Applicant’s statement of 
reasons (SOR) was resolved when the creditor accepted a deed in lieu of foreclosure 
and any debt owed was waived. She filed her 2010 federal income tax return 17 months 
late. In February 2013, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) indicated her federal income 
taxes for the 2010 tax year were paid, which was more than two years before the SOR 
was issued. Several non-SOR debts are paid or are in current payment plans. She is 
communicating with her creditors and has assured she intends to continue to pay her 
debts. She has established a track record of debt payment and resolution. Financial 
considerations security concerns are mitigated. Access to classified information is 
granted.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On February 23, 2012, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) On August 15, 2015, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued an 
SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry, February 20, 1960; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), January 
2, 1992; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 
2006. 
 
 
2 
                                         
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for her, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) Specifically, the 
SOR set forth security concerns arising under the financial considerations guideline. 
 
On September 3, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR, and she requested a 
hearing. On January 14, 2016, Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On February 
11, 2016, the case was assigned to me. On March 11, 2016, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for March 
31, 2016. (HE 1) Applicant waived her right to 15 days of notice of the date, time, and 
location of the hearing. (Tr. 7) The hearing was held as scheduled on March 31, 2016.  
  
Department Counsel offered 4 exhibits, and Applicant offered 15 exhibits, which 
were admitted into evidence without objection. (Transcript (Tr.) 13-20; Government 
Exhibit (GE) 1-4; Applicant Exhibit (AE) 1-15) On April 8, 2016, DOHA received a copy 
of the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, she denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a and 
admitted the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b. She also provided extenuating and mitigating 
information. Applicant’s admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is 38 years old, and she has been employed by a defense contractor 
as a logistician, technical writer, or in base operations since 2006. (Tr. 21; GE 1) In 
1988, she graduated from high school. (Tr. 48) She has two years of college credits. 
(Tr. 48) In 1991, she married, and her three children are ages 20, 24, and 27. (Tr. 39) 
Her husband retired from the Army as a sergeant first class (E-7) in 2012. (Tr. 40) He 
was injured in Iraq, and the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) has determined he has 
a 90 percent disability rating. (Tr. 45, 52-53)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant has paid and kept current numerous debts over the previous five years. 
(Tr. 21-30; AE 12-14) Her 2016 credit reports and statements from her landlords 
corroborate her statements about having a track record of paying her debts. (Tr. 28-30; 
AE 12-14)  
 
Applicant disclosed a delinquent mortgage and her failure to file her 2010 federal 
income tax return on her February 23, 2012 SF 86. (GE 1) Applicant and her spouse 
lived in a home near a military installation on the West Coast they had purchased in 
2006, for about $397,000. (Tr. 22-23, 35-36) Her husband was in the Army, and in May 
2011, he was transferred to the middle of the United States. (Tr. 23, 34) They attempted 
to sell their residence; however, due to the decline in residential real estate values, the 
fair market value of their home was about $265,000. (Tr. 23) They obtained a short-sale 
contract; however, after a lengthy negotiation, the mortgage company did not accept the 
 
3 
                                         
 
offer. (Tr. 24) They kept the VA, the guarantor for their mortgage loan, informed of the 
situation. (Tr. 36-37; AE 13) On January 2, 2014, the creditor wrote and informed 
Applicant that the VA and creditor waived any deficiency against Applicant and her 
husband. (Tr. 37; AG 10) They received an IRS Form 1099-C loan forgiveness 
document. (Tr. 38)  
 
 Applicant moved to the Midwest several months ahead of her husband. There 
was confusion in their personal affairs due to the move. Her husband filed for an 
extension with the IRS and then filed their 2010 federal income tax return 17 months 
late on April 15, 2015. (Tr. 26; AE 8-9) Applicant withheld at one or zero dependents 
from her paycheck for her federal income taxes; however, her spouse did not have an 
adequate amount withheld from his paycheck. (Tr. 26-27) For the last three years, they 
had refunds of at least $3,000 on their federal income tax returns. (AE 8-9): 
  
Applicant completed a budget. (Tr. 25-26) Applicant and her spouse currently 
have a $2,148 positive monthly cash flow. (AE 5) They have accumulated a positive net 
worth of $24,453. (AE 1) Dave Ramsey is a nationally known expert on debt counseling. 
Applicant and her spouse listened to Dave Ramsey’s presentations, attended a class, 
and completed workbooks to learn about establishing their financial stability. (Tr. 32, 42-
43) They have a specific plan for paying off their two remaining accounts. (Tr. 33, 42) 
Applicant expressed remorse for her financial problems. (Tr. 49) She promised that she 
would ensure she maintained her financial responsibility. (Tr. 49) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
4 
                                         
 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his or her security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;” and “(g) failure to file annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required . . . .” Applicant admitted that her 
 
5 
                                         
 
mortgage became delinquent, and she and her husband failed to timely file their federal 
income tax return for tax year 2010. The Government established the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 19(c), and 19(g) requiring additional inquiry about the 
possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;1 and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
                                            
1The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
6 
                                         
 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 20(e) apply. Applicant’s financial problems resulted from 
their move from one military installation to another, her husband’s failure to withhold 
sufficient funds from his salary to pay his share of their federal income taxes, his 
pending retirement from the Army, and distractions from his military retirement, such as 
processing for his 90 percent VA disability rating. They were unable to fully pay their 
2010 federal income taxes and their mortgage after moving to a different state. These 
unusual circumstances caused or contributed to their financial problems.      
 
Applicant attempted to resolve her mortgage debt with a short sale. When that 
was unsuccessful, the account was resolved with a deed in lieu of foreclosure. The 
creditor wrote that any debt from the mortgage was resolved.2 
 
Applicant failed to timely file her federal income tax return for tax year 2010. The 
DOHA Appeal Board has commented: 
 
Failure to file tax returns suggests that an applicant has a problem with 
complying with well-established governmental rules and systems. 
Voluntary compliance with such rules and systems is essential for 
protecting classified information. ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. 
                                            
2The VA loan guarantee is as follows: “For loans between $45,000 and $144,000, the minimum 
guaranty amount is $22,500, with a maximum guaranty, of up to 40 percent of the loan up to $36,000, 
subject to the amount of entitlement a veteran has available.” As to whether the VA loss on a loan must 
be repaid, the VA explains:   
 
Must the loan be repaid? 
 
Yes. A VA guaranteed loan is not a gift. It must be repaid, just as you must repay any 
money you borrow. The VA guaranty, which protects the lender against loss, encourages 
the lender to make a loan with terms favorable to the veteran. But if you fail to make the 
payments you agreed to make, you may lose your home through foreclosure, and you 
and your family would probably lose all the time and money you had invested in it. If the 
lender does take a loss, VA must pay the guaranty to the lender, and the amount paid by 
VA must be repaid by you. If your loan closed on or after January 1, 1990, you will owe 
the Government in the event of a default only if there was fraud, misrepresentation, or 
bad faith on your part. 
 
Factsheet VAP 26-4 is available on the VA website at http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&frm= 
1&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CD4QFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.benefits.va.gov%2Fhomeloans%2Fdocs%2F
vap 26-4 online version.pdf&ei=q4QbU zSCaST0QH0mIDwAg&usg=AF QjCNFv0-ay6SGFdfcDFlaE7aENpSq0cA. 
 
7 
                                         
 
Dec. 20, 2002). As we have noted in the past, a clearance adjudication is 
not directed at collecting debts. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-08049 at 5 
(App. Bd. Jul. 22, 2008). By the same token, neither is it directed toward 
inducing an applicant to file tax returns. Rather, it is a proceeding aimed at 
evaluating an applicant’s judgment and reliability. Id. A person who fails 
repeatedly to fulfill his or her legal obligations does not demonstrate the 
high degree of good judgment and reliability required of those granted 
access to classified information. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 5 
(App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). See Cafeteria & Restaurant Workers Union 
Local 473 v. McElroy, 284 F.2d 173, 183 (D.C. Cir. 1960), aff’d, 367 U.S. 
886 (1961). 
 
ISCR Case No. 14-04437 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 15, 2016). See ISCR Case No. 14-05476 
at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2016) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-05340 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 20, 
2002)). ISCR Case No. 14-01894 at 4-5 (App. Bd. Aug. 18, 2015). The Appeal Board 
commented that even in instances where an “[a]pplicant has purportedly corrected [the 
applicant’s] federal tax problem, and the fact that [applicant] is now motivated to prevent 
such problems in the future, does not preclude careful consideration of [a]pplicant’s 
security worthiness in light of [applicant’s] longstanding prior behavior evidencing 
irresponsibility” including a failure to timely file federal income tax returns. See ISCR 
Case No. 15-01031 at 3 and note 3 (App. Bd. June 15, 2016) (characterizing “no harm, 
no foul” approach to an Applicant’s course of conduct and employed an “all’s well that 
ends well” analysis as inadequate to support approval of access to classified 
information with focus on timing of filing of tax returns after receipt of the SOR).   
 
Applicant resolved her federal income tax problem for tax year 2010 two years 
before the SOR was issued. There is no evidence of tax liens or levies. For the previous 
three years (2013 through 2015), Applicant withheld more funds than necessary to pay 
her federal income taxes. Her federal income taxes are current. 
 
Applicant has several non-SOR accounts that are paid or are in current payment 
plans. She is communicating with her creditors, and has assured she intends to pay her 
accounts. She has established a track record of account payment and debt resolution. I 
am confident that Applicant will conscientiously endeavor to maintain her financial 
responsibility.  
 
Based on Applicant’s credible and sincere promise to timely pay her debts and 
file her tax returns, future new delinquent debt “is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on [Applicant’s] current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and “there 
are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” Her 
payments of her debts showed good faith. She has sufficient income to keep her 
accounts in current status and to continue making progress paying her remaining 
accounts. Her efforts are sufficient to mitigate financial considerations security 
concerns. Even if Applicant provided insufficient information to mitigate security 
concerns under AG ¶ 20, she mitigated security concerns under the whole-person 
concept, infra. 
  
 
8 
                                         
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 38 years old, and she has been employed by defense contractors as 
a logistician, technical writer, or in base operations since 2006. She has two years of 
college credits. Her husband retired from the Army as a sergeant first class in 2012. He 
was injured in Iraq, and the VA has determined he has a 90 percent disability rating.  
  
Applicant failed to timely file her federal income tax return for tax year 2010. 
There is no evidence that the IRS filed any tax liens or levies, and Applicant maintained 
communications with the IRS. She paid her 2010 federal income tax debt in 2013, more 
than two years before the SOR was issued. For tax years 2013 to 2015, she was 
entitled to federal income tax refunds. All of her federal income taxes are current.   
 
The SOR alleges one delinquent account, and this account was resolved before 
the SOR was issued. Several non-SOR accounts are paid or are in current payment 
plans. She is communicating with her creditors, and has assured she intends to pay her 
debts. She understands that she needs to pay her debts, timely file her tax returns and 
the conduct required to retain her security clearance. The Appeal Board has addressed 
a key element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases stating:  
 
. . . the concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence 
of actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
 
9 
                                         
 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
re-payment, and I am confident she will maintain her financial responsibility. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. Financial considerations concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
