 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
       ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02920 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire. Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline H, drug 
involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 16, 2015, the Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (DOD CAF) issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline H, drug involvement. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on January 25, 2016, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 8, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on April 21, 
2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 9, 2016. The Government offered 
 
2 
 
 
exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through N, which were admitted 
into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 17, 
2016.  
 
Procedural Matters 
 
 Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR to accurately reflect the 
evidence. Applicant had no objection. SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, and 1.d are amended, deleting 
the words “Marine Corps” and substituting the words “Air Force.” The motion was 
granted.1  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in SOR except that in ¶ 1.a. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 56 years old. He is a high school and technical school graduate. He 
was married from 1983 to 1998 and from 1999 to 2001. He married his current wife in 
2005. He has an adult son from his first marriage and three adult stepchildren. He has 
worked for the same federal employer since 1984, but had periods of time when he was 
laid off. Applicant was granted a security clearance in April 2003.2 
 
Applicant served in the military from 1978 to 1980 and received a General 
Discharge Under Honorable Conditions. His certificate of release or discharge from 
active duty notes the reason for his separation as “misconduct-drug abuse.”3 Applicant 
disclosed on his security clearance application that he received a General Discharge 
Under Honorable Conditions because he was “unadaptable for the military way of life. I 
was in Germany at the time and was drinking and using ‘hash.’”4 
 
 Applicant began using marijuana in high school in 1976 and continued to use it 
until February 1996.5 He testified he used it on a casual basis.6 While serving in the Air 
Force, Applicant received three Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) Article 15 
                                                          
1 Tr. 11. 
 
2 Tr. 19-22, 36; GE 1. 
 
3 AE B, C. 
 
4 Tr. 34; GE 1. 
 
5 Tr. 24; Answer to SOR. 
 
6 Tr.24. 
 
3 
 
 
disciplinary hearings. All three were for possession of marijuana. They occurred in 
August 1979, September 1979, and August 1980.7  
 
In Applicant’s sworn statement on October 18, 2002, to a government 
investigator, he disclosed that when he began using marijuana in high school he used it 
every week or two from 1976 to 1978. Applicant used hashish on a “near daily” basis, 
while in the military.8 He smoked it in a pipe. He used cocaine a total of three or four 
times beginning in 1979 and his last use was in about 1982. He experimented with LSD 
four or five times while in the military. His rationale for the illegal drug use was that it 
was common in his social circle and drugs were readily available. He continued to use 
marijuana on a recreational basis from 1980 to 1996, and while he was employed with 
his current federal employer beginning in 1984. He stated he was unaware of his 
employer’s drug policy. He used marijuana one to two times weekly for most of this 
particular period until 1996.9 
 
Applicant testified that he was arrested in 1995 because “I had a few plants,” 
referring to marijuana plants.10 He was charged with the felony offense of manufacturing 
marijuana. On cross-examination he admitted that he was growing marijuana, but could 
not remember the number of plants he was growing. In his 2002 sworn statement, he 
admitted there were a total of 280 plants. He began growing marijuana plants in 1984. 
His crop varied from year to year. He grew it to satisfy his own needs and sold small 
amounts to close friends, but not for a profit. In his statement he stated that he was just 
trying to get his money back. Applicant agreed to help law enforcement in exchange for 
having the charge adjudicated in state court vice federal court and a reduction in 
sentence. He pled guilty to the felony offense, but it appears he was sentenced as a first 
offender, completed the terms of the sentence, remained on probation for five year, and 
then the charge was dismissed.11  
 
In his 2002 sworn statement, Applicant stated that he learned from his mistakes 
and paid a price because of them. He further stated he had no intention of using illegal 
                                                          
7 Tr. 25; GE 2. 
 
8 Tr. 35-36. Applicant testified that he could not recall what he told the government investigator regarding 
how often he used hashish in the Air Force. He further testified that his use of hashish was “random.” 
 
9 Tr. 32, 36-37, 50-51; GE 3. Applicant was charged with driving under the influence (DUI) of alcohol in 
1981. He pled nolo contendere and paid a fine. He was arrested again in 1981 for DUI after being 
involved in an accident with his motorcycle. He paid a fine and his license was suspended for a year. I 
have not considered Applicant’s DUI arrests and other illegal drug use, except as alleged in the SOR, for 
purposes of disqualifying conditions, but considered them when analyzing potential mitigation, credibility 
determination, and the whole person. 
 
10 Tr. 26. 
 
11 Tr. 26-27; GE 3; AE D. 
 
 
4 
 
 
drugs in the future. He testified that when he was arrested it was during a period when 
he was laid off from work by his employer.12 
 
Applicant resumed using marijuana in approximately June 2012 and continued to 
use it until he participated in a drug test held by his employer in October 2012, when he 
tested positive for marijuana. A trace amount of marijuana was also found in Applicant’s 
car. Applicant testified that he was aware at the time that the use of illegal drugs was 
prohibited while holding a security clearance. Applicant was suspended for two weeks 
by his employer in October 2012 for the failed drug test. He was advised not to return to 
work until he was sure the drug was no longer in his system so he would not test 
positive upon his return. He did not return to work for an additional three weeks. He 
passed the drug test and was permitted to return to work. He was on probation with his 
employer for two years and was subject to random drug testing.13  
 
Applicant attributed his resumption of marijuana use to a stressful period in his 
life and because he was suffering from anxiety. In April 2012 his mother was ill and 
placed in a nursing home. She passed away about a month later. Applicant had 
difficulty sleeping and used over-the-counter medication to help, but it did not work. He 
attempted to cope. His father became sick in June 2012. Applicant’s brother offered him 
the marijuana to help him sleep. Applicant testified he would use marijuana every two to 
three days on some occasions, then not use it for about seven days. He estimated from 
June 2012 to October 2012, when he tested positive, he used marijuana about 10 to 12 
times. He stated he was weak and succumbed to using marijuana when his brother 
offered it. Applicant stated it was his brother who contacted his employer about his 
marijuana use because his brother was contesting their father’s will. He is now 
estranged from his brother. He stated he has not used marijuana since October 2012.14  
 
Applicant testified that if he were suffering from stress and anxiety today he 
would not succumb to using marijuana because he has a wonderful wife and a good 
job. He participated in counseling through an employer assistance program for 
approximately one month, which included alcohol/drug education. No substance abuse 
problem was identified.15 After he tested positive for marijuana, Applicant sought 
medical help for his anxiety and sleeping problems. He was prescribed a medication.16 
He stated he no longer associates with drug abusers. He signed a statement of 
automatic revocation of a security clearance if he uses illegal drugs in the future. 
Applicant has not tested positive for marijuana since October 2012. He provided the 
results of an alcohol/drug evaluation conducted in April 2016. He was not diagnosed as 
                                                          
12 Tr. 37-40; GE 3. 
 
13 Tr. 22-24, 27-34, 41-45, 48-49. 
 
14 Tr. 22-24, 28, 31, 41-44, 51. 
 
15 Tr. 49-50-52; AE E, F, G. 
 
16 Tr. 28; AE G. 
 
5 
 
 
dependent on marijuana or alcohol and it appears he did not exhibit signs of withdrawal 
or in need of detoxification. His level of risk was determined to be low.17  
 
Character letters describe Applicant as knowledgeable, conscientious, courteous, 
helpful, respectful, loyal, trustworthy, dedicated, and valued. He has a strong work ethic 
and a take-charge attitude.18 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have not drawn inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
                                                          
17 Tr. 28, 45-48; AE G, H, I, J, N. 
 
18 AE K, L, M. 
 
6 
 
 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern for drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered the disqualifying conditions for drug involvement under AG ¶ 
25 and the following are potentially applicable: 
 
 (a) any drug abuse; 
 
 (c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia; and 
 
 (g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.  
 
 Applicant used marijuana from approximately 1976 to October 2012. There is 
significant evidence that he used marijuana regularly from 1976 to 1996. He was 
disciplined three times while in the military for possession of marijuana. In 1995, he was 
arrested and pled guilty to a felony charge of manufacturing marijuana. He was growing 
approximately 280 marijuana plants. It appears he may have stopped using marijuana 
after his arrest, but resumed in June 2012 and continued to sometime in October 2012. 
These later uses occurred while he held a security clearance. The above disqualifying 
conditions apply.  
 
I have considered the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26. The following are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 
7 
 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation; and  
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and favorable prognosis by duly qualified 
medical professional.  
 
Applicant’s last reported illegal drug use was in October 2012 after he tested 
positive for marijuana. He had been using marijuana over a five-month period beginning 
in June 2012 while holding a security clearance. Applicant has a long history of 
marijuana use with varying frequency beginning in 1976. He used it frequently while he 
was in the military, and his discharge, although under honorable conditions, was 
because of misconduct due to drug abuse. He continued to use marijuana while he was 
employed by his current employer, a federal contractor. He was arrested and charged in 
1995 with a felony for manufacturing marijuana. He worked with law enforcement and 
was given a reduced sentence. He used marijuana again in 2012. Applicant stated 
during a sworn statement to a government investigator in 2002 that he did not intend to 
use illegal drugs in the future. Although, it has been three and a half years since 
Applicant’s last marijuana use, his behavior was not infrequent, did not happen under 
unique circumstances, and it casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply.  
 
Applicant testified that he will not use marijuana again because he has a good 
job and a good wife, both of which he had when he used marijuana in 2012. He made 
the same promise in 2002. He stated he no longer associates with those who use illegal 
drugs. He signed a letter of intent with automatic revocation of clearance if he uses 
illegal drugs in the future. Although AG ¶ 26(b) has some application, Applicant has a 
significant history of drug use. First, he used it while serving in the military, then for a 
significant period of time while working for a federal contractor.  He was then arrested 
for manufacturing marijuana, and then over a five-month period he used marijuana 
while holding a security clearance. The evidence establishes minimal mitigation under 
AG ¶ 26(b). 
 
Applicant participated in counseling and was not diagnosed as drug dependent. 
His was given a prognosis of low risk, presumably for future drug abuse. Although it 
appears Applicant is not addicted to drugs, the evidence shows he succumbs to using 
marijuana. He had an extended period of abstinence, and then resumed using 
marijuana. These are lifestyle choices. There is some evidence of mitigation under AG ¶ 
26(d), but it is insufficient and does not outweigh the lifestyle choices Applicant made 
when he repeatedly used marijuana in his past and while holding a security clearance.   
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline, H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is 56 years old. He has a long history of marijuana use beginning in 
high school, continuing during his military service, and was basis for his separation from 
the Air Force. He was growing 280 marijuana plants when he was arrested and charged 
with manufacturing marijuana, while he was laid off from work. After being granted a 
security clearance in 2003, he chose to use marijuana over a five-month period in 2012, 
until he tested positive during a drug test by his employer. Applicant has exhibited a 
long history of illegal drug involvement. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
serious questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security 
concerns arising under the drug involvement guideline.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:   Against Applicant 
 
       
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
