 
1 
                                      
 
      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00994 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations and 
personal conduct. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information 
is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 21, 2001, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
a Security Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On August 8, 2012, he submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a Security 
Clearance Application.2 On September 11, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (CAF) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended and modified (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining 
                                                          
1
 GE 2 (SF 86, dated November 21, 2001). 
 
2
 GE 1 (e-QIP, dated August 8, 2012). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) applicable to 
all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive, effective 
September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct), and detailed reasons why the DOD 
adjudicators were unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to 
an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on September 24, 2015. In his answer to the SOR 
allegations, Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on March 16, 2016. The 
case was assigned to me on March 28, 2016. A Notice of Hearing was issued on April 
8, 2016. I convened the hearing as scheduled on April 27, 2016. 
 
 During the hearing, six Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 6) and nine 
Applicant exhibits (AE A through AE I) were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 6, 2016. I kept the record 
open to enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took advantage of that opportunity. 
He timely submitted a number of documents, which were marked as AE J through AE R 
and admitted into evidence without objection. The record closed on May 25, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant essentially admitted and denied various 
portions, with explanations, of the factual allegations pertaining to financial 
considerations and personal conduct in the SOR (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.c., 2.a. and 2.b.). 
Applicant’s answers are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and 
thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due consideration of same, I 
make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 53-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been a 
quality engineer since June 2001.3 A 1982 high school graduate,4 Applicant received an 
associate’s degree in 1992 and a bachelor’s degree in industrial engineering in 1994.5 
He enlisted in the U.S. Navy and apparently served in both the inactive duty reserve 
(from 1990 until 1994) and on active duty (from 1983 until 1990) as a submariner. He 
retired honorably because of physical disability (subsequently awarded a 70 percent 
disability) in the grade of petty officer first class (E-6) in 1994.6 He held a top secret 
security clearance while in the U.S. Navy, and he has held a secret security clearance 
                                                          
3
 GE 1, supra note 2, at 10. 
 
4
 GE 6 (Personal Subject Interview, dated September 25, 2012), at 2. 
 
5
 Tr. at 21-23. 
 
6
 GE 6, supra note 4, at 2; GE 1, supra note 2, at 12; GE 2, supra note 1, at 5; AE K (Letter, dated October 
20, 1994); AE J (Letter, dated April 28, 2016); AE L (Identification Cards, undated); Tr. at 60, 62. 
 
3 
                                      
 
since 2002.7 Applicant was married the first time in June 1988 and divorced in June 
1995; the second time in August 1998 and divorced in January 2009; and the third time 
in July 2012.8 He has two sons and a daughter, born in 1995 and 1997,9 as well as 
several stepchildren. 
 
Financial Considerations10 
It is unclear if Applicant encountered financial difficulties or if certain accounts 
became delinquent because of oversight or other unusual circumstances. The SOR 
identified three purportedly continuing delinquent accounts which had been placed for 
collection, charged off, or for which foreclosure proceedings had commenced. His 
August 2012 credit report reflects one minor collection account in the amount of $62, 
but the remaining accounts were all current.11 That account does not appear in either of 
Applicant’s more recent credit reports, and it is not listed in the SOR.  
There is, however, one delinquent medical account in the amount of $48 (actually 
$47.67) that is listed in the SOR (SOR ¶ 1.a.). Applicant explained that the medical 
provider failed to submit the bill to both his primary insurance carrier and to his 
secondary insurance carrier. He was unaware that the account had been placed for 
collection.12 When he first learned of the delinquency during his interview with an 
investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in September 2012, 
he indicated he would follow up and resolve it.13 Applicant paid the entire amount owed 
in September 2015.14 The debt has been resolved. 
When Applicant decided to move from one residence to another, he instructed 
the utility company to turn off both his gas and electric service. They failed to do as 
instructed. Unbeknownst to Applicant, the service continued, generating approximately 
$1,155 in charges that were eventually charged off (SOR ¶ 1.b.). No final bill was ever 
                                                          
7
 GE 1, supra note 2, at 32-33; GE 2, supra note 1, at 10. 
 
8
 GE 1, supra note 2, at 14-17. 
 
9
 GE 1, supra note 2, at 21-22. 
 
10
 General source information pertaining to the financial accounts discussed below can be found in the 
following exhibits:  GE 5 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated August 22, 2012); GE 4 
(Equifax Credit Report, dated December 2, 2014); GE 3 (Equifax Credit Report, dated August 13, 2015); GE 6, supra 
note 4. More recent information can be found in the exhibits furnished and individually identified. 
 
11
 GE 5, supra note 10, at 14. 
 
12
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, dated September 24, 2015. 
 
13
 GE 6, supra note 4, at 1. 
 
14
 AE E (Receipt, dated September 24, 2015); Tr. at 27-28. 
 
4 
                                      
 
received by Applicant.15 Upon learning of the delinquency, Applicant paid the entire 
balance due.16 The debt has been resolved. 
Applicant purchased a residence in 2007 and refinanced it for approximately 
$190,692 in 2010. Although the house had been inspected when he bought it, Applicant 
subsequently learned that there were structural deficiencies involving the presence of 
lead in the paint, asbestos under the siding, and something akin to dry rot in the 
structural beams. Contractors would not touch the house to repair it. Applicant was also 
unable to sell it. He approached the mortgage lender for a solution, but none was 
forthcoming, so he stopped making his monthly payments (SOR ¶ 1.c.). Once he had 
secured another residence, Applicant relinquished the house keys and moved out. A 
foreclosure was subsequently completed. The house was sold by the mortgage lender 
for $212,080.42 in August 2014.17 Since the sale was for more that the amount owed by 
Applicant, the amount owed by Applicant was reduced to zero – a fact clearly set forth 
in Applicant’s December 2014 and August 2015 credit reports.18 The debt was resolved 
13 months before the SOR was issued. 
In April 2016, Applicant submitted a Personal Financial Statement setting forth 
his net monthly income of $7,691; and his monthly household expenses of $1,184.93. 
Based on those figures, it appears that he has a monthly remainder of approximately 
$6,506 available for savings or spending. His wife owns their residence. Applicant has 
substantial assets ($348,050) in a diverse variety of accounts, and only approximately 
$18,522 in liabilities, including a $12,600 mortgage in his wife’s name.19 Applicant has 
no delinquent accounts. His finances are under control.  
Personal Conduct 
 In October 2013, Applicant accompanied his daughter while she was driving the 
family car using her learner’s permit. When she turned down a road that narrows, a 
driver in a pickup truck behind them tried to pass them on the right curb. When 
Applicant told his daughter to move to the center of the road to allow the other driver to 
pass, the other driver shook his fist at them and pulled his vehicle in front of Applicant’s 
car and stopped, blocking their path. Road rage ensued. The other driver exited his 
                                                          
 
15
 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12. 
 
16
 AE B (Account Statement, undated); AE C (E-mail and Statement, both dated April 18, 2016); Tr. at 28. 
 
17
 Tr. at 29-35; GE 6, supra note 4, at 1; AE G (Loan Activity, dated September 24, 2015); AE D (Loan 
Activity, dated April 8, 2016). 
 
18
 GE 4, supra note 10, at 2; GE 3, supra note 10, at 5. See also AE H (Current Loan Information, dated 
September 9, 2015). Applicant’s recent April 2016 credit report reflects the account as “foreclosure redeemed.” AE A 
(TransUnion Credit Report, dated April 11, 2016), at 2. 
 
19
 AE M (Personal Financial Statement, dated April 28, 2016); AE P (Statement of Account, dated March 31, 
2016); AE Q (Salaried Savings Plan, dated April 27, 2016); AE O (Summary of Tour Statement Information, undated); 
AE N (Paycheck Print, dated April 28, 2016); AE I (Personal Account Summary, undated); AE R (Account Statement, 
undated). 
  
 
5 
                                      
 
vehicle, opened his jacket to expose a pistol in a shoulder holster, and came towards 
Applicant’s vehicle. The other driver kept his hand under his jacket. As he approached 
the car, Applicant, fearing for his life and that of his daughter, turned and tried to shield 
her, while at the same time, drawing his own concealed handgun. Applicant did not 
point the weapon at the other driver. He yelled at the other driver and told him to move 
away from their car. The driver complied, but he failed to move his truck. The police 
arrived shortly thereafter, but Applicant is not sure who called them because his cell 
phone was dead and his daughter did not have one. After explaining what had occurred, 
Applicant was arrested and charged with menacing in the second degree, a 
misdemeanor. The district attorney eventually dismissed the original charge and 
reduced it to disorderly conduct, a violation, which is less serious than a misdemeanor. 
Because of the costs which would have faced him to fight the charge, Applicant chose 
not to fight it. He was required to pay a small fine of less than $100. He was not 
required to do any probation, community service, or to attend any anger-management 
classes. Applicant’s handgun and pistol permit were promptly returned to him by the 
police authorities at the direction of the district attorney. The other driver’s pistol permit 
was revoked.20 
 In August 2012, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he responded to some 
questions pertaining to his financial record. One particular question in § 26 was if he 
was currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt. Applicant answered “no” to the 
question. He certified that the response was “true, complete, and correct” to the best of 
his knowledge and belief.21 The SOR had erroneously alleged that Applicant completed 
the e-QIP on January 1, 2014, but that allegation was incorrect, and Department 
Counsel moved to amend the SOR to correct the error. The motion was to substitute the 
date “August 8, 2012” for the alleged date of “January 1, 2014.” There being no 
objection, the motion was granted.22 At the time Applicant completed the e-QIP, the 
August 2012 credit report, issued two weeks after the e-QIP was completed, reflected 
the account was already over 120 days past due.23 Applicant denied that he was aware 
that the account was being reported as past due as he had been advised that it had 
been placed in a suspense status, and he had not obtained a copy of his credit report 
before completing the e-QIP.24 Upon being examined by Department Counsel, Applicant 
still denied intending to falsify his response, but did concede that his response was 
probably an oversight on his part and that he should have responded with a “yes” to the 
question.25 
                                                          
20
 Tr. at 42-54; AE F (Letter, dated November 6, 2014); Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 12. 
Applicant noted that under the state law, it is mandatory to arrest anyone who has drawn a weapon. He also indicated 
that he had been advised that if all charges had been dismissed, the state might be liable for false arrest. 
 
21
 GE 1, supra note 2, at 35, 38. 
 
22
 Tr. at 11-13. 
 
23
 GE 5, supra note 10, at 17. 
 
24
 Tr. at 40-41. 
 
25
 Tr. at 41. 
 
6 
                                      
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”26 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”27   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”28 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.29  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
                                                          
26
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
27
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
28
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
29
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”30  
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”31 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a “history of not meeting financial obligations” may raise 
security concerns. Applicant had three isolated delinquent debts that were placed for 
collection, charged off, or went to foreclosure. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
                                                          
30
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
31
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
may be mitigated where “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where “the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” Evidence 
that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
“the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.”32  
AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) apply. Applicant’s financial problems were 
not caused by frivolous or irresponsible spending, and he did not spend beyond his 
means. Instead, those financial problems were largely beyond his control. He was 
unaware that one small medical bill was not sent by the provider to his two health 
insurance carriers. Instead, the provider apparently ignored or overlooked the second 
carrier and simply placed the debt for collection. Another debt was created when the 
utility company failed to comply with Applicant’s wishes to terminate service, and 
instead, continued to charge him for undesired service. When Applicant learned of the 
two delinquent accounts, he paid them off. The third debt arose over a dispute 
regarding the structural deficiencies in his residence. Apparently there was some 
miscommunication between Applicant and the mortgage lender, for rather than having 
the issue placed in suspense, foreclosure proceedings commenced. The house was 
eventually sold for more than the remaining mortgage balance, and Applicant’s 
responsibility under the mortgage loan is now zero.  
Applicant has substantial assets in a diverse variety of accounts, and only 
minimal liabilities, including a modest mortgage in his wife’s name. He has no 
delinquent accounts. His finances are under control. There are substantial indications 
that Applicant’s finances have never really been out of control. Applicant’s actions, 
                                                          
32
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term “good-faith.” 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith “requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
under the circumstances confronting him, do not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.33 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out in 
AG & 15:       
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
 The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 16(a), it is potentially disqualifying if there is 
 
Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Under AG ¶ 16(e), it is also potentially disqualifying if there is 
personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . 
engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, 
professional, or community standing. . . . 
 Applicant was involved in an incident of road rage. The other driver exited his 
vehicle, opened his jacket to expose a pistol in a shoulder holster, and came towards 
Applicant’s vehicle. The other driver kept his hand under his jacket. As he approached 
the car, Applicant, fearing for his life and that of his daughter, turned and tried to shield 
her, while at the same time, drawing his own concealed handgun. Applicant did not 
point the weapon at the other driver. He yelled at the other driver and told him to move 
away from their car. The driver complied, but he failed to move his truck. The police 
arrived shortly thereafter. After explaining what had occurred, Applicant was arrested 
and charged with menacing in the second degree, a misdemeanor. It was reduced to 
disorderly conduct, a violation, which is less serious than a misdemeanor. Applicant did 
not fight the reduced charge. He was required to pay a small fine of less than $100. 
With respect to the road rage incident, AG ¶ 16(e) has been established. 
 
  
                                                          
33
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
In August 2012, when Applicant completed his e-QIP, he denied that he was 
currently over 120 days delinquent on any debt. At the time Applicant completed the e-
QIP, he did, in fact, have one account that was over 120 days past due. However, 
Applicant denied that he was aware that the account was being reported as past due as 
he had been advised that it had been placed in a suspense status, and he had not 
obtained a copy of his credit report before completing the e-QIP. Applicant steadfastly 
denied intending to falsify his response, but he did eventually concede that his response 
was probably an oversight on his part and that he should have responded with a “yes” 
to the question. With respect to Applicant’s response to the e-QIP question, AG ¶ 16(a) 
has not been established 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. AG ¶ 17(c) may apply if  
 
the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so 
infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
AG ¶ 17(c) applies. As noted above, in October 2013, Applicant accompanied his 
daughter while she was driving the family car using her learner’s permit. When she 
turned down a road that narrows, a driver in a pickup truck behind them tried to pass 
them on the right curb. The other driver shook his fist at them and pulled his vehicle in 
front of Applicant’s car and stopped, blocking their path. Road rage ensued. Weapons 
were displayed.  Applicant feared for his life and that of his daughter. He turned and 
tried to shield her, while at the same time, drawing his own concealed handgun. 
Applicant did not point the weapon at the other driver. Although Applicant was arrested 
and charged with menacing in the second degree, a misdemeanor, the district attorney 
eventually dismissed the original charge and reduced it to disorderly conduct, a 
violation, which is less serious than a misdemeanor. Because of the costs which would 
have faced him to fight the charge, Applicant chose not to fight it. He paid a small fine of 
less than $100. Because the offense was so minor, and it happened under such unique 
circumstances, Applicant was not required to do any probation, community service, or to 
attend any anger-management classes. His handgun and pistol permit were promptly 
returned to him by the police authorities at the direction of the district attorney. 
Applicant’s actions in exercising his right to protect his daughter from possible 
impending harm, under the circumstances, does not cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 
11 
                                      
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Moreover, I have evaluated the various 
aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not merely 
performed a piecemeal analysis.34       
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant’s 
residence went into foreclosure after he stopped making his monthly mortgage 
payments, and two other diverse accounts became delinquent. During a road-rage 
confrontation, he drew a handgun to deter an aggressor. He was convicted of disorderly 
conduct.  
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant is a disabled military veteran as well as a good and involved parent. He 
possesses a concealed gun permit in a state not known for being liberal in issuing such 
permits. Although he was involved in a road-rage incident while teaching his daughter to 
drive, he drew his handgun in self-defense only after the other driver displayed his 
weapon while approaching Applicant and his daughter, and Applicant feared for their 
safety. Although Applicant was convicted of the “violation” called disorderly conduct, the 
significance of the violation has been greatly diminished by the return of Applicant’s 
handgun and permit and the minimal penalty imposed by the court.  
Applicant did incur two small debts, but upon becoming aware of them, he 
promptly paid them off. The larger debt, over which there was a dispute regarding 
structural deficiencies in his residence, was eventually resolved over a year before the 
SOR was issued, and he has no further financial liability or responsibility under it. There 
are substantial indications that Applicant’s finances have never really been out of 
control. Applicant’s actions under the circumstances confronting him during both the 
road-rage incident and related to his mortgage issues do not cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial considerations 
and personal conduct. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
                                                          
34
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR 
and amended SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                          
            
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
 
