1 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01418 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Rhett Petcher, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on June 28, 2012. On 
September 27, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) sent him a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guidelines F and E. The DOD acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 9, 2015, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on 
December 23, 2015, and the case was assigned to me on February 17, 2016. The 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing on 
2 
 
February 26, 2016, scheduling the hearing for March 23, 2016. I convened the hearing 
as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 3-6 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant declined to waive the authentication of GX 2, and it was not 
admitted. He testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A-F, which were admitted 
without objection. I kept the record open until April 8, 2016, to enable him to submit 
additional evidence. He timely submitted AX G-L,1 which were received without 
objection. Department Counsel’s comments regarding AX G-L are attached to the 
record as Hearing Exhibit I. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on April 1, 2016. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c, 1.e-1.i, and 1.l-1.q. 
He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.d, 1.j, 1.k, and 2.a. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old senior software engineer. He is self-employed. His 
company was certified as a small business in 2005. (Tr. 47.) He has worked for defense 
contractors since at least March 2001, and he has worked as a sub-contractor since 
starting his own company. He received a security clearance in March 1999. Currently, 
he does not have an active security clearance. (Tr. 8.) 
 
 Applicant married in January 2005 and divorced in April 2007. He married his 
current wife in September 2008. He and his current wife have two children, ages six and 
four. 
 
 Applicant received an associate’s degree from a technical school in September 
1998. He has attended a community college and a university since March 2004, but he 
has not received a degree. His wife is a full-time student in a medical school, seeking to 
become a physician’s assistant. (Tr. 48-49, 85.) 
 
 When Applicant submitted his SCA in June 2012, he answered “No” to all the 
questions about financial delinquencies. He did not disclose any of the debts alleged in 
the SOR. His credit bureau report (CBR) dated July 20, 2012, reflected the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a, 1.l-1.n, and the federal tax liens alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h. 
(GX 3.) At the hearing, he admitted knowing that he “had something going on” with his 
taxes. (Tr. 59.) He also knew that a hospital had filed a judgment against him, but he 
thought his wife was taking care of it. (Tr. 60.) He testified that he had difficulty with the 
electronic questionnaire, and some of the financial information he submitted did not 
appear on the form when he reviewed it, but that he thought it was “not that big of a 
deal.” He testified that he did not believe that, “if you miss a letter . . . they are going to 
throw the book at you.” He believed, “If I filled it out as complete as possible, you guys 
can pull [my] credit report at any time.” (Tr. 86.) He testified that he did not intend to lie, 
                                                          
1 AX G was submitted twice. Only one copy is included in the record. 
 
2 Applicant’s personal information is extracted from his security clearance application (GX 1) unless 
otherwise indicated by a parenthetical citation to other documents in the record. 
3 
 
and he disclosed everything when he was “prompted with the information” by a security 
investigator six months after he submitted his SCA. (Tr. 38-40, 87.)   
 
Applicant’s CBRs from January 2015 and August 2015 reflect the debts alleged 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.i and 1.l-1.q. (GX 4; GX 5.) The unsatisfied judgments alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.j and 1.k are reflected in court records. (GX 6.) The evidence concerning the debts 
alleged in the SOR is summarized below. 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b: two credit-card accounts, one charged off $4,972 in 
September 2011; and one placed for collection of $3,088 in August 2012. These 
debts were incurred for clothing and household furnishings. As of the date of the 
hearing, Applicant had not contacted the creditors or taken any action to resolve the 
debts. (Tr. 60-61; 64-65) 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d: student loans, one placed for collection of $792 in 
November 2011; and one placed for collection of $619 in February 2011. At the 
hearing, Applicant testified that he could not remember how these debts were incurred. 
(Tr. 69-70.) They are not resolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e: cell phone disconnection fee, placed for collection of $277 in 
December 2014. Applicant testified that this debt was paid, but he submitted no 
documentation of payment. (Tr. 71; AX J.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f: installment account for computer purchase, past due for $184, 
last payment in April 2012. Applicant testified that the computer was a business debt. 
He thought the debt “might be gone,” but he was unsure. (Tr. 71.) In his post-hearing 
submission, he stated that the debt was paid in full, but he submitted no documentation. 
(AX J.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g: federal tax lien entered in 2012 for $32,731. Applicant testified that 
his tax debts were a high priority, in large part because they prevented him and his wife 
from obtaining student loans. (Tr. 61.) In October 2014, Applicant requested that the 
IRS release three liens, citing the adverse effect of the liens on his eligibility for a 
security clearance. (AX E.) On January 15, 2016, his request was denied. (AX D.) On 
January 20, 2016, the $32,731 lien was released after Applicant’s wife and her father 
borrowed $40,000 and satisfied the lien. (GX 1 at 17, 24.; AX C; AX H.) Applicant 
testified that he was unsure whether he and his wife were legally obligated to repay the 
debt, because it may have been connected to a $50,000 gift that his father-in-law 
intended to give his wife and each of her siblings. (Tr. 93-94.) However, the promissory 
note lists Applicant’s wife and her father as co-borrowers, jointly and severally liable for 
payment of the debt. There is no evidence that her father has agreed to pay the entire 
amount of the loan or hold Applicant’s wife harmless for any default. To the contrary, 
Applicant’s wife has agreed to make monthly $716 payments by automatic withdrawals 
from a bank account. The documentation does not reflect whether the bank account is a 
joint account with Applicant, his wife’s separate account, or a joint account with her 
father. (AX G.) 
4 
 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 1.i: federal tax liens entered in 2012 for $9,325 and $7,716. 
These liens were included in the October 2014 request for release of liens. The request 
for release was denied. In his post-hearing submission, Applicant stated that he has 
negotiated a payment plan for these two liens, but he was awaiting documentation from 
the IRS. (AX I.) No documentation was provided. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j and 1.k: judgments for hospital bills for $902, entered in 2012; 
and $302, entered in 2010. At the hearing, Applicant was unsure of the status of these 
two judgments. He believed that they may have been incurred during the births of his 
children. They are unsatisfied. (Tr. 77.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.l: retail-store debt charged off for $281 in February 2011. Applicant 
submitted no documentation of any efforts to resolve the debt. (Tr. 77-78.) In his post-
hearing submission, he stated that the debt was paid in full, but he submitted no 
documentation. (AX J.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.m: overdrawn checking account, placed for collection of $545 in 
January 2010. Applicant testified that the account was a business account and he 
remembered that the overdraft occurred when the IRS began garnishing the account. 
He was unsure of the status of the account and produced no documentation regarding 
it. (Tr. 78.) 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.n: retail-store account charged off for $792 in November 2011. 
Applicant was unable to provide any information about this debt. It is unresolved. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.o-1.q, student loans past due for $186, $248, and $262. Applicant 
testified that payments on these loans were current. (Tr. 79.) In his answer to the SOR, 
he stated that he owed a balance of about $2,000 on his student loans. Applicant’s 
account history reflects a payment in February 2000; multiple late fees in 2002; and 
payments in November 2002, February 2003, and March 2003, with late fees 
interspersed for months in which no payment was made. His history shows fairly regular 
payments in 2004-2009; one payment in 2010 and two payments in 2011, with multiple 
late fees; regular payments in 2012-2014; one payment in February 2015, and multiple 
late fees from March-October 2015. (AX H.) Three Stafford loans for $921, $775, and 
$581 were in forbearance as of May 2016. (AX I.) Applicant submitted evidence that 
three student loans are paid in full. (AX F.) However, he did not present evidence that 
the paid-off student loans are the same as the student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.o-1.q.  
 
 State tax debt (not alleged in SOR).3 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant 
stated that he had satisfied a state tax debt of about $12,000. Applicant submitted 
                                                          
3 Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to decide 
whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate evidence of extenuation, mitigation, 
or changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; 
or as part of a whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have 
considered the evidence of Applicant’s state tax debt for these limited purposes. 
 
5 
 
evidence of a $30 payment of state income taxes. (AX K.) The evidence does not reflect 
whether the $30 payment was a partial payment or the final payment.  
 
 Applicant is the sole owner of his company. He had a co-owner until around 
2005-2006. He testified that he was “not the best business man.” He found that tax 
requirements and company financial documents did not make “a whole lot of sense” to 
him. He trusted an accounting firm to take care of his income taxes, gave the 
accountants his signature stamp, and did not verify that taxes were timely paid. (Tr. 50-
53.) He testified that he was not able to deal with the tax liens until January 2016 
because he was dealing with the failure of his company and demands for payment from 
multiple creditors. (Tr. 80.) 
 
 Applicant’s salary is about $105,000 per year. His net pay is about $5,600 per 
month. (Tr. 88.) He has a second job as a medical scribe, for which he earns about 
$14,000 per year. (Tr. 48.) His net pay from his second job is about $500 per month. 
(Tr. 89.) His wife is not employed outside the home. (Tr. 48-49, 85.) 
 
 Applicant owns two vehicles, a 2005 truck and a 2009 minivan, which are both 
paid off. His mortgage-loan payments on his home are current. He testified that his wife 
enrolled one of their two children in a private school at a cost of $200 per month, over 
his objection. (Tr. 84.) 
 
 Applicant demonstrated during the hearing that he does not understand the 
nexus between delinquent debts and his eligibility for a security clearance. His 
testimony included the following comments: 
 
[Y]ou can sit there and grill me all day long, but what you are trying to do, 
is you are trying to push one of its best employees away. . . . If you guys 
would just say, hey look, you know? He is a good guy, he does the right 
thing, he is responsible with what we need to be responsible, with our 
information, [sic] we trust him with our information. What is the problem? 
That is the way I look at it. But you will grill me over these things and it is, 
you know, I think that you guys are pushing away one of the good guys, 
you know? 
 
(Tr. 81-83.) In Applicant’s closing statement he commented that his financial problems 
are unrelated to how he will treat classified information, and he referred to the 
Department Counsel’s closing statement as “arguing apples and oranges.” (Tr. 107.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
6 
 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available and reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 Applicant’s admissions in his answer to the SOR, his testimony at the hearing, 
and the documentary evidence submitted at and after the hearing establish two 
disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”). AG ¶ 
19(g) (“failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or the 
fraudulent filing”) is not established by Applicant’s tax debts, because the evidence 
reflects that the tax debts were incurred by miscalculation of the taxes due and failure to 
pay them rather than a failure to timely file returns. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are potentially applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
AG ¶ 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control; 
 
8 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, 
ongoing, and were not incurred under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) is not fully established. The failure of Applicant’s business, the 
substandard performance by his business accountants, and the medical debts incurred 
by his wife were circumstances beyond his control. However, he has not acted 
responsibly. His business was failing when he submitted his SCA in June 2012, but he 
did not begin to address his tax debts until October 2014, and he was motivated to take 
action largely because the tax debts prevented him and his wife from obtaining student 
loans. He neglected his consumer debts and medical bills and had not taken any action 
to resolve them as of the date of the hearing. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is not established. Applicant presented no evidence of financial 
counseling, and his financial problems are not yet under control. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.e, 1.f, 
and 1.j-1.n, which are unresolved. Although Applicant claimed to have paid the debts in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, and 1.l, he submitted no documentation to support his claim.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established for the student loans alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 
1.d. It is established for the student loans in SOR ¶¶ 1.o-1.q, for which Applicant has 
been making frequent payments, albeit somewhat sporadically.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established for the $32,731 federal tax lien in SOR ¶ 1.g. The 
mitigating value of the payment of the $32,731 lien is diminished by the fact that he and 
his wife exchanged one debt for another. Although Applicant is not personally obligated 
to repay the loan, it adversely affects the family finances. Furthermore, Applicant’s 
motivation for resolving the lien was based in large part on removing a hindrance to 
obtaining student loans rather than a sense of duty or obligation. In this respect, his 
conduct falls short of the “good faith” required by this mitigating condition. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is not established for the federal tax liens alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.h and 
1.i. Applicant has not provided documentation to support his assertion that he has 
negotiated a payment plan for these debts. Furthermore, he took no action to satisfy 
these liens until after the hearing. Payment of debts motivated by pressure to obtain a 
security clearance does not constitute “good faith” within the meaning of this mitigating 
condition.  
9 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) is not established. Applicant was unable to provide any information 
about several debts alleged in the SOR, but he has not disputed any of them. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition is AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire 
. . . .” When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. 
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004). An applicant’s experience and level of education are relevant 
to determining whether a failure to disclose relevant information on a security clearance 
application was deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). 
 
 Applicant admitted that he knew about his tax problems and a judgment entered 
against him when he submitted his SCA, but he did not take the omissions from his 
SCA seriously. While he may not have fully understood the implications of an intentional 
omission of relevant information from his SCA, he knew that he had not fully disclosed 
his financial situation. AG ¶ 16(a) is established. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions are potentially relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 AG ¶ 17(a) is not established. Applicant did not attempt to correct his omissions 
from his SCA until he was “prompted with the information” six months after he submitted 
his SCA.  
 
10 
 
 AG ¶ 17(c) is not established. Applicant’s intentional omissions were arguably 
infrequent and not recent, but they did not occur under unique circumstances and were 
not minor. Falsification of a security clearance application is serious misconduct that 
“strikes at the heart of the security clearance process.” ISCR Case No. 09-01652 (App. 
Bd. Aug. 8, 2011.) Furthermore, Applicant testified that he regarded his lack of candor 
as “not that big of a deal.” His casual attitude about his lack of candor precludes a 
finding that it is unlikely to recur. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under these guidelines, but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 A security clearance adjudication is an evaluation of an individual’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) An applicant is not required to establish resolution of 
every debt alleged in the SOR, to make payments on all delinquent debts 
simultaneously, or to pay the debts alleged in the SOR first. He or she need only 
establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement 
the plan. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant has 
no coherent plan. His approach to his financial problems has been haphazard, reactive, 
and motivated by self-interest rather than a sense of obligation.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns raised by his financial delinquencies 
and lack of candor in his SCA. I conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that 
11 
 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him eligibility for access to 
classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.n:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.o-1.q:    For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
