 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01690 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CERVI, Gregg A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
June 30, 2014. On November 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on December 10, 2015, provided supporting 
documents, and elected to have the case decided on the written record in lieu of a 
hearing. The Government’s written brief with supporting documents, known as the File 
 
2 
 
of Relevant Material (FORM), was submitted by Department Counsel on January 20, 
2016.  
 
A complete copy of the FORM was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
security concerns. Applicant received the FORM on February 8, 2016. She filed a 
response to the FORM, and included two exhibits, marked AE A, a personal letter, and 
AE B, a letter of support from her security manager. She did not assert any objections to 
the Government’s evidence. 
 
The case was assigned to me on May 3, 2016. The Government exhibits 
included in the FORM (Items 1 to 7) are admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant’s exhibits are admitted into evidence without objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy in May 2015, which was 
discharged in September 2015. The evidence submitted with the FORM substantiates 
the SOR allegations, except that the bankruptcy discharge order was dated October 1, 
2015. Applicant admitted the allegation with an explanation. 
 
 Applicant is 38 years old and is employed by a defense contractor as a planning 
and scheduling analyst, since February 2014. Her security manager provided a letter 
attesting to Applicant’s honesty, trustworthiness and excellent work performance.1 She 
received a bachelor’s degree in 2000. She has been married since 2002, and has two 
children. Before accepting her current position in 2014, she was primarily a homemaker 
from about 2006 to 2014, but was employed as a part-time realtor from 2005 to 2008, 
and as a part-time transaction coordinator from 2008 to 2014.2 
 
 Applicant claims that before 2006, her credit rating was good. Applicant’s 
husband left an executive position in 2008 to start and operate a business while 
Applicant was primarily a homemaker. The business struggled because they did not 
have the required licenses, and did not generate expected income. As a result, they fell 
behind on credit card debt and their mortgage. Applicant claims to have contacted their 
creditors in an attempt to negotiate favorable terms that they could afford, but was 
unsuccessful. They eventually were able to short-sell their home.  
 
 In May 2015, Applicant received two garnishment orders at her work, to collect 
on judgments from 2012 and 2013. The judgments resulted from two unpaid credit card 
debts. Applicant claims she could not afford the loss of income from the garnishments, 
so she filed personal (Chapter 7) bankruptcy in May 2015, after completing mandatory 
financial counseling. Her husband was not included in the bankruptcy filing. 
Approximately $62,402 in delinquent debt was ordered discharged on October 1, 2015. 
                                                     
1 AE B. 
 
2 Item 2. 
 
3 
 
Applicant claims that she has not accumulated new debt in the past two to seven years 
and is able to live within her means since her husband is now employed. 
 
No documentary evidence was submitted with Applicant’s Answer or in response 
to this FORM, to show the current status of her finances, credit, household budget or 
other information to establish financial responsibility. I was unable to evaluate her 
personal credibility, demeanor, or character since she elected to have her case decided 
without a hearing. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security clearance 
decision.3 In Department of Navy v. Egan4, the Supreme Court stated that the burden of 
proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” It is well-established 
law that no one has a right to a security clearance. As noted by the Supreme Court in 
Egan, “the clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations 
                                                     
3 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan.27, 1995). 
 
4 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to 
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10th Cir. 2002) (no right to a 
security clearance). 
 
5 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
4 
 
should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, 
and the Directive, any doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of protecting national security.6 
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to 
whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, 
consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and, 
(b) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 Applicant filed her Chapter 7 bankruptcy case to extinguish delinquent debts, 
including two judgments that she was unable or unwilling to resolve. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
                                                     
6 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
 
 
5 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant has been employed full-time since 2014, and part-time while raising 
children. Her husband left an executive level position in 2008 to start a company, which 
apparently struggled. Applicant accumulated credit card debts that resulted in two 
judgments and garnishment orders. Applicant filed personal Chapter 7 bankruptcy to 
extinguish her debts. I have no documentary information in the record regarding the 
Applicant’s income, expenses, debts, etc., or her husband’s assets and contributions to 
the family’s financial resources in the past or now. I am unable to determine Applicant’s 
ability to meet current and future financial obligations. 
 
 Although Applicant filed bankruptcy to extinguish her delinquent financial 
obligations accumulated during a period of underemployment and apparent business 
struggles, I do not have sufficient information to determine her past financial status as 
her husband was not included in the bankruptcy filing, or to show her current financial 
responsibility. Applicant is responsible to submit evidence to show mitigation. I am 
unable to determine whether her she is able to meet current or future financial 
obligations based on the information in the record. 
 
 There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant’s overall financial 
condition has improved since the bankruptcy. Although bankruptcy is an acceptable 
form of addressing debts, an applicant must show that her financial problems are under 
control and that she is able to address her financial issues responsibly in the future. 
Applicant’s financial issues are recent and ongoing. They continue to cast doubt on her 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. Although she received 
mandatory financial counseling before filing bankruptcy, there is insufficient evidence to 
show her current financial status and her ability to act responsibly in the future. None of 
the mitigating conditions are fully applicable. 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I considered all of the 
potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and 
circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my findings of fact and 
comments under Guideline F in this whole-person analysis. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
GREGG A. CERVI 
Administrative Judge 
