1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ADP Case No. 15-01606 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
CREAN, THOMAS M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, eligibility for a public trust position is denied. 
Applicant did not present sufficient information to mitigate financial trustworthiness 
concerns. 
  
On October 15, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain eligibility for a public trust position with a 
defense contractor. Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator from the Office 
of Personnel Management (OPM) on January 5, 2013. (Item 6) After reviewing the 
results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense (DOD) could not make the 
preliminary affirmative findings required to grant Applicant access to sensitive 
information. On September 11, 2015, DOD issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) for financial trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F. (Item 1) The action was 
taken under Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended; Department of 
Defense Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as 
amended (Regulation); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the DOD on 
September 1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 17, 2015. She did not directly 
admit the 44 financial allegations. Her explanations in her answer concerning the 
actions she has taken on her debts is a clear indication and admission that the debts 
are delinquent and are her debts. Her answer is considered an admission of her debts. 
Applicant requested a decision on the record. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on December 15, 2015. Applicant received a complete file of 
relevant material (FORM) on December 17, 2015, and was provided the opportunity to 
file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. Applicant did not submit any information in response to the FORM. I was 
assigned the case on May 5, 2016.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview with an OPM investigator (Item 3) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over her objection. She was further advised that she could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate, and 
could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. She was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, 
the Administrative Judge could determine that she waived any objection to the 
admissibility of the Personnel Subject Interview summary. Applicant, in her response to 
the FORM, did not raise any objection to consideration of the Personal Subject 
Interview. Since there is no objection by Applicant, I will consider information in the 
Personal Subject Interview in my decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 34-years-old. She has an associate’s degree from a technical school 
awarded in 2012. She also attended college and another technical school but did not 
receive a degree from either school. She has been employed as a health data systems 
computer operator for a defense contractor since 2012.  She has never married, but she 
has a teenage child who lives with her. Applicant held various retail and office jobs over 
a number of years. She also had periods of unemployment from January 2009 until 
September 2009; from March 2010 until July 2010; and from April 2012 until September 
2012. (Item 4, e-QIP, dated October 15, 2012; Item 6, Personal Subject Interview, dated 
January 3, 2013)  
 
 The SOR alleges, and credit reports (Item 5, Credit Report, dated November 20, 
2012; Item 7, Credit Report, dated February 9, 2012; Item 8, Credit Report, dated 
August 10, 2015) confirm that Applicant has 44 delinquent debts from medical bills, 
student loans, past due rent, and a vehicle repossession. The total amount of 
delinquent debt is approximately $52,240.   
 
 Applicant listed some delinquent debts on her e-QIP. She attributes most of her 
overall debt to her daughter’s serious medical condition. Most of the medical debts were 
3 
 
incurred for her daughter’s medical care. Some of the medical debts were incurred for 
Applicant’s medical care. Applicant did not present any information to establish how the 
daughter’s illness affected her ability to resolve the debts. 
 
 Applicant states that the debt at SOR 1.a is for the rent of an apartment. 
Applicant co-signed the lease with her brother. Her brother lost his job and was unable 
to make the rent payments and had to abandon the apartment and the lease. He 
provided Applicant with a letter claiming responsibility for the amount due on the lease. 
Applicant is responsible for the debt as the co-signer of the lease. Neither Applicant nor 
her brother presented any evidence of payments on the debt or any attempts to resolve 
the rental dispute with the landlord.  
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant made margin notes indicating that some 
debts had been paid or were being paid, and that other debts were being disputed. She 
presented no documents to verify the claims of payment or information about any 
dispute of a debt. Applicant declared that her student loans were not past due but were 
in deferment. She presented no documentation to verify the status of her student loans. 
In other words, Applicant presented no documentation to verify the status of her 
delinquent debts listed in the SOR.  
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
4 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There is a trustworthiness concern for a failure or inability to live within one=s 
means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations indicating poor self-control, lack of 
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect sensitive 
information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage 
in illegal acts to generate funds (AG ¶ 18). Similarly, an individual who is financially 
irresponsible may also be irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in their obligation to 
protect sensitive information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life 
provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life. 
 
 A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a public trust position. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations.  
 
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant has significant delinquent debts 
that she has not resolved. Applicant’s delinquent medical bills, student loans, rent 
payments, and charges from repossession are established by credit reports and 
5 
 
Applicant’s admissions. These debts pose a trustworthiness concern raising Financial 
Consideration Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations).   
 
 I considered the following Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under 
AG ¶ 20:   
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separations) and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 These mitigating conditions apply only in part. Applicant incurred delinquent debt 
because of her daughter’s medical expenses, and her own periods of low-paying jobs or 
unemployment. Some of these conditions may have been beyond Applicant’s control. 
However, she failed to establish the second requirement of the mitigating conditions. 
She has not established that she acted reasonably and responsibly under the 
circumstances. She presented no information on payment of any debts, attempts to 
contact creditors, or any plans to resolve the debts. AG¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) do not apply. 
 
  Applicant presented no information that she received financial counseling. There 
is no indication that her financial problems are being resolved and are under control. AG 
¶ 20(c) does not apply.  
 
 Applicant did not establish a good-faith effort to pay her debts. For a good-faith 
effort, there must be an ability to repay the debts, the desire to repay, and evidence of a 
good-faith effort to repay. Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty and obligation. A systematic method of 
handling debts is needed. Applicant must establish a meaningful track record of debt 
payment. A meaningful track record of debt payment can be established by evidence of 
actual debt payments or reduction of debt through payment of debts. A promise to pay 
delinquent debts is not a substitute for a track record of paying debts in a timely manner 
and acting in a financially responsible manner. Applicant must establish that she has a 
6 
 
reasonable plan to resolve financial problems and has taken significant action to 
implement that plan.  
 
 Applicant did not present a plan to resolve her financial issues. She did not show 
a meaningful track record of debt payments, Applicant’s failure to pay her debts shows 
that she has not acted reasonably and honestly with regard to her financial duties and 
obligations. She is not managing her personal financial obligations responsibly. Based 
on all of the financial information, I conclude that Applicant has not mitigated 
trustworthiness concerns based on financial considerations. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s trustworthiness eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct 
and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a trustworthiness 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is required to show that 
she has a plan to resolve her financial problems and that she has taken significant 
action to implement that plan.  
 
 Applicant has not taken any action to resolve even the smallest of her debts. 
Applicant has not presented sufficient information to establish that she acted reasonably 
and responsibly within her limited finances, and that she will continue to responsibly 
manage her financial obligations. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and eligibility and 
suitability for a trustworthiness clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated trustworthiness concerns arising under the financial 
considerations guideline. Eligibility for a trustworthiness position is denied. 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
                         Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.rr    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
