 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 15-00056 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 5, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 26, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On November 19, 2015, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, 
and it was received on November 30, 2015. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
 
2 
 
 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not 
object to the Government’s evidence and did not offer any additional information. The 
Government’s documents, identified as Items 3 through 6, are admitted into evidence. 
The case was assigned to me on March 31, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR, except ¶ 1.f. After a thorough 
and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings 
of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old, has never been married, and has one minor child. He 
served in the military from February 2004 to April 2010 when he was honorably 
discharged. He was unemployed for approximately a year after his discharge. From 
March 2011 to November 2013, he was employed part-time with a federal contractor. 
From November 2013 to the present he has been employed part-time with a different 
federal contractor. It is unknown if Applicant is currently employed full time.1 
 
 Credit reports from November 2014 and May 2014 substantiate the debts alleged 
in the SOR that total more than $14,000. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e ($563) was 
paid. Applicant denied the delinquent debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($177) without explanation or 
documented proof. Applicant’s largest delinquent debt (SOR 1.a, $10,607) relates to a 
repossessed vehicle. He noted in his answer to the SOR that he was “making plan to 
pay off all debt.” During his June 2014 background interview he was provided with a list 
of his delinquent debts, and he indicated he intended to research and resolve them. 
Applicant did not provide evidence of his actions to pay, resolve, or dispute the 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR.2  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 4, 5, 6. 
 
3 
 
 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
4 
 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.3 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has seven delinquent debts that total more than $14,000. He began 
accruing the majority of them in approximately 2010. His delinquent debts are unpaid 
and unresolved. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
                                                          
3 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant paid one debt, but failed to provide evidence that any of the remaining 
debts in the SOR have been paid or resolved, despite being put on notice in 2014 
during his background interview. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that his 
financial problems are unlikely to recur. His failure to timely address his delinquent 
debts casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply 
 
Applicant’s financial problems were likely due to unemployment after his 
discharge from the military and subsequent part-time employment. These are conditions 
beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant must have acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. He did not provide evidence of his actions to pay, 
resolve, or dispute the delinquent debts alleged. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that he received financial counseling. There is 
insufficient evidence to conclude he made good-faith payments to six creditors or 
otherwise resolved those delinquent debts. Despite paying one delinquent debt there 
are not clear indications that Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or under 
control. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to SOR ¶ 1.e. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply to the 
remaining debts. 
 
Applicant disputed the debt in SOR ¶ 1.f. He did not provide a reasonable basis 
to dispute the legitimacy of the debt or documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or any actions he may have taken to resolve the issue. AG ¶ 20(e) does not 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
 
6 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 32 years old. He served in the military and received an honorable 
discharge. He subsequently experienced a period of unemployment and part-time 
employment. Applicant had an opportunity to provide substantiating documentation of 
actions he may have taken to resolve his delinquent debts, but did not provide it. He has 
failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence leaves me with questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.e:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.f-1.h:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
