 
1 
 
 
                                  `                           
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: 
  
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02880 
            ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to provide adequate documentation to mitigate security concerns 
for financial considerations under Guideline F. He failed to mitigate security concerns for 
personal conduct under Guideline E. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 29, 2012, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for 
employment with a defense contractor. (Item 4) Applicant was interviewed by a security 
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on January 30, 2013. 
(Item 6) After reviewing the results of the OPM investigation, the Department of Defense 
(DOD) could not make the affirmative findings required to issue a security clearance. On 
October 19, 2015, DOD issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing 
security concerns for financial considerations under Guideline F and personal conduct 
under Guideline E. (Item 1) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
 
2 
 
 
DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective in the DOD on September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant received the SOR on October 30, 2015. He answered the SOR on 
October 31, 2015, admitting the nine financial allegations with explanation. He admitted 
the personal conduct allegation, but his explanation is actually a denial of the allegation. 
I find that he denied the personal conduct falsification allegation. He elected to have the 
matter decided on the written record. (Item 3) Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on December 15, 2015. Applicant received a complete file of 
relevant material (FORM) on January 11, 2016, and was provided the opportunity to file 
objections and to submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the disqualifying 
conditions. Applicant did not file a reply to the FORM. I was assigned the case on March 
29, 2016.   
   
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant was advised in the FORM that the summary of the Personal Subject 
Interview with an OPM agent (Item 6) was not authenticated and could not be 
considered over his objection. He was further advised that he could make any 
corrections, additions, or deletions to the summary to make it clear and accurate. He 
could object to the admission of the summary as not authenticated by a Government 
witness. He was additionally advised that if no objection was raised to the summary, the 
Administrative Judge could determine that he waived any objection to the admissibility 
of the Personal Subject Interview summary. Applicant did not respond to the FORM, so 
he waived any objection to the admissibility of the Personal Subject Interview summary. 
I will consider information in the Personal Subject Interview in my decision.  
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 I thoroughly reviewed the case file and the pleadings. I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old computer technician seeking employment with a 
defense contractor who is sponsoring him for a security clearance. This is his first 
request for a security clearance. He attended a technical school from 2008 to 2010 and 
received an associate’s degree. He is married with three children. It is not clear if he is 
now employed while waiting for the outcome of his request for a security clearance. 
(Item 4, e-QIP, dated November 29, 2012; Item 6, Personal Subject Interview, January 
30, 2013)  
 
The SOR lists, and credit reports (Item 5, dated December 14, 2014; and Item 7, 
dated March 6, 2015) confirm the following delinquent debts for Applicant: a student 
loan for $20,649 (SOR 1.a); a car repossession debt for $10,107 (SOR 1.b); a cell 
phone debt in collection for $1,289 (SOR 1.c); a student loan for $1,228 (SOR 1.d); two 
credit card debts in collection by the same creditor for $780 (SOR 1.e) and $661 (SOR 
 
3 
 
 
1.f); a store debt in collection for $332 (SOR 1.g); and a cable debt in collection for $224 
(SOR 1.h). The amount of delinquent debt is $35,280. Of that amount, $21,877 is for 
student loans. Also listed is a Chapter 7 bankruptcy filed in March 2010 with debts 
discharged in July 2010. (SOR 1.i)  
 
Applicant told the security investigator that the reason for his delinquent debts is 
that he did not make enough money to meet all of his obligations. He spends his money 
on family living expenses. He described his financial condition as somewhat stable. 
 
Applicant did not list any delinquent debts on the e-QIP he submitted on 
November 29, 2012, in response to financial questions concerning delinquencies on 
routine accounts, debts in collection, defaulted loans, charged off accounts, and 
accounts delinquent more than 120 days. He reported the July 2010 Chapter 7 
bankruptcy discharge. He noted that the bankruptcy debts were all old debts and were 
discharged in the bankruptcy.  (Item 4, Personal Subject Interview, dated November 29, 
2012, at 6-8) It is noted that some of the bankruptcy debts were delinquent student 
loans that cannot be discharged in bankruptcy. He reported to the security investigator 
that he had no delinquent debt. A December 2012 credit report (Item 5, dated 
December 14, 2012) showed that at the time he completed the e-QIP, Applicant had 
several accounts in collection including accounts opened after the bankruptcy 
discharge. The debts included an automobile loan opened in June 2012 that was 
delinquent by November 2012. A later credit report (Item 7, dated March 6, 2015) listed 
additional delinquent debts.  
 
In response to the SOR, Applicant acknowledged that he had delinquent debt 
that he needed to pay but that he did not have the funds to pay the debts. He is seeking 
a security clearance so he can work and pay the debts. All the SOR debts are still 
outstanding. Applicant has not presented a plan to resolve his delinquent debts.  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial 
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by 
rules and regulations, thereby raising questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
(AG ¶ 18) Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or careless in his or her obligations to protect classified 
information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an 
indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
 A person’s relationship with his or her creditors is a private matter until evidence 
is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant 
with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage finances in such a way as to meet financial 
obligations.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 Adverse information in credit reports can normally meet the substantial evidence 
standard to establish financial delinquency. Applicant’s history of delinquent debts is 
documented in his credit reports. The evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns 
under Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts), and AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial 
obligations). The information raises both an inability and an unwillingness to pay 
delinquent debt.   
 
 I considered the following Financial Consideration Mitigating Condition under AG 
¶ 20: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problems were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g. loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or 
separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay the overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provided 
documented proof to substantiate the basis for the dispute or provide 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.  
 
 None of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant’s unpaid debts are a 
continuous course of conduct and thus current. The delinquent debts were incurred in 
the normal course of everyday living and were not caused by conditions beyond 
Applicant’s control. In addition, Applicant has not established that he has acted 
reasonably and responsibly under his financial circumstances. Applicant also did not 
indicate that he received financial counseling.  
 
 There are security concerns about Applicant’s lack of action concerning his 
delinquent debts. The existence of delinquent debts and lack of meaningful action to 
resolve them indicate that he has not acted reasonably under the circumstances. This is 
clearly illustrated by Applicant securing an automobile loan after bankruptcy discharge 
that was in default within five months.  
 
 
6 
 
 
Applicant’s debts have not been paid, and Applicant has not presented a 
reasonable plan to resolve his financial problems. With evidence of delinquent debt and 
no documentation to support responsible management of his finances, it is obvious that 
Applicant’s financial problems are not under control. Applicant's lack of documented 
action is significant and disqualifying. Based on the identified debts and the failure to 
make arrangements to pay his debts, it is clear that Applicant has not been reasonable 
and responsible in regard to his finances. His failure to act reasonably and responsibly 
towards his finances is an indication that he may not protect and safeguard classified 
information. Applicant has not presented sufficient information to mitigate security 
concerns for financial considerations.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 Personal conduct is a security concern because conduct involving questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified and sensitive information. Of special interest is any failure to 
provide truthful and candid answers during the process to determine eligibility for 
access to classified information or any other failure to cooperate with this process. (AG 
¶ 15) Personal conduct is always a security concern because it asks whether the 
person’s past conduct justifies confidence the person can be trusted to properly 
safeguard classified or sensitive information. Authorization for a security clearance 
depends on the individual providing correct and accurate information. If a person 
conceals or provides false information, the security clearance process cannot function 
properly to ensure that granting access to classified or sensitive information is in the 
best interest of the United States Government.  
 
Applicant did not provide any derogatory financial information on the e-QIP, 
except to note that he had filed a Chapter 7 bankruptcy. As noted in the SOR and the 
credit reports, Applicant had significant delinquent debts. His failure to list his delinquent 
debts raises a security concern under Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 
16(a) (the deliberate omission concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to 
conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status, 
determine security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities).  
 
 Applicant, at the time he completed the e-QIP, had to know he had delinquent 
debt. He filed a bankruptcy two years previously and he knew, at a minimum, that his 
student loans had not been discharged. He also had to know he had financial problems. 
He recently had taken out an automobile loan that he had not paid on a regular basis. 
Within a few weeks of completing the e-QIP, that loan went into default.  
 
While there is a security concern for a deliberate omission, concealment, or 
falsification of a material fact in any written document or oral statement to the 
Government when applying for a security clearance, not every omission, concealment, 
or inaccurate statement is a falsification. A falsification must be deliberate and material. 
 
7 
 
 
It is deliberate if it is done knowingly and willfully with intent to deceive. Based on the 
knowledge Applicant had concerning his finances and his delinquent accounts, I find 
that Applicant knew he had delinquent debt when he completed his e-QIP. Since he had 
this knowledge, the only reason not to disclose the financial information was to deceive 
security adjudicators of the true state of his finances. Applicant deliberately failed to 
provide correct and accurate financial information on the security clearance application.  
 
 I considered the following mitigating condition under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(a) The individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts: 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
cause by or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice 
of authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon 
being made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the 
information the individual cooperated fully and truthfully; and 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
 These mitigating conditions do not apply. Failure to provide full and complete 
information in response to questions on a security clearance application is not a minor 
offense. This failure to provide accurate information was recent and frequent. Applicant 
failed to provide accurate information in reference to his finances on his security 
clearance application in November 2012 and again in response to questions from the 
security investigator when he told him that his finances were good and his debts 
current. He has not yet provided correct financial information. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
8 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for access to 
classified information must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
   
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant knew he had delinquent 
debt when he completed his e-QIP and deliberately failed to provide full and accurate 
information concerning his finances. Applicant has not provided sufficient credible 
documentary information to show reasonable and responsible action to address 
delinquent debts and resolve financial problems. Applicant has not demonstrated 
responsible management of his finances or a consistent record of actions to resolve 
financial issues. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts 
about Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. He has not established his 
suitability for access to classified information. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial situation and 
his personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a -1.i:  Against Applicant  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for access to 
classified information. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
