 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-01198 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On September 9, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DoD after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 On October 17, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision on 
the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on 
December 14, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on January 8, 2016. He had 30 days 
from his receipt of the FORM to submit additional information in response to the FORM. 
Applicant timely submitted a response to the FORM. (Item 13) Department Counsel had 
no objections to Applicant’s response to the FORM. (Item 14) On February 26, 2016, 
the FORM was forwarded to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on March 24, 2016. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
2 
 
 
Rulings on Evidence  
 
 Item 12 of the FORM is a portion of the Report of Investigation (ROI) from 
Applicant’s background investigation. It is a summary of Applicant’s Personal Subject 
Interview completed by the investigator conducting his background investigation on 
August 6, 2014. It is unsworn and unauthenticated. DOD Directive 5220.6, enclosure 2, 
¶ E3.1.20 states, “An ROI may be received with an authenticating witness provided it is 
otherwise admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence.” (see ISCR Case No. 11-
13999 (App. Bd., February 3, 2014)).  
 
Although Applicant, who is representing himself, has not raised the issue via an 
objection, I am raising it sua sponte because Item 12 is not properly authenticated. 
Applicant’s failure to mention this issue in a response to the FORM is not a knowing 
waiver of the rule because he more than likely was unaware of the rule.  Waiver means 
“the voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or 
advantage, the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of 
the existing right and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. 
Garner, editor-in-chief, 9th ed., West 2009).  
 
Department Counsel explained that Applicant had a right to object to Item 12 in 
footnote 1 of the FORM.  I find that putting this information in a footnote is not adequate 
notice for Applicant to be aware of this right to object to the admissibility of Item 12 in 
accordance with ¶ E3.1.20 of the Directive.  Applicant is a pro se client and does not 
have the level of sophistication of a trained and licensed attorney. It is likely that he may 
not have read footnote 1. He did not mention Item 12 in his response to the FORM. In 
accordance with the Directive, Enclosure 2, ¶ E3.1.20, Item 12 is not admissible and will 
not be considered in this Decision because the document is not authenticated.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.c, 
and 2.b. He denies the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 2.a, and 3.a. (Item 2 at 3)    
 
 Applicant is a 35-year-old employee of a defense contractor who is seeking to 
obtain a security clearance. He has been with his employer since June 2014.  From 
September 2008 to February 2014, he was self-employed in construction. From April 
2004 to September 2008, he was the vice president of a pool and spa contracting 
business. It was a limited liability corporation (LLC). (A limited liability company is an 
independent legal entity with an existence separate and apart from its owners, the 
members.) The highest level of education he has achieved is high school. He is single 
and has no children. He lives with his girlfriend. (Item 4)   
 
On June 5, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). In response to Section 22 – Police Record, Applicant 
listed that he was found guilty of DUI Extreme BAC .20 or more in December 2009. In 
 
3 
 
 
response to Section 26 Financial Record, Applicant listed a delinquent cell phone 
account which was ultimately paid by his employer. (Item 4)  
 
A subsequent background investigation verified this information. In addition, it 
was discovered that Applicant had a $36,322 judgment entered against him in 2009. 
(SOR ¶ 1.a: Item 7; Item 9 at 3; Item 10 at 2; Item 11 at 1); a $1,319 collection account 
(SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 9 at 4); and a $97 medical account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.c: 
Item 9 at 4) Applicant paid the collection account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b on September 
11, 2015. (Item 13 at 5). He appears to have resolved the $97 medical debt alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.c. The account is no longer listed on his recent credit reports. (Items 10, 11 
and 13) 
 
Applicant disputes the $36,322 judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. He claims the 
case was dismissed due to lack of prosecution. The following is background information 
to explain how the judgment happened.  In 2005, Applicant entered into a pool business 
with an investor. The investor was the president of the LLC and handled the money for 
the LLC. Applicant was appointed a vice president. He had the construction knowledge. 
The business was initially quite successful, but his partner’s financial mismanagement 
and the economic collapse in 2008, led to the demise of the business in 2009. (Item 13 
at 45)   
 
Mr. and Mrs. S. filed a civil suit against the pool company LLC, the president of 
the company, and Applicant for breach of contract. A default judgment was entered 
against the parties on July 21, 2009. Several attempts were made to garnish wages 
followed by subsequent orders discharging the garnishee. The president of the 
company and his wife filed for bankruptcy.  On July 12, 2010, a Judgment of Dismissal 
was entered involving all of the parties. (Item 7 at 2)  In his response to the SOR, 
Applicant provided a copy of the judge’s Judgment of Dismissal Without Prejudice, 
which occurred on July 9, 2010. The case number was CV 2008-055103. (Item 2 at 4) 
 
Applicant’s credit reports continued to list the $36,322 judgment. The same case 
number, CV 2008-055103, is listed and it states a judgment was filed in August 2009.  
(Item 9 at 3; Item 10 at 2; Item 11 at 1) The credit reports do not indicate that the 
judgment was dismissed on July 9, 2010.  
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant states that he understood that the civil 
judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was a dismissed case. He claims he was never served 
papers regarding the judgment and no one contacted him to attempt to collect the debt. 
He claims he has been in contact with the courts and was given information on how to 
petition for removal of the judgment on his credit report. He is seeking legal help in 
Arizona in order to resolve this issue. He states, “There was never any wrong-doing on 
my part, as to be backed up by the police report, this lawsuit was filed under false 
accusations.”  (Item 13 at 1) 
 
I find for Applicant with respect to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. This debt was a 
business debt. The pool business was an LLC, which likely limited Applicant’s personal 
 
4 
 
 
liability in the matter. Applicant proved that the $36,222 judgment was dismissed 
against him on July 9, 2010. 
 
Applicant admits to financial problems. He was unable to pay some bills when 
relocating to a new state to start his new employment. He intended to pay the court fine 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b and the medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c once he began earning 
money in his new job. A month after he started work, he was required to take a leave of 
absence to await being medically cleared to fly based on his past alcohol issues which 
will be discussed in the Alcohol Consumption – Criminal Conduct section. His girlfriend 
also developed a medical issue which required several surgeries. He was not working 
from mid-September 2014 until he was called back to work on November 1, 2014. 
Further issues with his flight medical exam caused extra expenses.  After returning to 
work in May 2015, he was able to pay off both debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. 
Applicant is now working on rebuilding his credit. He enrolled himself in credit 
monitoring to help him from getting into financial trouble again. (Item 13 at 1-2)  
 
 Applicant provided a January 2016 credit report which indicates the fine alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.b was paid in full. The medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is no longer on his 
credit report. Applicant has only three open accounts listed on his credit report. All 
accounts are current. (Item 13 at 4 - 23) 
  
Alcohol Consumption - Criminal Conduct  
 
 The allegation under Alcohol Consumption and Criminal Conduct concerns 
Applicant’s apprehension on September 29, 2009, for driving under the influence of 
alcohol. His BAC was .24. (Item 13 at 28) On December 12, 2009, Applicant was found 
guilty of EXTREME DUI – BAC GREATER .20 – MISDEMEANOR. He was sentenced 
to a 180 day jail sentence (suspended), probation for two years, and fined.  SOR 
allegations 2.a and 2.b involve the same offense. The allegation is cross alleged under 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. (SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, 2.c: Item 5 at 2; Item 6) 
 
 In his response to the SOR, Applicant admits to using poor judgment by driving 
his car after a night of drinking. He said he parked the car after driving less than a mile 
because he hit a curb. While walking to a nearby friend’s house, he was approached by 
police and admitted to being the driver of the truck. He failed a sobriety test. Applicant 
claims he was never arrested, but was given a ticket with a court date on it. He 
arranged to have a friend’s mother drive him home. He recalls that his sentence was 15 
days in the county jail with work release, 30 days of home detention with work release, 
with the remaining 135 days suspended, and two years probation. He was released 
from probation after one year. He was fined $4,846. He also underwent court-mandated 
counseling. (Item 13 at 2, 24-27) At some point, Applicant stopped paying the court fine. 
He learned of the unpaid fine during his security clearance background investigation. He 
could not pay the fine immediately because of the expenses related to moving to 
another state and starting a new job. Once he had sufficient income to pay the fine, he 
paid the fine in full.  
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s arrest and conviction for DUI was his sole alcohol-related incident.  In 
order to obtain flight status as part of his current job, he was required to undergo 
several flight medical evaluations related to the alcohol incident. He was required to 
undergo two evaluations. Both evaluations concluded that Applicant’s alcohol issue is 
no longer an issue and future problems are not foreseen. Applicant is enrolled in a zero 
tolerance random alcohol testing program and intends to continue to abstain from 
drinking alcohol. He drank alcohol socially after the DUI, but stopped drinking alcohol in 
2014 when he decided to focus on his new career. (Item 13 at 2)  
 
 Applicant’s first psychological evaluation occurred on September 16, 2014. At the 
time, Applicant drank alcohol socially about 2 to 3 times a month. He did not crave 
alcohol or experience symptoms of alcohol withdrawal after drinking.  Doctor C., the 
doctor completing his evaluation, indicated Applicant had a past history of alcohol 
misuse, but he does not meet the alcohol dependence criteria under the DSM IV TR. 
(Item 13 at 32-34) 
 
 On February 24, 2015, Doctor S., wrote a letter indicating that he was working 
with Applicant to help him acquire a flight medical certificate under special issuance. 
Applicant met with Doctor S. in person and spoke to him on the telephone on several 
occasions. Doctor S. notes that Applicant set up random drug screening and that his 
first test came back negative. He noted Applicant stopped using alcohol on his own 
accord and that the evaluation resulted in a low probability for alcohol or substance 
abuse.  Applicant passed physical standards for a 2nd class medical classification. 
Doctor S. will sponsor Applicant for the purposes of Applicant obtaining his flight 
medical certificate. (Item 13 at 28)   
 
 The FAA required Applicant to attend a more extensive follow up evaluation with 
Dr.K. who had a H.I.M.S. FAA rating which allows him to evaluate pilots who have had 
DUIs. Applicant did so at his own expense on April 20, 2015. The report indicated 
Applicant first began drinking in high school, but had no regular pattern of use because 
he was unable to pay for alcohol.  After gaining regular employment, Applicant would 
drink about once a week at a sport’s bar with friends. About four people would drink four 
pitchers of beer over a period of four hours. In the summer, Applicant and his friends 
would spend weekends on a lake. Applicant would drink about 10 beers per day over a 
period of many hours. He began earning more money in 2002, and was drinking about 
five nights a week by 2004. (Item 13 at 35-41) 
 
 The second evaluation found Applicant’s current use of alcohol was infrequent. 
He drinks about six drinks per month, and no more than two drinks in a single evening. 
Dr. K. acknowledged Applicant abused alcohol in the past. He did not suspect that 
Applicant was currently drinking heavily nor was he concerned that Applicant would 
return to “high risk” drinking. He recommended Applicant be tested for alcohol 15 times 
over a period of 12 months.  Dr. K. concluded if Applicant followed these terms, “it is my 
opinion that [Applicant] would be able to safely operate an aircraft without complications 
from any emotional, behavioral, or cognitive problem caused by alcohol or any drug. 
There are no mental health disturbances observed in this evaluation.” (Item 13 at 41-54)     
 
6 
 
 
          Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant has 
encountered financial problems for several years. He was unable to pay his bills 
because he was unemployed or did not earn enough income.  
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage his finances in such a way as to meet his financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
8 
 
 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment);  
 
AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances);  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control); 
  
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts); and  
 
AG &20(e) (the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue) 
 
Of the mitigating conditions under Guideline F, I find AG & 20(a) applies  
because Applicant incurred the alleged debts several years ago.  Since that time, 
Applicant has matured.  He resolved the outstanding DUI fine alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b and 
the minor medical debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c.  I find there are extenuating circumstances 
with regard to $36,322 judgment filed against Applicant. The judgment was the result of 
an unresolved business dispute against the pool company, which was a limited liability 
corporation. Although Applicant was designated a vice president, he handled only the 
construction part of the business. The president of the company handled the business 
end of the company.   
 
The $36,322 judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is the result of a business dispute 
and happened at a time when the pool company was failing as a result of the economic 
downturn in 2008.  Ultimately, the judgment was dismissed against Applicant in July 
2010.  The dismissal of the judgment was not updated on Applicant’s credit reports. 
Although Applicant has struggled financially over the past few years, he has not 
incurred additional delinquent accounts. He resolved his personal delinquent accounts 
as soon as he was able to do so. I find the behavior happened so long ago, and 
occurred under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.  
 
 AG & 20(b) applies because circumstances beyond his control contributed to 
Applicant’s financial problems. Applicant’s pool company went out of business in 2009 
as a result of the economic downturn in 2008. He experienced several periods of 
unemployment or underemployment. His girlfriend’s health issues caused further 
financial adversity.  Applicant paid the two debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c when he 
 
9 
 
 
was financially able to make payments. The judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was 
dismissed in July 2010. The entry in his credit reports regarding the judgment needs to 
be corrected.  I conclude he acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 AG & 20(d) applies with respect to the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c. 
When Applicant finally earned some income to apply towards these debts he paid the 
debts in full.  
 
 AG & 20(e) applies regarding the judgment alleged in SOR & 1.a. Applicant 
disputed the judgment and provided proof that the judgment was dismissed. There is an 
incorrect entry in his credit report, which he can formally dispute with the credit reporting 
agencies. 
  
 Applicant mitigated the security concerns raised under financial considerations.  
 
Guideline G – Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, is set forth in AG & 21: 
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
 AG & 22 lists disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern. The 
following apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG & 22(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving 
while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the 
peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual 
is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and  
 
AG & 22(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.   
 
 Applicant’s conviction for Extreme DUI – BAC Greater than .20, Misdemeanor, is 
sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c).  Applicant’s blood alcohol content on the night 
of his arrest was 0.24.  On the night of his apprehension, it is reasonable to conclude 
that Applicant binge consumed alcohol to the point of impaired judgment based on his 
blood alcohol content.   
 
AG & 23 lists the conditions that could mitigate security concerns under alcohol 
consumption. The following mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s case:  
  
AG & 23(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
 
10 
 
 
recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
AG & 23(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
AG & 23(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or 
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program.  
 
 While Applicant experienced a period of heavy drinking in his 20s, he reduced his 
alcohol intake after his DUI to two drinks in one sitting a couple times a month. When he 
began the flight evaluation process for his current job, he stopped drinking alcohol 
completely in 2014. AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) apply. 
 
 AG ¶ 23(d) applies because Applicant successfully completed his court-ordered 
counseling. He also underwent a series of alcohol evaluations in order to qualify for 
flight status.  Each evaluation acknowledged that while there were concerns in the past, 
Applicant’s alcohol use is not currently an issue. He has abstained from drinking alcohol 
for more than one year.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
  
The security concern for Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, is set out in AG & 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 AG & 31 lists disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern. The 
following apply to Applicant’s case: 
 
AG & 31(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
AG & 31(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of 
whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or 
convicted. 
 
 
11 
 
 
The above disqualifying conditions apply because Applicant was apprehended 
and charged with DUI in September 2009. Applicant’s blood alcohol content was 0.24 
which resulted in the DUI being classified as Extreme. He was convicted of Extreme 
DUI – BAC Greater than .20 – a Misdemeanor.  
 
 AG & 32 lists the conditions that could mitigate security concerns under criminal 
conduct. The following mitigating conditions apply to Applicant’s case:  
 
AG & 32(a): so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior 
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and 
 
AG & 32(d): There is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but 
not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
Applicant’s arrest occurred close to seven years ago and there is no evidence of 
recent criminal behavior. Applicant appears to have matured since the days of drinking 
heavily in his youth and is focused on advancing in his career. There is evidence of 
successful rehabilitation.  Security concerns under Criminal Conduct are mitigated.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. The economic downturn of 2008 
adversely affected the pool business LLC that Applicant worked for and served as a 
 
12 
 
 
vice president.  Several periods of unemployment or underemployment adversely 
affected Applicant’s finances. He was unable to pay all of his debts while he was 
transitioning to his new job.  As soon as he achieved some extra income, he resolved 
the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.c.  The $36,322 judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a 
was dismissed against Applicant in July 2010. I considered that it was a business debt 
from a failed business and does not indicate frivolous spending by Applicant.   
 
While, Applicant’s 2009 DUI raised concerns under alcohol consumption and 
criminal conduct, those concerns were mitigated by Applicant’s subsequent maturity, 
and reduced drinking patterns.  He underwent two medical evaluations because of his 
DUI and was cleared for flight status after each evaluation because his current alcohol 
use did not present a concern. All security concerns raised in the SOR have been 
mitigated.  
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.c:    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:    For Applicant 
  
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a:     For Applicant 
    
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
