1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-00799
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: David F. Hayes, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
June 27, 2016
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On August 22, 2015, the Department of Defense (DoD) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline F  for Applicant. (Item
1.) The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006. 
 
On September 4, 2015, Applicant replied to the SOR (RSOR) in writing, and he
requested that his case be decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. (Item 1.)
On October 31, 2015, Department Counsel issued the Department's written case. On
November 23, 2015, a complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was
provided to Applicant. In the FORM, Department Counsel offered three documentary
exhibits. (Items 1-3.) Applicant was given the opportunity to file objections and submit
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. A response was due on December 23,
2015. Applicant submitted no additional evidence. The case was assigned to this
2
Administrative Judge on February 19, 2016. Based upon a review of the pleadings and
exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, and the FORM, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make
the following findings of fact: 
Applicant is 52 years old. He is married, and he has one daughter and one
stepdaughter. He received a Bachelor’s degree in 2011. Applicant served in the United
States Air Force from 1983 to 1987, when he received an Honorable Discharge. He is
employed as a Radar Maintenance Technician by a defense contractor, and he seeks a
DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector. (Item
2.)
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists two allegations (1.a. and 1.b.) regarding financial difficulties,
specifically failing to file Federal and state tax returns, under Adjudicative Guideline F.
The allegations will be discussed below in the same order as they were listed on the
SOR:
1.a. The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file Federal income tax returns for
tax yeas 2011, 2012, and 2013. In his RSOR, Applicant admitted this SOR allegation.
(Item 1.) This information was revealed by Applicant on his Electronic Questionnaires
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), signed by him on June 30, 2014. (Item 2.)  
1.b. The SOR alleges that Applicant failed to file State A income tax returns for
tax yeas 2011, 2012, and 2013. In his RSOR, Applicant admitted this SOR allegation.
(Item 1.) This information was also revealed by Applicant on his e-QIP. (Item 2.)  
Regarding his Federal and State A tax returns for tax years 2011 through 2013,
Applicant wrote in his RSOR that his Federal and State A tax returns for tax years 2011
through 2013 “have [now] been filed and all taxes, interest and penalties paid, or
refunds received, for the years in question.” (Item 1.) No independent evidence was
submitted that would establish that Applicant had resolved any of his Federal or state
tax returns for tax years 2011, 2012, or 2013.
Applicant explained his late filing of the tax returns by writing the following,
“When it came time to organize my documents for the 2011 State and Federal returns a
folder with a majority of important documents could not be located. Additionally, other
interest statements had to be re-obtained that were missing. The account in question
had changed institutions, which slowed the process and required additional effort.” (Item
1.) 
3
Applicant also explained that his family “was a bit harried at the time,” as
Applicant was working the night shift while attempting to earn a college degree, and his
wife, who works full-time, struggled with a serious medical condition of one of his
daughters. While he had two daughters attending school, because of the illness of his
one daughter, she could not continue to attend school. (Item 1.)
Finally, Applicant wrote in his RSOR, 
I let too much time get by and put off my responsibility to organize and get
my returns filed. Situation snowballed. This caused me unnecessary
stress until resolved; and relief once my 2011, 2012, and 2013, returns
had been filed. I fully understand the importance of filing my annual State
and Federal Income tax returns in a timely manner. All can be assured
that this situation will NOT re-occur. (Emphasis in original.)
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance
decision. 
4
A person who applies for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set
out in AG ¶ 18:  
      Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially overextended
is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns and
could potentially apply in this case.  Under AG ¶ 19(g), “failure to file annual Federal,
state or local income tax returns as required . . .” and  ¶ 19(a) “an inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” are potentially disqualifying and applicable to Applicant
in this case. The evidence has established that Applicant filed to timely file his Federal
and state tax returns for tax years 2011 through 2013 as required by law. 
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns from financial
difficulties. Applicant self-reported his failure to file his tax returns, and they occurred
during a particularly difficult period in Applicant’s life. However, no independent
evidence was introduced to establish that his Federal and state tax returns have all
been filed. Therefore, I cannot find that AG ¶ 20(a) “the behavior . . . occurred under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” applies to this case. Also, under
AG ¶ 20(b), it may be mitigating where, “the conditions that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” As reviewed above, Applicant’s
5
failure to timely file his tax returns occurred, at least in part, because of the illness of his
daughter. However, again no independent evidence was introduced to establish that his
Federal and state tax returns have all been filed. Therefore, I find that this mitigating
condition is not a factor for consideration in this case.
As Applicant has not established through independent evidence that he has filed
his Federal and state tax returns for tax years 2011 through 2013, I find Guideline F
against Applicant. If Applicant wishes to obtain a security clearance in the future, he
must fully establish that he has filed and continues to file all of his required Federal and
state tax returns in a timely manner. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Under AG ¶ 2 (c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Based on all of the reasons cited
above as to why the disqualifying conditions are applicable and controlling, I find that
the record evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance under the whole-person concept. For all
these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns under the
whole-person concept. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.c.: Against  Applicant
6
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
