 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 15-00369 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kasey Edwards, Esquire 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On August 8, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 28, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on January 
15, 2016. The case was assigned to me on March 23, 2016.  On March 31, 2016, a 
Notice of Hearing was issued, scheduling the hearing for April 29, 2016. The hearing 
was held as scheduled. During the hearing, the Government offered five exhibits which 
were admitted as Government Exhibits (Gov) 1 – 5.  Applicant testified and offered 
seven exhibits which were admitted as Applicant Exhibits (AE) A – G. The transcript 
(Tr.) was received on May 11, 2016. The record was held open until May 13, 2015, to 
allow Applicant to submit additional documents. Applicant timely submitted additional 
documents which were admitted as AE H. Department Counsel did not object to 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant’s post-hearing submission. (HE I) Based upon a review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant admits to all SOR allegations.  
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old employee of a Department of Defense contractor 
seeking to obtain a security clearance. She has worked for her current employer since 
April 2008.  She has held security clearances in the past. She is a high school graduate 
and has some college credit. She is single and has an adult son and two grandchildren.  
(Tr. at 28-29, 38; Gov 1)   
 
Applicant’s security clearance background investigation revealed that she has a 
history of financial problems. She failed to file her federal income tax returns for tax 
years 2005 – 2010. (SOR ¶ 1.a: Gov 1; Gov 5, Schedule E) She also admits to failing to 
file her local tax returns for tax years 2005 to 2010. (SOR ¶ 1.b: Gov 5, Schedule E) In 
addition, recent credit reports revealed she has seven delinquent debts. The debts 
include a $4,423 judgment related to unpaid rent filed in 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Gov 2 at 1; 
Gov 4; Gov 5, Schedule F); a local tax lien in the amount of $1,970 filed against 
Applicant in 2008 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Gov 2 at 1; Gov 3 at 3; Gov 5, Schedule E); a $55 
delinquent medical account  (SOR ¶ 1.e: Gov 2 at 2);  a $190 television services 
account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.f: Gov 2 at 2; Gov 3 at 2); a student loan account 
placed for collection, amount unknown (SOR ¶ 1.g: Gov 2 at 2; Gov 3 at 2); a student 
loan account that was 120 days or more past due, amount unknown (SOR ¶ 1.h: Gov 2 
at 3); and a delinquent credit union account that was charged off, amount unknown 
(SOR  ¶ 1.i: Gov 2 at 3; Gov 3 at 2; Gov 5, Schedule F).   
 
In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admits that she failed to file her federal and 
local income tax returns for tax years 2005 to 2010, but states that all returns have been 
filed except for 2005 which was overlooked by her tax preparer. He provided a letter 
indicating that it was due to his oversight and he will prepare and file the 2005 federal 
tax return in the near future, which he did on January 4, 2016.  She provided paid-in-full 
letters for the student loan debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h.  She indicated that she 
filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy and all remaining debts are included in her Chapter 13 
payment plan which was approved on November 19, 2015. Applicant states that she 
has made every effort to clear all negative issues that may hinder a positive background 
clearance. She is a devoted, trustworthy, and reliable employee. (Answer to SOR)  
  
During the hearing, Applicant testified that she filed all of her 2006-2010 federal 
tax returns in March 2014. Her tax preparer overlooked the 2005 tax return and filed it in 
early 2016. She owes $10,667 to the IRS. She did not file and pay her taxes because of 
financial hardship. She was providing financial support to her mother, her son, two 
grandchildren and other family members. (Tr. 23-28) 
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant struggled to pay her debts. She was unemployed for one year in 2012.  
In 2014, she was diagnosed with a serious illness which aggravated her ability to pay 
her bills. She will undergo treatment for this illness over the next three years. (Tr. 29-31, 
34, 45) 
 
On July 10, 2015, Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy as a means to 
resolve her financial situation. The plan was confirmed by the bankruptcy court on 
November 19, 2015.  All of Applicant’s debts are included in the bankruptcy. She pays 
$780 a month towards the plan. The payments are automatically deducted from her 
paycheck every two weeks ($360). Applicant has consistently made payments towards 
the plan. (Tr. 21-24; Gov 5; AE D; AE E; AE F; AE G)   
 
Whole-Person Factors 
 
Applicant’s supervisor wrote a letter on her behalf. She describes Applicant as a 
dedicated employee who is an incredible asset to the office. She does an excellent job 
working in a very busy office that has a lot of high-level attention and officials. “She is 
the ultimate team player, jumping without hesitation whenever someone needs 
assistance, regardless of whether she is technically responsible for that portfolio.” 
Applicant’s supervisor states that she relies on her and trusts her implicitly. (AE H at 5) 
 
Another high-ranking official in the office states that Applicant gets things done at 
a moment’s notice and brings a positive attitude and dedication that is rare. He has 
worked with many office managers, but has never come across anyone who embodies 
Applicant’s skills and character. (AE H at 6) 
 
Another high-ranking official from another division describes his office as a “fast-
paced high pressure office” that reports directly to the [top office]. His office faced a 
staffing crisis this past year and Applicant volunteered to help out the office, effectively 
doubling her workload. Because of Applicant, the office avoided “dropped balls at a 
critical time.” He would work with her without hesitation because, if she says she is 
going to do something, she does it. (AE H at 7) Other former supervisors, co-workers, 
friends and her nephew submitted letters attesting to her work ethic, reliability, positive 
personality, and trustworthiness. (AE H at 8-13) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
 
4 
 
 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
5 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts); AG &19(c) (a 
history of not meeting financial obligations); and AG &19(g) (failure to file annual 
Federal, state, or local income tax returns or the fraudulent filing of the same) apply to 
Applicant’s case. Applicant failed to file her federal and local income tax returns in a 
timely manner for tax years 2005 to 2010. In addition, she acquired seven delinquent 
debts. She has been unable to satisfy these debts over the past several years.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in his/her obligations to protect classified information. 
Behaving irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may 
behave in other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private 
matter until evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay 
debts under agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating 
circumstances, an applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is 
in a situation of risk inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is 
not required to be debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to 
meet their financial obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions apply:  
 
 AG & 20(b) (the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual 
acted responsibly under the circumstances) applies.  Applicant was unemployed for a 
year in 2012. In 2014, she was diagnosed with a serious medical condition. Her 
treatment is ongoing.  She provided assistance to her mother, son, grandchildren and 
other family members, which further complicated her financial situation. Applicant has 
taken steps to resolve her delinquent debts. She filed all of her tax returns. She 
resolved the student loan debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h.  She opted to file for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy in order to resolve her debts. She does not live above her 
means. Based on the challenges Applicant has encountered over the past few years, I 
find Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) 
applies because Applicant attended financial counseling as a requirement when she 
filed for bankruptcy under Chapter 13. She is in the beginning of her Chapter 13 
payment plan. Based on the timely payments towards the plan so far, it appears 
Applicant’s financial situation is becoming more stable.    
 
AG & 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts) applies. Applicant resolved her delinquent student-loan 
accounts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g and 1.h. Facing a serious illness and having to deal 
with financial issues, Applicant opted to file for bankruptcy under Chapter 13. She is 
making a good-faith effort to resolve her accounts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the favorable 
recommendations of Applicant’s current and former supervisors, co-workers, and 
friends. Applicant was unemployed for one year in 2012. She was diagnosed with a 
serious illness in 2014. She estimates that she will receive treatment for this illness over 
the next three years. She filed all of her tax returns. Considering all of the challenges 
Applicant has and will continue to face within the next few years, her decision to file for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy was reasonable. She is attempting to resolve her debts through 
bankruptcy and is making timely payments towards the plan.  Security concerns under 
financial considerations are mitigated.    
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a -1.i:    For Applicant 
 
     
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with the national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
