 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02239 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). DOD acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 23, 2015, and elected to have her case 
decided on the written record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
 
2 
 
 
Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM)1  on December 23, 2015 (the 
Government evidence is referred to in the FORM as “Evidence”, but in this decision the 
evidence will be referred to as Items). The FORM was mailed to Applicant who received 
it on January 7, 2016. Applicant was given an opportunity to file objections and submit 
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. She submitted a response to the FORM 
containing Applicant’s exhibits (AE) A-G, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The case was assigned to me on May 5, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR she admitted ¶¶ 1.e, 1.f, 1.h, 1.j, and 1.k-1.o. 
She denied the remaining allegations. The admissions are adopted as findings of fact. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and evidence submitted, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 55 years old. She is married and has three adult children. She has 
worked for her current employer, a federal contractor, since November 2008. She also 
worked for her current contractor from 1985 to 1992, but stopped to care for her 
children. She has a bachelor’s degree. She did not serve in the military and has never 
held a security clearance.2  
 
 The amended SOR lists 15 delinquent debts in the total amount of approximately 
$40,000. The debts are supported by credit report entries from August 2014, February 
2015, and December 2015, and other evidence contained in the FORM.3  
 
 The status of Applicant’s SOR debts is as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: 
 
 This is a collection account for a credit card debt in the amount of $1,287. 
Applicant provided documentation showing she set up a payment plan to settle this 
account in October 2015. She has made eight continuous payments in accordance with 
the payment plan from October 2015 through January 2016. This debt is being 
resolved.4 
 
                                                          
1 In the FORM, the Government amended the SOR to modify ¶ 1.d by changing the charged-off amount 
to $18,027; and to add five new allegations (¶¶ 1.k-1.o) with the following respective charged-off or 
delinquent amounts: $2,756; $1,500; $3,667; $389; and $123. In her undated response to the FORM, 
received by DOHA on February 8, 2016, Applicant did not object to the amendment, nor did she ask for 
additional time to address the new allegations. She admitted all the amended allegations. See AE A. 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Items 5-7. 
 
4 Item 2; AE A, C. 
 
 
3 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: 
 
 This is a car loan debt in the amount of $358. Applicant stated this debt was paid 
and that she possesses the title for this vehicle indicating there is no debt associated 
with it. She will contact the credit bureaus to straighten out this matter. This debt is 
being resolved.5 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: 
 
 This is a consumer debt in the amount of $312. Applicant provided 
documentation showing she set up a payment plan and paid this debt in November 
2015. This debt is resolved.6 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: 
 
 This is a credit card debt in the amount of $18,027 (amended amount). Applicant 
indicated she would address this debt once the other debts were resolved.7 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: 
 
 This is a medical collection account in the amount of $6,798. Applicant indicated 
she set up a payment plan to pay this account by initially paying $100, followed by 
monthly payments of $50 until the debt is paid. Although she did not provide 
documentation of these payments, the debt does not appear on the two most recent 
credit reports. This debt is being resolved.8 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g (duplicate debt): 
 
 This is a collection account for a credit card debt in the amount of $1,785. 
Applicant provided documentation showing she set up a payment plan to settle this 
account in October 2015. She has made seven continuous payments in accordance 
with the payment plan from October 2015 through January 2016. This debt is being 
resolved.9 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
5 Item 2. 
 
6 Item 2; AE A, H. 
 
7 Item 4; AE A. 
 
8 Items 2, 5, 7. 
 
9 Item 2; AE A, D. 
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.h: 
 
 This is a consumer debt in the amount of $671. Applicant provided 
documentation showing she set up a payment plan and settled this debt in December 
2015. This debt is resolved.10 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j (duplicate debt): 
 
 This is a consumer debt in the amount of $452. Applicant provided 
documentation showing she settled this debt in October 2015. This debt is resolved.11 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.k-1.o: 
 
 These are consumer and medical debts that were added to the SOR by 
Department Counsel’s amendment in December 2015. Applicant indicated in her FORM 
response that she would begin addressing these accounts when she resolves the debts 
listed in the original SOR.12 
 
Non-SOR payments: 
 
 Applicant is in good standing with her student loan account. Her total 
indebtedness is approximately $43,268 and she has made consistent monthly 
payments of $193 since November 2014.13 
 
Character Information: 
 
 Applicant provided reference letters from a supervisor and a coworker who 
support her request for a security clearance. They described Applicant as dedicated, 
reliable, honest, and someone with great integrity.14 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
                                                          
10 Item 2; AE A, E. 
 
11 Item 2; AE A, G. 
 
12 Item 2; AE A. 
 
13 Item 7. 
 
14 AE B. 
 
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
6 
 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 Applicant has resolved or is resolving ten of her debts and is current on her 
student loan debt. Several of the debts that remain unresolved are those added through 
the amendment to the SOR and she has not had an adequate opportunity to address 
them. However, she made good on her commitment to address her debts as she 
indicated when she answered the SOR. Therefore, she has established a track record 
of addressing her debts. There is sufficient evidence to indicate that Applicant’s debts 
are being resolved and that she has made good-faith efforts to resolve those that 
remain. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
7 
 
 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guideline and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the recommendations 
from her supervisor and a coworker. Applicant has stabilized her finances and has 
shown significant progress towards getting her finances back on track.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
  
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.o:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
