 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02298 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 19, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 4, 2015, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. On December 8, 2015, Department Counsel submitted 
the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to Applicant, 
and it was received on December 16, 2015. Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file 
 
2 
 
 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not 
object to the Government evidence and did not offer any additional information within 
the time period of 30 days after receipt of a copy of the FORM. The Government’s 
documents identified as Items 1 through 5 are admitted into evidence. The case was 
assigned to me on May 2, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.n, 1.o, 1.p, 1.q, and 1.w. He 
denied the remaining allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 42 years old. He is a high school graduate. He attended a trade 
school and received a certificate. He served in the Marine Corps Reserve from 1999 to 
2007 and was honorably discharged. He was married from 1995 to 2001. He has two 
children, ages 21 and 17, from this marriage. He was married from 2010 to 2011. He 
has a 12-year-old child from a former relationship. He has cohabitated with a woman 
since December 2012.1 
 
 In 2000 Applicant had approximately $18,000 of debt discharged in Chapter 7 
bankruptcy. The SOR alleges 24 delinquent debts totaling approximately $40,091. 
Applicant admitted that he owed the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a ($8,058-repossessed vehicle 
from 2008), 1.n ($4,800-student loan), and 1.o ($3,500-student loan),2 and 1.w ($961-
medical). He did not provide any information about action he is taking to resolve these 
debts.3  
 
 Applicant denied the remaining debts in the SOR. In his answer to the SOR, he 
stated that all of the accounts alleged, except those he admitted, have been dismissed 
“due to length of accounts time period” and/or “dropped,” and/or “no longer on credit” 
report. He further stated: “I have not opened any credit or store accounts since 2008, so 
I have not accrued any positive or negative accounts since. Also since working at 
[employer], I have not had any debts or monetary issues.”4  
 
 During Applicant’s background investigation interview with a government 
investigator in September 2014, he acknowledged that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.e 
($1,187), 1.h ($844), 1.i ($1,917), 1.j ($680), 1.l ($221) and 1.m ($903) belonged to him. 
In his answer to the SOR, he denied these debts and all of the other debts alleged, 
except as noted above. He also indicated in his answer that he contested the debt in 
SOR ¶ 1.j because the “job wasn’t finished.” In his answer, he indicated the debts 
                                                          
1 GE 2. 
 
2 Applicant admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.n and 1.o, but explained the student loan debts ¶¶ 1.p and 1.q 
are duplicates. I concur and will only address the two student loan debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.n and 1.o.¶ 
 
3 GE 2. 
 
4 GE 1. 
 
3 
 
 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.l and 1.m did not belong to him, which contradicts the 
acknowledgement he made to the investigator. Regarding the other debts, he attributed 
them to identity theft.5 
 
 Applicant attributed his early financial problems to his first wife’s spending habits 
and their divorce. He attributed his later financial problems to periods of unemployment, 
low income and difficulty supporting his family, expenses from his former girlfriend, and 
identity theft.6 
 
 During his background interview, Applicant stated he now had a good job and is 
financially stable and able to support his family. He intended on contacting all of the 
creditors holding his delinquent debts and working out payment plans, because he was 
now steadily employed. Applicant was interviewed again in November 2014 by a 
government investigator. He stated that since his last interview he was provided 
information on how to file a criminal complaint about the previously-discussed identity-
theft issue. He had not filed the complaint and did not know when he would do so. He 
further indicated he was working toward financial stability, but had no timeline for 
resolution.7  
 
 Applicant did not provide any documentary evidence to show he paid, resolved, 
or disputed any of the debts alleged in the SOR. Credit reports from February 2015 and 
July 2014 substantiate the debts alleged in the SOR.8 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
                                                          
5 GE 3. 
 
6 GE 3. 
 
7 GE 3. 
 
8 GE 4, 5.  
 
4 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
 
5 
 
 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.9 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant had his delinquent debts discharged in bankruptcy in 2000. He has 24 
delinquent debts totaling about $40,091. There is sufficient evidence to support the 
application of the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant failed to provide evidence that any of the debts in the SOR have been 
paid, resolved, or disputed despite being put on notice in 2014 during his background 
interview. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial problems are 
                                                          
9 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
6 
 
 
unlikely to recur. His failure to timely address his delinquent debts casts doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply 
 
Applicant had debts discharged in bankruptcy after his first divorce. He attributed 
his latest financial problems to unemployment, underemployment, his girlfriend’s 
expenses, and identity theft. His unemployment and underemployment were conditions 
beyond his control. He provided limited information regarding the other reasons, but I 
will consider that they had an impact on his finances. For the full application of AG ¶ 
20(b), Applicant must provide evidence that he acted responsibly under the 
circumstances. He has not. He indicated to the government investigator he would 
contact his creditors and make payment arrangements to resolve his delinquent debts. 
He failed to provide any evidence that he did so. He relies on the fact that the debts are 
no longer on his credit report due to the age of the debts. He did not provide 
documentary evidence in that regard. He claimed some of the debts were the result of 
identity theft, but admitted during his interview that some belonged to him. He was 
made aware of how to file a criminal complaint regarding his belief his identity was 
stolen, but had not done so and failed to provide any information to show he is actively 
pursuing that course. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.  
 
Applicant did not provide evidence that he has received financial counseling. 
There is insufficient evidence to conclude he made good-faith payments to any creditors 
or otherwise resolved his delinquent debts. There are not clear indications that 
Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 
20(d) do not apply. 
 
Applicant indicated he disagreed with some debts. He did not provide 
documented evidence regarding the basis of his dispute debts or evidence to resolve it. 
AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
7 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 42 years old. He has worked for a federal contractor since 2014. He 
has a history of financial delinquencies. He failed to provide evidence that he has paid, 
resolved, or disputed any of the debts. He did not provide evidence supporting his belief 
some of his debts are no longer being reported on his credit report. Although some of 
the debts may no longer be legally enforceable because of their age, it does not show 
Applicant has acted responsibly in paying his just debts. To the contrary, it reflects 
Applicant’s long history of irresponsibility regarding his fiscal duties. Applicant’s financial 
track record is unstable and unreliable. He has failed to meet his burden of persuasion. 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed 
to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.p-1.q:  Duplicates-For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.r-1.z:  Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
