 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-01256 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Andrew Henderson, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ryan C. Nerney, Esq. 
 
 
 June 20, 2016 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had tax liens totaling $143,299 lodged against him for unpaid taxes 
related to his business he operated from 1997 to 2009. He also had two unresolved 
medical debts and a delinquent utility bill totaling $3,244, collectively. He has resolved 
both of his medical debts, the utility bill, and all but one tax lien. He is making regular 
monthly payments on his remaining tax delinquency. Based on a review of the 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the security 
concerns raised under the guideline for Financial Considerations. His request for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 29, 2015, the Department of Defense issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
 
2 
 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 17, 2015 (Answer), and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 15, 
2016. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a notice of hearing 
on March 31, 2016, scheduling the hearing for April 18, 2016. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through L, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on April 26, 2016. The record was left open for Applicant to submit 
additional exhibits. On May 2, 2016, Applicant presented additional exhibits marked AE 
M through AE O. Department Counsel had no objections to AE M through AE O and 
they were admitted. The record then closed. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his employer for the past six years. He served on active duty in the Air Force from 1977 
to 1987 and achieved the rank of staff sergeant. He held a security clearance, without 
incident, during his military service. He is married and has no children. (GE 1; AE L; Tr. 
16-18, 43.) 
 
 As stated in the SOR, Applicant was alleged to be indebted to the Federal 
government for seven Federal tax liens entered against him between 2004 and 2012, in 
the approximate amount of $143,299. Additionally, he had two unresolved medical 
debts and a delinquent utility bill that totaled $3,244, collectively. Applicant denied all of 
the SOR listed debts, with explanations. These debts are found in the credit reports 
entered into evidence. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, 
and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. (Answer; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6.) 
  
 Applicant purchased a business between 1997 and 1999. It was organized as a 
limited liability company, and Applicant was personally liable for the company’s debts. 
The business heavily invested in research and development of its product, despite a 
significant shortfall in cash-flow. He hoped that sales of the product would alleviate the 
company’s debt, but the company continued to decline and eventually closed in 2009. 
As a result, the company’s Federal taxes went largely unpaid between 2004 and 2012. 
As a result, seven Federal tax liens were filed against Applicant between 2004 and 
2012. (Tr. 19-24, 37-38, 49-51.) 
 
 In 2012 Applicant hired a tax advisory company to assist him in setting up an 
installment plan with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). He has been making regular 
monthly payments to the IRS in accordance with the established installment plan since 
September 2012. He has resolved six of the seven tax liens, including those alleged in 
SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.c, 1.e, 1.f. and 1.g, and those liens have been released. He is 
making monthly payments of $190 to resolve the remaining $11,040 debt identified in 
SOR ¶ 1.d. (AE A; AE B; AE G; AE H; AE I; Tr. 26-29.) 
 
3 
 
 Applicant experienced additional financial problems as a result of his wife leaving 
the work force to care for her ailing parents from 2010 to January 2016. Her father 
(Applicant’s father-in-law), passed away in January 2016, and she immediately went 
back to work. (Tr. 23-25.) Her unemployment caused a decrease in their familial 
income. As a result, Applicant incurred additional debt including two delinquent medical 
debts and a delinquent utility bill. However, Applicant presented documents to show he 
has resolved the $1,028 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.h); the $554 utility bill (SOR ¶ 1.i); and 
the $1,662 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.j). There are no additional delinquencies identified on 
Applicant’s most recent credit report. (AE E; AE F; AE M; AE N; AE O; Tr. 23-25.) 
 
Applicant now makes sound financial choices. He purchased a home in 2014, 
which decreased his monthly expenses by $200. He and his wife drive older model 
vehicles. The only vacation he has taken recently was financed by his brother so that he 
could attend his brother’s wedding. He completed a financial counseling class in March 
2016. He now has approximately $800 left at the end of the month. Additionally, his wife 
recently inherited property, which they intend to sell. They plan to use the proceeds of 
the sale to resolve the remaining tax delinquency. (AE D; AE E; AE K; 40-51.) 
   
 Applicant is well respected by those that know him. He is known by his friends 
and colleagues to be trustworthy and reliable. His supervisor considers him to be “a 
valued asset to [their] team.” (AE C.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
4 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise security concerns and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts began in 2004, when he was unable to pay Federal 
taxes for his company. He continued to amass $143,299 in Federal tax liens through 
2012. Additionally, he incurred two unresolved medical debts and a delinquent utility bill 
totaling $3,244, collectively. The evidence raises security concerns under both of these 
 
5 
 
conditions, thereby shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, extenuate, or mitigate those 
concerns.  
 
  Two Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
applicable:  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
While Applicant acted irresponsibly from 2004 to 2012 in failing to address his tax 
liens and other delinquent accounts, he has demonstrated that since 2012 he has 
worked diligently to bring his financial problems under control. Applicant sought financial 
guidance and counseling about how to handle the debts from a tax advisor in 2012. He 
also participated in recent financial counseling. He has consistently made payments on 
his tax debt since 2012, and has resolved all but $11,040 of it. He also resolved the two 
medical debts and the delinquent utility bill. He has demonstrated a concerted effort to 
resolve his delinquencies over the past four years. Moreover, Applicant is incurring no 
additional delinquent debt of any nature. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant’s 
 
6 
 
financial difficulties were caused, in part, by his irresponsible choice to spend his 
company’s available cash flow on research and development instead of paying its tax 
obligations in a timely fashion. Other factors beyond his control, like his wife’s 
unemployment, also contributed to his financial difficulties. However, he is an honorable 
man and has diligently worked over the past several years to pay his tax debts. He has 
a recent history of making regular payments to the IRS under his installment agreement 
and he resolved his other delinquencies. It is unlikely that Applicant will incur future 
financial problems. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. I 
conclude the whole-person analysis for Applicant. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a through 1.j:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
