 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-00626 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Adrienne Strzelczyk, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 20, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued to Applicant a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the DOD 
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on September 18, 2015, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. On November 23, 2015, Department Counsel 
submitted the Government’s file of relevant material (FORM). The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, and it was received on December 3, 2015. Applicant was afforded an 
 
2 
 
 
opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant did not object to the Government’s evidence and did not offer any additional 
information. The Government’s documents identified as Items 1 through 6 are admitted 
into evidence. The case was assigned to me on March 31, 2016.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He is a high school graduate. He has completed some 
college courses, but has not earned a degree. He served on active duty in the military 
from 2002 to 2011 when he was honorably discharged in the paygrade E-5. He married 
in 2003 and divorced in 2008. He has three children, ages 16, 12, and 10. He has 
worked for his current employer, a federal contractor, since November 2013. Applicant 
disclosed periods of unemployment from January 2012 to April 2012, October 2012 to 
November 2012, and August 2013 to November 2013.1 
 
 The SOR alleged nine delinquent debts totaling approximately $22,956. 
Applicant admitted all of the debts in his answer to the SOR, except one that he 
disputed. In May 2014 Applicant was interviewed as part of a background investigation. 
Applicant acknowledged that the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h and 1.i 
belonged to him. He stated there were no delinquent or past-due balances owed on 
these debts, and they were all current. He acknowledged the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g 
($4,887), which was a debt for cell phone service that was incurred when he was 
married to his ex-wife. He intended to begin making $100 payments toward the debt 
starting in June 2014.2  
 
Applicant attributed his financial difficulties to the death of his aunt in 2009. He 
was close to her and took out personal loans to help pay for her funeral and burial 
expenses. He then found it difficult to pay his monthly living expenses and started using 
credit to meet his financial obligations. He indicated during his background interview 
that he is now more mature and financially stable.3  
 
Applicant indicated in his answer to the SOR that all of the debts in the SOR, 
except ¶ 1.g, were paid or settled. He indicated that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g was being 
investigated. He did not provide any documents to show the debts are paid, resolved, or 
or disputed. All of the debts are documented by credit reports from February 2014, 
                                                          
1 Item 2. 
 
2 Item 3. 
 
3 Item 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 
December 2014, and July 2015. Applicant’s delinquent debts began accruing in at least 
2011.4 No other evidence was provided. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
                                                          
4 Items 1, 3, 4, 5, 6. 
 
4 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handing and safeguarding classified 
information.5 
 
AG ¶ 19 provides conditions that could raise security concerns. The following are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has approximately $22,956 in delinquent debts that he began accruing 
in about 2011. There is sufficient evidence to support the application of the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
                                                          
5 See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App.Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
5 
 
 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant failed to provide any supporting evidence that his delinquent debts are 
paid, settled, or resolved. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that his financial 
problems are unlikely to recur. His failure to address the delinquent debts casts doubt 
on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) does not 
apply. 
 
Applicant attributed his financial problems to the death of his aunt in 2009, after 
which he took out personal loans to help pay for the funeral expenses. Although he did 
not state such, I have considered that his periods of unemployment also affected his 
finances. These conditions were beyond his control. For the full application of AG ¶ 
20(b), Applicant must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant stated 
during his background interview, and in his answer the SOR, that the debts alleged are 
paid, settled, or resolved. During his background interview he acknowledged owing the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.g, and was going to begin making payments. In his answer to the SOR, 
he denied this debt and indicated it was being investigated. Applicant failed to provide 
any supporting evidence that the SOR debts are paid, resolved, or disputed. He has 
been steadily employed since November 2013. He received the FORM on December 3, 
2015, which stated: “Applicant did not, however, provide any evidence to substantiate 
any of these assertions.” There is insufficient evidence to conclude Applicant acted 
responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. 
 
 There is no evidence Applicant received financial counseling or that his financial 
problems are being resolved or are under control. There is no evidence that he made 
good-faith payments to creditors or otherwise resolved his delinquent debts. AG ¶¶ 
20(c) and 20(d) do not apply.  
 
6 
 
 
 Applicant denied the debt in SOR ¶ 1.g, and indicated that it was being 
investigated. He did not provide evidence of the results of the investigation or actions he 
has taken to resolve the debt. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant is 32 years old. He served in the military and received an honorable 
discharge. He has had financial difficulties since 2011. He has been steadily employed 
since November 2013. Applicant had an opportunity to provide substantiating 
documentation of actions he may have taken to resolve his delinquent debts, but did not 
provide anything. He failed to meet his burden of persuasion. The record evidence 
leaves me with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a 
security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising under Guideline F, financial considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:  Against Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
