 
1 
 
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
[Name Redacted]  )  ISCR Case No. 15-02042 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Bryan Olmos, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOGAN, Erin C., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 25, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations, and Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD after 
September 1, 2006.  
  
 On November 16, 2015, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision 
on the record. Department Counsel issued a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on 
December 30, 2015. Applicant received the FORM on January 4, 2016. She had 30 
days from the receipt of the FORM to submit an additional response to the FORM. She 
did not submit a response to the FORM. On March 21, 2016, the FORM was forwarded 
to the Hearing Office and assigned to me on March 29, 2016. Based upon a review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
 
2 
 
 
Rulings on Evidence  
 
 Item 4 of the FORM is a portion of the Report of Investigation (ROI) from the 
background investigation of Applicant. It is a summary of Applicant’s Personal Subject 
Interview completed by the investigator conducting her background investigation on 
November 12, 2014. It is unsworn and unauthenticated. DODD 5220.6, Enclosure 3, ¶ 
E3.1.20 states, “An ROI may be received with an authenticating witness provided it is 
otherwise admissible under the Federal Rules of Evidence.” (see ISCR Case No. 11-
13999 (App. Bd., February 3, 2014)).  
 
Although Applicant, who is representing herself, has not raised the issue via an 
objection, I am raising it sua sponte because Item 4 is not properly authenticated. 
Applicant’s failure to mention this issue in a response to the FORM is not a knowing 
waiver of the rule because she more than likely was unaware of the rule.  Waiver means 
“the voluntary relinquishment or abandonment – express or implied – of a legal right or 
advantage, the party alleged to have waived a right must have had both knowledge of 
the existing right and the intention of forgoing it.” Black’s Law Dictionary, 1717 (Bryan A. 
Garner, editor-in-chief, 9th ed., West 2009).  
 
While Department Counsel mentions the authentication requirement of ¶ E3.1.20 
of the Directive in Footnote 1 of the FORM without directly citing it, I cannot conclude 
Applicant expressly waived this rule because she did not respond to the FORM. In 
accordance with the Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.20, Item 4 is not admissible and will 
not be considered in this decision.   
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant denies the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 
1.k. She admits the remaining SOR allegations. (Item 2)    
 
 Applicant is an employee of a DOD contractor seeking a security clearance. She 
has worked for her current employer since May 2014. The highest level of education 
received is a bachelor’s degree. She and her husband have been separated since 
September 2012. A divorce is pending. She has two children, ages 9 and 6. (Item 3)   
 
On July 7, 2014, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigation Processing (e-QIP). In response to Section 26 – Delinquency Involving 
Routine Accounts, Applicant listed several delinquent accounts. (Item 3, section 26) A 
subsequent background investigation revealed the following delinquent accounts which 
are alleged in the SOR: a $441 account placed for collection in October 2012 (SOR ¶ 
1.a: Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 1); a $3,692 credit-card account that was charged off in 
October 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.b: Item 5 at 4; Item 6 at 1; Item 7 at 3); a $3,299 credit-card 
account placed for collection in July 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.c: Item 5 at 15; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 
at 3); a $2,523 credit-card account placed for collection in July 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.d: Item 5 
at 15; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 3); a $4,847 credit-card account that was charged-off in July 
 
3 
 
 
2012 (SOR ¶ 1.e: Item 5 at 3; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 4); and a $3,192 bank account that 
was charged off in July 2014 (SOR ¶ 1.f: Item 5 at 3; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 5). 
 
Additional delinquent accounts include:  a $734 credit-card account that was 
charged off in July 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.g: Item 5 at 4; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 7); a $487 
department store credit-card account that was charged off in June 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.h: 
Item 5 at 5; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 7); a $1,613 department store credit-card account that 
was charged off in November 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.i: Item 5 at 4; Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 8); a 
$9,050 credit-card account that was charged off in July 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.j: Item 5 at 3; 
Item 6 at 2; Item 7 at 9); a $441 account that was placed for collection in October 2012 
(SOR ¶ 1.k: Item 5 at 5); and a $288 utility account that was placed for collection in 
December 2012 (SOR ¶ 1.l: Item 5 at 15). 
 
Applicant had two periods of unemployment, from October 2013 to May 2014, 
and from November 2011 to April 2012. (Item 3 at 13-16) In her response to the SOR, 
Applicant explains that she encountered financial problems when she separated from 
her husband in September 2012.  With the loss of joint income, Applicant was unable to 
keep up with her debts. She was able to pay only a few important accounts. At some 
point, she hired a law firm to help manage her debt for a period of nine months. She 
claims the law firm repaired her credit and worked on removing negative comments 
from her credit history. She states that many of the charges are written off, but remain 
on her credit history. She has made payment arrangements on those debts that she can 
afford and states her credit has significantly improved. (Item 2 at 1)  
 
The status of the SOR debts are as follows: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a: $441 debt owed to a bank. Applicant admits the debt. She says that 
the balance of this debt has been combined with the balance of the debt alleged in SOR   
¶ 1.f. She entered into a repayment agreement with the bank. She pays $100 a month. 
She has been paying on this debt for over a year and she says that her payments are 
timely. (Item 2 at 1) She did not provide additional documentation, such as the 
repayment agreement, bank records, checks, or statement of payment history from the 
bank corroborating her statement that she is making payments towards this debt.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.b: $3,692 charged off delinquent credit-card account. Applicant admits 
this debt and she is working on a payment plan to satisfy this debt. (Item 2 at 1) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c: $3,299 credit-card account placed for collection. Applicant admits the 
debt and says the account has been bought by several collection agencies. She did not 
indicate how she plans to resolve this debt. (Item 2 at 1) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.d: $2,523 credit-card account placed for collection. Applicant denies this 
debt. She claims she sent the creditor a request for further information regarding the 
debt.  She did not provide a copy of her correspondence to the creditor and did not say 
why she denied the debt. (Item 2 at 2) 
 
 
4 
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e: $4,847 charged-off account: Applicant admits this debt and will be 
working on a payment plan to satisfy this debt. (Item 2 at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f: $3,192 charged-off account owed to a bank. Applicant admits this 
debt. It was combined with the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant claims she has 
been paying $100 monthly payments for over a year. She did not provide additional 
documents verifying the payment plan and that she was making payments. (Item 2 at 2) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, and I.i: charged-off accounts with respective balances of $734, 
$487, and $1,613: Applicant admits to these accounts. She states that they were 
charged off. She did not state whether she had a plan to resolve these accounts. (Item 
2 at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.j: $9,050 charged-off account owed to a bank: Applicant admits the debt 
and says that she will be working on setting up a payment plan to resolve this debt. 
(Item 2 at 2) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.k: $441 debt that was placed for collection: Applicant denies this debt. 
She has no knowledge of this account. She points out that it is the same amount as the 
balance of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a. (Item 2 at 2) Upon review of the credit report 
entries of the debts in SOR ¶ 1.a and SOR ¶ 1.k, the account numbers are identical. 
The debt appears to have been transferred to a collection agency. (Item 5 at 5; Item 7 at 
1) I find the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k is a duplicate of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.  
SOR ¶ 1.k is found for Applicant. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.l: $288 utility account placed for collection: Applicant admits the debt 
and says that she will work to satisfy this debt. She believes the account was charged 
off. (Item 2 at 2)  
 
Guideline H - Drug Involvement 
 
The SOR alleges Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from January 
2007 to January 2012. In response to section 23 – Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity, 
Applicant listed that she smoked “weed” from January 2007 to January 2012. She 
smoked it in social settings. She stopped using “weed” because she is older and has a 
different lifestyle. (Item 3, section 23, at 32-33) In her answer to the SOR, Applicant 
states that she has been 100% drug free for many years. She claims that she was not a 
regular user of marijuana and only smoked a few times a year during the period of years 
listed. She is not proud of her past marijuana use. She has completely changed her 
lifestyle. (Item 2 at 2) 
 
Applicant states that she takes her job very seriously and is supporting two 
young children. She works hard to make continuous positive improvements. She lives a 
healthy, smoke- and drug-free lifestyle and tries to be the best role model as possible 
for her children. She does not have a criminal record. She is trustworthy. (Item 2 at 2)  
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered when 
determining an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find AG &19(a) (an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG &19(c) 
(a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply to Applicant’s case. Applicant 
encountered financial problems since about 2012.  The SOR alleges 12 delinquent 
debts, an approximate total balance of $30,607. These debts became delinquent in 
2012 and remain unresolved. Both AG &19(a) and AG &19(c) apply.   
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, or careless in their obligations to protect classified information. Behaving 
irresponsibly in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in 
other aspects of life. A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until 
evidence is uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to pay debts under 
agreed terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a situation of risk 
inconsistent with the holding of a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances in such a way as to meet her financial 
obligations.  
 
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline F. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. (Directive 
¶E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden 
of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 
(App. Bd. Sept. 22, 2005))  
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply:  
 
AG & 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
7 
 
 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
AG & 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
  
AG & 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
AG & 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
AG & 20(a) does not apply. Applicant incurred the delinquent accounts alleged in 
the SOR, most of which are over four years old. The debts were charged off or placed 
for collection 2012. While Applicant states that she hired a law firm to assist her in 
repairing her credit, she provided no documentation verifying this or what the law firm 
actually did for Applicant.  She claims that she is in a payment agreement with the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f, but provided no proof such as a copy of the payment 
agreement as well as receipts, bank statements, cancelled checks, payment histories 
(etc.), to show that she was making timely payments in accordance with the plan. All 
remaining debts are unresolved and Applicant has not taken steps to resolve these 
debts. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s financial issues remain current 
and ongoing. While Applicant intends to pay her debts, she has taken little action to 
resolve the debts.  
  
AG & 20(b) partially applies in that Applicant’s financial problems were caused by 
her separation from her husband in 2012. It is not clear whether the divorce is final.  
Applicant also had two periods of unemployment from November 2011 to April 2012, 
and from October 2013 to May 2014. This mitigating condition is given less weight 
because I cannot conclude Applicant acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
Applicant provided little information about her financial situation such as her monthly 
income and her monthly financial obligations. She did not explain why she could not 
begin to resolve her delinquent accounts once she gained full-time employment in May 
2014.  
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply. While Applicant consulted a law firm to repair her 
credit, it is not clear in what capacity the law firm acted on Applicant’s behalf. It does not 
appear that Applicant received financial counseling. Applicant did not provide sufficient 
 
8 
 
 
documentary evidence that she was resolving her delinquent accounts. Applicant’s 
financial situation remains unstable.  
 
I cannot conclude AG & 20(d) applies because Applicant provided no proof of the 
repayment agreement as well as proof of payments towards the agreement for the 
debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f.  While Applicant states that she intends to pay her 
debts, she has not taken steps to resolve the remaining delinquent debts. I cannot 
conclude Applicant initiated a good-faith effort to resolve her debts.  
 
AG & 20(e) applies with respect to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. It is a duplicate 
of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a.  While Applicant indicated that she disputed the debt 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, she did not provide documentation of her actions, such as a 
dispute letter, and explain the basis for the dispute. AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply with 
respect to the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Drug Involvement is set out in 
AG & 24:       
  
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:  
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed 
in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended, (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; 
 
Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction. 
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that could raise security 
concerns. I find the following drug involvement disqualifying conditions apply to 
Applicant’s case.  
 
AG & 25(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
AG & 25(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia. 
 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant used marijuana with varying frequency from January 2007 to January 
2012.  She used marijuana on a recreational basis. AG & 25(a) applies. AG & 25(c) also 
applies because Applicant occasionally possessed marijuana.  
  
The Government’s substantial evidence and Applicant’s own admissions raise 
security concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement. The burden shifted to Applicant 
to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. 
(Directive ¶ E3.1.15) An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and 
the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. (See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. September 22, 2005))  
  
Guideline H also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from drug involvement. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply to Applicant’s case:  
 
AG ¶ 26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and  
  
AG & 26(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, 
such as: (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) 
changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an 
appropriate period of abstinence; and (4) a signed statement of intent with 
automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.  
   
 AG ¶ 26(a) applies because Applicant stopped using marijuana over four years 
ago. Applicant did not use marijuana while holding a security clearance. She stopped 
using marijuana in order to live a more healthy lifestyle and to provide a positive role 
model for her children.  Applicant was forthcoming about her illegal drug use on her 
security clearance application. Applicant appears to understand the security concern 
involving illegal drug use. It is unlikely that she will jeopardize her future by returning to 
illegal drug use.   
 
 AG ¶ 26(b) applies because Applicant has not used illegal drugs in over four 
years. Life circumstances have changed for Applicant. She has matured and is focused 
on her children’s future. She is not proud of her past marijuana use and has completely 
changed her life style.  Applicant met her burden to mitigate the security concerns 
raised under Guideline H, Drug Involvement.  
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
10 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
 In requesting an administrative determination, Applicant chose to rely on the 
written record. However, she failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to 
supplement the record with relevant and material facts regarding her circumstances and 
documents that would mitigate financial considerations security concerns. 
 
 The determination of an individual’s eligibility for a security clearance is not a 
once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, both disqualifying 
and mitigating to the evidence presented. Under Applicant’s current circumstances, the 
granting of a security clearance is not warranted. In the future, if Applicant establishes a 
track record of resolving her delinquent debts, she may demonstrate persuasive 
evidence of her security worthiness.  
        
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s 
employment record, including her two periods of unemployment. I considered her two 
years of employment with her current employer. I considered her financial problems 
were caused when she and her husband separated in 2012.  However, Applicant has 
not demonstrated that she has taken reasonable steps to resolve her delinquent 
accounts. At the close of the record, most of the debts alleged in the SOR remain  
unresolved. In the future, Applicant may be able to demonstrate a track record of 
resolving her financial obligations. It is too soon to make this conclusion at this point. 
The security concerns raised under financial considerations are not mitigated.  The 
security concerns under drug involvement were mitigated because Applicant stopped 
marijuana use four years ago.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
  
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.j, 1.l:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.k:     For Applicant 
  
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
     Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                
_________________ 
ERIN C. HOGAN 
Administrative Judge 
