 
1 
                                         
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 15-05702 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s finances were adversely affected, to some extent, by circumstances 
beyond her control. She recently resolved five of the eight SOR debts, and has three 
SOR debts left to resolve. She has established a track record of debt payment and 
resolution. She understands that she is required to demonstrate financial responsibility 
to be eligible for a clearance and ultimately her job. Financial considerations security 
concerns are mitigated. Access to classified information is granted.      
  
History of the Case 
  
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 6, 
2014. After reviewing it and the information gathered during a background investigation, 
the Department of Defense (DOD) was unable to make an affirmative decision to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance. On February 17, 2016, the DOD issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on March 16, 2016 (Answer), and 
                                            
1 The DOD acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented by the DOD on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
                                         
 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge from the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA). 
 
The case was assigned to me on May 4, 2016. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on May 5, 2016, scheduling the hearing for May 12, 2016. Applicant’s hearing was held 
as scheduled. Government exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, and Applicant’s exhibit (AE) 1 
(submitted post-hearing), were admitted into evidence without objection. On May 23, 
2016, DOHA received the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Procedural Issues 
 
 Applicant requested an expedited hearing on May 2, 2016, and the hearing was 
scheduled for May 12, 2016. At the hearing, she stated that she had sufficient time to 
prepare for her hearing and was ready to proceed. She affirmatively waived her right to 
15 days advance notice of her hearing. (Tr. 12-13) 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR and provided some 
evidence in extenuation and mitigation. Her admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the record evidence, and having observed 
Applicant’s demeanor while testifying, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a federal contractor. She graduated from 
high school and attended college between 2001 and 2006, but did not earn a degree. 
She has never been married and has no children.  
 
Between 2002 and 2007, Applicant was employed as a library technician. She 
then worked as an information technology coordinator, making about $45,000 - $50,000 
a year, from 2007 to 2014. She has been working for Federal contractors since 
November 2014. Her annual salary is about $70,000. Applicant’s continued employment 
is contingent on her eligibility to possess a security clearance. There are no allegations 
or evidence of any rule or security violations.   
 
Applicant submitted her first SCA in 2014. She was granted an interim secret 
clearance, which was revoked as a result of the financial considerations security 
concerns raised by the February 2016 SOR. Section 26 (Financial Record) of the 2014 
SCA asked Applicant to disclose whether during the last seven years she had any 
financial problems, including delinquent or in-collection debts; loan defaults; credit cards 
or accounts suspended, charged off, or cancelled; and whether she was currently over 
120 days delinquent on any debt, or had been over 120 days delinquent on any debts.  
 
Applicant answered “yes” and disclosed that she had financial problems. The 
subsequent background investigation confirmed Applicant’s disclosures and revealed 
the eight debts alleged in the SOR, totaling less than $12,000. Applicant’s credit reports 
and her SOR and hearing admissions established the debts in the SOR. The status of 
her SOR debts is as follows: 
 
3 
                                         
 
 
SOR ¶ 1.a ($1,263) This was an old telephone services debt. Applicant was 
financially irresponsible and then forgot about the debt. She explained that in the past 
she did not pay attention to her credit report. Applicant paid this debt on March 15, 
2016. (Documentary evidence attached to her Answer.) 
  
SOR ¶ 1.b ($4,311) Applicant purchased a car in 2008. She missed a couple of 
payments in 2012, but brought the account current. She became delinquent again in 
2014, and her car was repossessed in July 2014. Applicant disclosed this debt on her 
2014 SCA. Applicant averred that she had been in contact with the creditor since 2014 
when she tried to avoid the repossession. She approached the creditor again in 2015 
and 2016 to negotiate a settlement and establish a payment plan. However, she has yet 
to establish a payment plan. Applicant explained she has been paying other debts first 
and then will address this debt. This debt is unresolved. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.c ($1,968 – delinquent second mortgage) Applicant borrowed the down 
payment for her home in 2008 through a financial assistance program for low-income 
families. She was current on the two home mortgages up until 2013-2014, when her 
mother was laid off. Applicant provided financial support for her mother and siblings and 
neglected her mortgage payments. Applicant obtained a mortgage modification in 2015, 
and she is current on her first mortgage. She remained in contact with the second 
mortgage lender, and in early 2016, she made arrangements to pay an additional 
amount every month to become current on the second mortgage. (Tr. 22, 38) 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.d ($112) This was an old medical services debt that Applicant forgot 
about. She initially believed it should have been paid by her insurance company. She 
paid this debt on March 10, 2016. (Documentary evidence attached to her Answer.) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.e ($2,217) This was a debt for unpaid college tuition. Applicant was not 
aware of the debt until she was confronted with it during her security clearance 
background interview in January 2015. To her knowledge, all her tuition expenses were 
covered by her student loans. After receipt of the SOR, Applicant contacted the creditor, 
to establish a payment plan, but has yet to establish it. 
 
SOR ¶1.f ($1,380) This was an old cable services debt that Applicant forgot 
about. Applicant paid this debt in full after receipt of the SOR. (Answer, Tr. 20, 43-44) 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g ($320) This is an old credit card debt. Applicant contacted the credit 
card company and collection agency, but apparently, the account is so old that they 
don’t have records of the debt. She is trying to identify the legal creditor to establish a 
payment plan. 
SOR ¶ 1.h ($325) This is a tuition debt to a college. Applicant believed she did 
not owe the debt because she withdrew from the class. However, she paid the debt in 
March 2016. (AE 1) Applicant’s documentary evidence shows that she consolidated her 
student loans under one account, and she has been making payments. (AE 1) 
 
 
4 
                                         
 
Applicant’s testimony was candid and forthcoming. She took responsibility for her 
financial problems and attributed some of her old delinquent debts to being immature, 
irresponsible, and ignorant of the consequences of not being financially responsible. 
She forgot some of her old debts. During her background interview she was made 
aware of her delinquent debts. She was unable to immediately start paying her debts 
because she was still getting back on her feet from helping her family with their living 
expenses and the financial burden of repairing her home.  
 
Applicant currently follows a budget, reviews her credit reports, and is making 
strides to correct her financial problems. Applicant noted that some of the more recent 
delinquent debts were caused by circumstances beyond her control. In 2013 or 2014, 
her mother was laid off and Applicant provided her with extensive financial support. At 
some point, Applicant moved into her mother’s apartment to consolidate their living 
expenses and rented out her home. When the lease ended, Applicant and her mother 
moved back into Applicant’s home. Applicant’s renter damaged her home and she 
incurred significant expenses (fix broken pipes, water damage, paint, and other 
problems) to rehabilitate her home. She estimated having repair expenses close to 
$3,000. 
 
Applicant’s mother worked 16 years for a large hotel before getting laid off in 
2013. She was unemployed for 15 months. During that period, Applicant paid for about 
90 percent of her mother’s bills and living expenses (around $400 monthly). Applicant is 
considered to be the backbone of her family. She not only has helped her mother 
financially, but she also helps her two sisters and their six children on a frequent basis. 
Applicant provided between $200 and $300 to her sisters in financial support. 
Applicant’s dedication and financial assistance to her family was corroborated by her 
Aunt’s testimony.  
 
Applicant also presented the testimony of a coworker who retired from the U.S. 
Navy as a chief petty officer (E-7) in 2002. Both Applicant and her coworker started 
working for their current employer at about the same time in 2014. Applicant’s coworker 
has been providing financial counseling and assisting Applicant to contact creditors, 
negotiate settlement agreements, and pay some of her debts. In her opinion, Applicant 
is honest, down to earth, reliable, and an excellent worker. She recommended 
Applicant’s eligibility for a clearance without reservations. 
 
Applicant’s monthly take home pay is $4,000. After paying her living expenses 
and debts, she has about $1,000 left over in discretionary income. Applicant testified 
that since receiving the SOR, she had been using her discretionary income to pay her 
delinquent debts. Applicant expressed sincere remorse and embarrassment for her 
financial problems. She noted that she has been managing her financial situation and 
has brought her debt down. She believes she has gained control of her finances, and 
plans to pay all her creditors. 
 
Applicant credibly testified that the security clearance process opened her eyes 
to the possibility of her losing her job and the importance of being financially 
responsible. Applicant promised to continue resolving all her delinquent obligations. Her 
 
5 
                                         
 
mother is currently working and she is assisting Applicant with her debts. Applicant now 
understands that she is required to demonstrate financial responsibility to be eligible for 
a security clearance. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, 
must be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
  
 
6 
                                         
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18) 
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an individual might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an individual’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. 
 
Applicant’s history of financial problems is documented in her credit reports, SOR 
response, and hearing record. AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could 
raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) 
requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating conditions.  
 
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable: 
  
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
7 
                                         
 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
In the past, Applicant was financially irresponsible. Currently, with the financial 
counseling and mentoring from a knowledgeable coworker, she has demonstrated 
increase maturity and financial responsibility. Applicant’s documentary evidence 
established that she resolved five of the eight delinquent accounts alleged in the SOR, 
albeit after receipt of the SOR. Applicant worked diligently to regain contact with her 
creditors and resolved most of the SOR debts. She credibly promised to resolve the 
remaining debt in the near future.  
 
Applicant’s finances were adversely affected by circumstances beyond her 
control, including her mother’s period of unemployment and having to provide financial 
support to her mother, siblings, and their children.  
 
Based on Applicant’s actions addressing and paying her debts, and her credible 
and sincere promise to timely pay her debts, future delinquent debt is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on her current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. I 
find there are clear indications that her financial problem is being resolved and is under 
control. Her payments of some of her debts showed good faith. She has sufficient 
income to keep her debts in current status and to continue making progress paying her 
remaining delinquent debts. Her efforts are sufficient to fully mitigate financial 
considerations security concerns.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments under Guideline F in my whole-
person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under Guideline F, 
but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a federal contractor. This is her first SCA. 
She held an interim security clearance for some time during 2014. There are no 
allegations of rule or security violations. Applicant has worked for two federal 
contractors since 2014.  
 
The SOR alleged 8 delinquent debts. Applicant showed current financial 
responsibility by contacting her creditors and making payment arrangements to resolve 
five delinquent debts. She still has 3 SOR debts to resolve. Applicant’s finances were 
adversely affected by circumstances beyond her control. She promised to pay or 
resolve the remaining unpaid SOR debt. She understands that she is required to 
demonstrate financial responsibility to retain her security clearance and ultimately her 
job.  
 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:  
 
8 
                                         
 
 
[T]he concept of meaningful track record necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts. However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each and 
every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
demonstrate that he has . . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan. The Judge 
can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial situation 
and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s plan for 
the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and realistic. See 
Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (Available, reliable information about the person, past 
and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching 
a determination.) There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments 
on all outstanding debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and 
concomitant conduct) may provide for the payment of such debts one at a 
time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR.  
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations and 
quotation marks omitted). Applicant has established a “meaningful track record” of debt 
re-payment, and I am confident she will maintain her financial responsibility. Financial 
considerations security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
_________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
