 
 
 
 
1 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
         
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-00257 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
                    For Government: Tara R. Karoian, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge: 
 
                                        Statement of the Case  
 
On July 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).1 In an August 5, 2015, answer 
to the SOR, Applicant responded to the allegations with comments. He also requested a 
determination based on the written record. On August 28, 2015, the Government issued 
a File of Relevant Material (FORM) with seven attachments (“Items”). Applicant timely 
responded to the FORM. The case was assigned to me on October 28, 2015. Based on 
my review of the case file and submissions, I find Applicant mitigated financial 
considerations security concerns. 
 
       Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 42-year-old husband and father of two children, whose wife is 
unable to work as an in-home daycare provider due to medical issues. Applicant is a 
site lead who has worked for the same defense contractor since 2010. He earned a high 
                                                          
1 The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
school diploma in 1992, then served honorably in the United States military from 1992 
through 1996. He also served as an active reservist in the military from 2002 through 
2010, when he was converted to inactive status due to funding cuts.  
 
Applicant wrote that he acquired delinquent debt as the result of his military 
service conversion and a reduction in work pay; unspecified expenses related to both of 
his daughters, a recent high school graduate and a college student, unexpectedly 
becoming pregnant, ceasing their schooling, and returning home; approximately $1,900 
spent toward his wife’s spinal surgery; about $2,700 for expenses related to the 2012 
passing of his mother, and at least $1,200 spent for his father’s 2015 funeral. Around 
the same time in 2015, he received a notable salary raise at work that enabled him to 
start addressing his finances in earnest, which he proceeded to commence that Spring.  
 
At issue in the SOR are 15 delinquent accounts representing approximately 
$15,300.2 Applicant admits all allegations except for the obligation noted at 1.d for $654, 
which the facts indicate is a duplicate of the debt at 1.c. In his response to the SOR, 
Applicant referenced repayment plans and his intentions to investigate debts of which 
he previously had no knowledge. No supporting documentary evidence reflecting such 
plans, payments, or efforts to dispute or investigate accounts, however, were appended. 
Applicant did, however, provide documentary evidence that he requested loan 
assistance from his mortgagor, the debtor noted at SOR allegation 1.a with a past-due 
balance of $3,625 on a total loan of $96,015, which resulted in an offer for a loan 
modification in June 2015. While he attached a copy of the acceptance letter addressed 
to the lender on June 29, 2015, dated before the June 30, 2015, deadline, there is no 
evidence of mailing and no indication as to the amount of the loan offer or its terms.  
 
After receiving the FORM, Applicant forwarded documentation related to most of 
the obligations reflected in the SOR allegations. Regarding the loan noted at SOR 
allegation 1.a, he submitted a substantially completed loan modification package, 
poised for submission on the date of his FORM Response. 
 
Regarding the debt noted at SOR allegation 1.b, for a charged-off auto loan in 
the approximate amount of $6,416, Applicant provided documentary evidence that he 
received an offer to settle the debt for $2,603. Under the offered terms, it was to be paid 
in nine payments over nine months. Applicant provided evidence of two payments 
toward the debt of $289.23 each, from August 2015 and September 2015, respectively.  
 
Applicant noted that he has not yet resolved the medical debts noted at SOR 
allegation 1.c, 1.d, or 1.e. He wrote that he spoke with an unidentified representative of 
the collection agent, but provided no documentary expression of their discussion. 
 
Regarding SOR allegation 1.f, for a $648 collection balance, Applicant provided 
evidence that he accepted and satisfied the debt upon his receipt of an offer to settle 
the balance for $648.49. As for allegation 1.g, another collection effort for $648, 
                                                          
2 It is noted that the medical accounts noted at SOR allegations 1.c and 1.d, each for $654 with account 
numbers 3903600 and 390360, respectively, appear to be duplicates.   
 
 
 
 
3 
Applicant provided documentary evidence of an offer to settle the debt for $570.53, with 
evidence he has made two of the contemplated payments, amounting to $266.24. He 
expected to have the balance satisfied by October 2015. SOR allegation 1.h, for a $565 
collection effort, was made subject to a settlement of about $460, with the first two 
payments, for $100 and $52.22, respectively, paid. It should be satisfied by March 2016. 
 
The several allegations reflected at SOR 1.i-1.o are additional medical debts. As 
noted above with the other medical accounts, Applicant wrote that he made contact with 
the creditors, but that no repayment arrangements have yet been made. He hopes to 
repay these and the other medical debts, amounting to about $2,800, after he satisfies 
his other obligations. He expects to have this completed in 2016.   
 
There is no evidence as to whether Applicant has received financial counseling, 
nor is there evidence regarding a recent pay raise. However, his submitted evidence 
indicates that he has been capable of successfully negotiating with his creditors 
effectively and either devising or agreeing workable repayment schedules.  
 
          Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” All available, 
reliable information about the person should be considered in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. Decisions 
 
 
 
 
4 
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or 
inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information. Section 7 of Executive Order 
10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 
12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive 
information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Under Guideline F, AG ¶ 18 sets forth that the security concern under this 
guideline is that failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to 
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. An individual who 
is financially overextended is at risk of engaging in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
The Government introduced evidence showing Applicant acquired over $15,000 
in delinquent debt, invoking two financial considerations disqualifying conditions:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Five conditions could mitigate these finance-related security concerns:  
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the 
problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control;  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 AG ¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy 
of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 
 
 
5 
           Applicant’s financial distress was precipitated by his conversion from active duty 
reserve service to inactive duty status due to budgetary cuts, and to a reduction in 
salary at work. Unanticipated expenses soon arose when both his daughters 
unexpectedly became pregnant and returned home, when his wife needed spinal 
surgery to address a condition that had prevented her from working, and when 
expenses related to the funerals for both his parents arose. The military conversion and 
reduction in pay occurred in the early 2010s, followed in quick succession by the 
pregnancies, the surgery, and the funerals between 2012 and 2015. At a minimum, the 
surgical expenses and funeral expenses, alone, amounted to about $6,000, not 
including expenses related to his daughters’ lost tuition, housing costs, and medical 
expenses.  
 
        Although there is no documentary evidence indicating Applicant has received 
financial counseling and he has not indicated that he disputes any of the accounts at 
issue except for the duplicate entry at SOR allegation 1.d, there is evidence that his 
recent pay raise has significantly helped him make progress on his debts. His 
documentation shows that he has addressed all the accounts at issue in the SOR, 
except for the medical debts noted at 1.c,1.e, and 1.i-1.o, representing about $2,800 in 
delinquent debt.3 To his credit, he has initiated contact with his medical creditors and 
expects to start paying them when his current repayment plans are completed, which 
should be soon forthcoming. AG ¶ 20(a), AG ¶ 20(c), and AG ¶ 20(d) apply. AG ¶ 20(b) 
only applies in part because there is insufficient information as to how Applicant 
contemporaneously handled his acquisition of debt between 2012 and 2015. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c) sets forth the need to 
utilize a whole-person evaluation. I considered the potentially disqualifying and 
mitigating conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I 
incorporated my comments under the guideline at issue in my whole-person analysis. 
 
Applicant is 42-year-old husband and father of two children, whose wife has back 
issues that, despite surgery, have prevented her from working. He has reliably been 
employed for the same employer since 2010, following high school graduation and 
many years of honorable active duty and reserve military service. Applicant acquired 
delinquent debt as the result of his conversion from active to inactive reserve military 
service, a pay reduction, expenses related to his daughters’ pregnancies, his wife’s 
spinal surgery, and funeral-related expenses for both his parents. In sum, he acquired 
about $15,000 in delinquent debt between about 2012 and early 2015.  
 
                                                          
3 This excludes the duplicate entry shown at SOR allegation 1.d. 
 
 
 
 
6 
In 2015, Applicant received a significant pay raise. With the income, he was able 
to start addressing his delinquent debt, an effort he apparently commenced before 
receiving the July 2015 SOR. To date, he has addressed all non-medical accounts, 
debts amounting to over $12,000 of the approximately $15,000 at issue. His 
documentary evidence shows that he has modified his home loan, settled some 
accounts, negotiated repayment plans, and made notable progress in making payments 
on his repayment plans. He has made contact with his remaining creditors, each related 
to medical accounts, and articulated a plan to address his remaining accounts when he 
finishes his current repayment schedules. He expected to have those completed by 
early 2016, a reasonable goal given the balances and payments at issue. With his plan 
for addressing his delinquent debts successfully implemented and notable progress 
demonstrated, I find that financial considerations security concerns are mitigated.   
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.o:   For Applicant 
 
             Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                   
_____________________________ 
Arthur E. Marshall, Jr. 
Administrative Judge 
