 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
----------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 15-01200 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 29 and August 11, 2014, Applicant submitted his Electronic 
Questionnaires for Investigations Processing (e-QIP)1. On August 22, 2015, the 
Department of Defense Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
                                                          
1
 Both dates were entered in the signature block on the e-QIP. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 17, 2015. Applicant 
admitted the allegations. Applicant requested his case be decided on the written record 
in lieu of a hearing.  
 
On December 23, 2015, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM), consisting of Items 1 to 5, 
was provided to the Applicant on December 28, 2015. He was given the opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
received the FORM on December 30, 2015.  
 
Applicant filed a Response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed that 
would have expired on January 29, 2016. His Response is dated January 27, 2016. On 
February 3, 2016, Department Counsel indicated that she had no objection to the 
inclusion of Applicant’s Response in the record. The record closed on that date. 
 
 Department Counsel submitted four Items in support of the SOR allegations.  
Item 4 is inadmissible. It will not be considered or cited as evidence in this case. It is the 
summary of an unsworn interview of Applicant conducted by an interviewer from the 
Office of Personnel Management on August 28, 2014. Applicant did not adopt it as his 
own statement, or otherwise certify it to be accurate.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.20, this 
Report of Investigation summary is inadmissible in the absence of an authenticating 
witness. In light of Applicant’s admissions, it is also cumulative. 
 
I received the case assignment on March 29, 2016. Based upon a review of the 
pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the four allegations in Paragraph 1 of the SOR. All the 
allegations alleged family connections to India, Applicant’s country of birth. (Items 1-3, 
5)  
 
 Applicant emigrated from India to the United States in February 1998 when he 
was 24 years old. He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in May 2010. He has had a U.S. 
passport since June 2010. His Indian passport was cancelled in June 2010 after he 
became a U.S. citizen. He works for a defense contractor. (Items 1-3, 5) 
 
 Applicant is married and has two children. They all live in the United States. His 
wife and first child were born in India. His wife is a registered alien and is a citizen of 
India. They have been married since 2009. The second child was born in the United 
States. (Items 1-3, 5) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 Applicant’s two brothers, one sister, father-in-law, and brother-in-law all live in 
India and are citizens of that country. Applicant’s e-QIP states he does not know the 
employer of his oldest brother. His younger brother works for a technology company in 
India. Applicant’s brother-in-law works as a maintenance manager at an Indian 
government research center. Applicant denies having frequent contact with him. 
Applicant’s father-in-law does not work for the Indian government and is retired. He 
visits Applicant for several weeks each year. Applicant has monthly telephone or 
internet contact with his other relatives listed in the SOR. His e-QIP shows trips to India 
every year from 2008 to 2010 for a month at a time. (Items 1-3, 5; Response) 
 
 Applicant’s parents are deceased. His mother-in-law is also deceased. His 
youngest brother is a banker in and a citizen of Australia. (Item 3) 
 
 Applicant owns his home in the United States. He also owns property in India 
that is worth about $80,000 U.S. dollars. He paid about $20,000 for it in 2002. He is 
willing to sell that property that he describes as an apartment. He does not earn any 
money from it. His sister receives the rental income to help support her. She has 
Applicant’s power of attorney for the property. She is a housewife in India. (Items 1-3, 5; 
Response)  
 
     Applicant provided no evidence concerning the quality of his job performance. He 
submitted no character references or other evidence tending to establish good 
judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, 
demeanor, or character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a 
hearing. 
  
Administrative Notice 
 
 Applicant has contacts with India. Accordingly, it is appropriate to discuss the 
current situation concerning India and the United States. India is the most populous 
democracy in the world. There have been incidences in the past when parties in the 
United States attempted to illegally export military or dual-use technologies to India, 
such as night vision equipment and missile components. There have been numerous 
and recent criminal cases concerning export enforcement, economic espionage, theft of 
trade secrets, and embargo-related criminal prosecutions involving the government of 
India, private companies, and individuals. Finally there are concerns with widespread 
human rights problems, and terrorist activity, particularly in northwest India.  
 
 India and Pakistan have been locked in a tense rivalry since the partition of the 
subcontinent after the end of British rule in 1947. These two countries have engaged in 
three wars since 1947 over Kashmir and Jammu, both Indian states. The U.S. State 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Department strongly recommends avoiding travel in these areas by U.S. citizens.  
 
 India continues to experience terrorist and insurgent activities that may affect 
U.S. citizens. Six Americans were killed in the November 2008 attack in Mumbai. 
Attacks in 2012 and 2013 show India remains a target for these groups.  
 
 The U.S. State Department in a 2013 report stated there are significant human 
rights problems in India with police and security force abuses, corruption in all levels of 
the government, and various types of violence. Discrimination and violence against 
women remain a serious problem.  
 
 India’s relations with Iran have been positive in years past. It has a lenient stance 
on Iran which has caused friction between India and the United States. India has long 
been a military customer of the Soviet Union in the past and of Russia currently. 
  
 In 2015 the United States and India signed a “Declaration of Friendship” because 
India is growing as a trade partner with the U.S. The two countries are to cooperate on 
energy, defense, and homeland security. (Item 4) 
  
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge=s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the Awhole-person concept.@ The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
According to Directive & E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to 
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, an 
“applicant is responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, 
extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, 
and has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance 
decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes nine conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Four conditions may be applicable: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 Applicant has contact with his oldest and younger brothers, father-in-law, and 
sister on a frequent basis. His brother-in-law has infrequent contact with Applicant. 
However, there is family contact. Therefore, AG ¶ 7 (a) applies.  
 
 Applicant has familial connections to his siblings and his wife’s family in India. His 
brother-in-law works as a maintenance manager at an Indian government research 
facility. These situations create the potential for a conflict of interest between Applicant’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and his possible desire to assist 
his Indian relatives by providing that information. AG ¶ 7 (b) is established.  
 
 Applicant lives with his family in the United States, including his wife and first-
born child who were born in India and are citizens of that country. Therefore, he shares 
living quarters with persons who might create a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, or coercion. AG ¶ 7 (d) is established. 
 
 Finally, Applicant owns property in India currently worth about $80,000 that he 
bought in 2002 for $20,000. This property he owns, and that is managed by his sister for 
her economic benefit, places Applicant at a heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. AG ¶ 7 (e) is established.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
AG ¶ 8 provides six conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Three 
conditions may apply: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property  
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
  
 Applicant has lived in the United States since immigrating in 1998. He became a 
U.S. citizen in May 2010. He owns a home in the United States. His contact with his 
siblings and in-laws is monthly. They have positions in India that will not raise a 
possibility that he would be placed in the position of having to choose between his 
relatives’ interests and those of the United States. Applicant’s connections to the United 
States after 18 years are stronger than his familial ties to India. Applicant can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States based on his 
work history as shown in the e-QIP during the past 18 years. AG ¶ 8 (a) and (b) are 
established.  
 
 Applicant owns property in India. His only sister manages the property for him 
and uses the income to support herself and her family. The value of the property has 
increased from $20,000 in 2002 to about $80,000 in 2016. Applicant does not benefit 
financially from this investment. His Response declared his willingness to sell this 
property on his next visit to India if that would be the “right” course of action regarding 
his security clearance. The value of this apartment is such that it is routine and not 
actively controlled or managed by him. His sister has effective control of the property to 
manage it and receive any income from it. This apartment and its value are unlikely to 
result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or 
pressure the individual because of its value and his arm’s length control and his lack of 
any economic benefit from the property. AG ¶ 8 (f) is established.  
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
Although this case pertains to Guideline B, the security concerns do not arise 
from any questionable conduct by Applicant, but rather circumstances that warrant 
further analysis. First, there is a significant risk of various human rights abuses in India. 
Industrial espionage is a serious concern also. Persons interested in gaining such 
information could attempt to use Applicant’s siblings and in-laws to obtain such 
information. Second, he had numerous connections to India before he immigrated to the 
United States in 1998. Following his birth, he spent his formative years there. He was 
educated at an Indian university. Third, his three siblings, and in-laws, remain residents 
and citizens of India.  Fourth, he has some contact with these family members on a 
monthly basis. Fifth, he owns an $80,000 apartment in India to which his sister has 
power of attorney and derives the income from its rental.  
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs in favor of granting Applicant a security 
clearance. He is a mature person, who has lived in the United States for 18 years, and 
has been a naturalized citizen for six years. His spouse has been living in the United 
States since 2009 and is a registered alien. His second son was born in the United 
States. His wife and oldest son were born in India. He owns a home here. His Indian 
apartment he stated he would sell on his next trip to India if it would help reduce security 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
concerns. Out of his sense of patriotism and love for the United States, he obtained a 
job with a defense contractor. There is no evidence that he has ever taken any action 
that could cause potential harm to the United States. There is no derogatory information 
about him in the record.  
 
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole-person, I conclude Applicant mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to foreign influence. Overall, the record evidence leaves 
me without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the foreign influence 
security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or substantial doubts 
as to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, 
I conclude Applicant did mitigate the security concerns under the guideline for foreign 
influence. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
          Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
