 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
     ------------------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 15-00425 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ross Hyams, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
On July 27, 2012, Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On July 29, 2015, the Department of Defense 
Consolidated Adjudications Facility (DODCAF) issued Applicant a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines C (Foreign Preference) 
and B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on August 13, 2015. He answered 
the SOR in writing on August 17, 2015, and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on September 30, 
2015, and I received the case assignment on October 20, 2015. DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing on October 21, 2015, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on 
 
2 
 
 
November 4, 2015. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 5, which were received 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through E, without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on November 16, 2015. 
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Notice 
 
At the hearing, Department Counsel disclosed he spoke with Applicant on 
October 20, 2015, about a hearing date. The Notice of Hearing was sent on October 21, 
2015. I advised Applicant of his right under ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive to 15 days notice 
before the hearing. Applicant affirmatively waived his right to 15 days notice. (Tr. 7)  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iran. (Tr. 8, 13, 14) The request and the attached documents 
were admitted into evidence as Exhibit 5 and were included in the record. Applicant had 
no objection to these documents. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the 
Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶ 1 and ¶ 
2, of the SOR, with explanations. He also provided additional information to support his 
request for eligibility for a security clearance.   
 
Applicant is 49 years old. He is married since 1994 and has two sons. His wife 
and sons were born in the United States. Applicant was also born in the United States. 
He has a master’s degree in mechanical engineering. He is self-employed as a 
consultant for defense contractors. (Tr. 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 41) 
 
Applicant’s father is an 81-year-old Iranian pathologist who lives and works in 
Iran. His mother is a French citizen who lives in France and is 76 years old. She works 
as a translator. She may sell her house in France and move to the United States where 
she is a naturalized U.S. citizen. He expected to bring her to the United States in 
December 2015. His mother also owns two rental properties she may sell. His parents 
are divorced since 1969. (Tr. 18, 19, 20, 22, 25, 35, 39, 41, 46, 52) 
 
Applicant lived with his mother and brother in France from 1969 to 1972. They 
moved back to Iran in 1972, and departed again in 1976 and returned to France. In 
1982 Applicant and his mother moved to New York. In 1985 Applicant went to college in 
the U.S. (Tr. 41, 42)  
 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant testified his father in Iran is retired and does not work for the Iranian 
government. He works a few days each week at a private medical testing lab as a 
pathologist. Neither man travels to visit each other because of the difficulty of an 81-
year-old man traveling and Applicant’s reluctance to travel to Iran. Applicant speaks with 
his father monthly on the telephone, though there are periods when they do not speak 
for several months. In years past Applicant met his father overseas. He met him in 
France in 2002, 2009, and 2011. They met in Turkey in 2008 and 2012. Applicant saw 
his father twice between 1979 and 1985, twice more between 1985 and 1994. Finally, 
he saw his father one more time before 2002. Applicant testified he will not receive an 
inheritance from his father, particularly of any property in Iran. (Tr. 19, 32, 33, 35, 36) 
 
Applicant has two half-brothers living in the United States. They are the sons of 
his father’s second marriage after Applicant’s mother divorced his father. One is an 
architect and has a resident alien “green card.” He is about 40 years old. The other half-
brother is a U.S. citizen and is about 42 years old. Applicant speaks with him about 
once a year. These siblings have not traveled to Iran in at least 15 years. Applicant also 
has a brother in the United States who is a U.S. citizen and was born when his parents 
were married. (Tr. 18, 19, 20, 22, 25, 31, 32, 39, 41; Exhibit 2) 
 
Applicant is a dual U.S. and French citizen, based on his mother’s French 
citizenship and he being born in the United States. Applicant has a United States 
passport issued in 1984, another one issued in 1996, and a third U.S. passport issued 
in 2006. Applicant had a French passport issued in 1988 and in 1998. He does not have 
one now. He has worked for U.S. companies in his career in the United States. 
Applicant retained his French citizenship because of French law regarding inheritance 
by non-French citizens being complicated. He stated he maintains French citizenship as 
a family obligation. However, he has no intention of retaining his French citizenship 
because he does not use it. When his mother moves to the United States with her 
assets converted to cash he will not have the French inheritance issue, and can inherit 
according to U.S. state law. (Tr. 16, 20, 21, 25-27, 45, 48; Exhibit 2, 4; Exhibits A to E) 
 
Applicant voted in the second round of the French presidential elections in 2002 
when he visited Toronto, Canada. He did so at his mother’s request because she feared 
the right-wing presidential candidate in France might win the election. His mother asked 
him to vote to defeat that candidate. The other presidential candidate did win in that 
election. That was the only time Applicant voted in a French election. Applicant stated 
he voted in every U.S. election for which he is eligible. (Tr. 20, 21, 27; Exhibit 3) 
 
Applicant had a security clearance in 1989 until 1997. He had an interim security 
clearance for a year in 2005 when working for a defense contractor. (Tr. 24) 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts relating to Iran: 
 
Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in 
which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures, and ultimate political 
 
4 
 
 
authority is vested in a learned religious scholar. The U.S. has not had diplomatic 
relations with Iran since 1980.  
 
The U.S. Government has defined the areas of objectionable Iranian behavior as: 
(1) Iran’s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction; 
(2) Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; (3) Its support for violent 
opposition to the Middle East peace process; (4) Its dismal human rights record; (5) 
Iran’s intervention in the internal affairs of Iraq and Syria; and (6) cyber espionage. The 
U.S. has designated and characterized Iran as the most active state sponsor of 
terrorism. Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups. 
 
The government of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses 
against the Iranian people. Abuses include political killings and incarceration; summary 
executions, including of minors; disappearances; religious persecution; torture; arbitrary 
arrest and detention, including prolonged solitary confinement; denial of due process; 
severe restrictions on civil liberties - speech, press, assembly, association, movement 
and privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of religion; official corruption; violence and 
legal and societal discrimination against women, ethnic and religious minorities, and 
homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and child labor. 
 
The State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens to consider carefully the 
risks of travel to Iran. U.S. citizens, who were born in Iran and are the children of Iranian 
citizens, even those without Iranian passports who do not consider themselves Iranian, 
are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Therefore, despite the fact that these individuals hold U.S. citizenship, under 
Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport, unless the Iranian 
government has recognized a formal renunciation or loss of Iranian citizenship. U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals have been denied permission to enter and depart Iran using their 
U.S. passports; they even have had their U.S. passports confiscated upon arrival or 
departure. U.S.-Iranian dual citizens have been detained and harassed by the Iranian 
government. Iranian security personnel may place foreign visitors under surveillance. 
Hotel rooms, telephones and fax machines may be monitored, and personal 
possessions in hotel rooms be searched. (Exhibit 5) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process (AG ¶ 2(a)). The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
 
5 
 
 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “When an 
individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the 
United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions 
that are harmful to the interests of the United States.” 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
AG ¶ 10 describes four conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying. Two conditions may apply: 
 
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family 
member. This includes but is not limited to: 
 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial. or business 
interests in another country; and 
 
(7) voting in a foreign election. 
 
Applicant has dual U.S. and French citizenship based on his mother’s French 
citizenship, and his being born in the United States. He retained French citizenship in 
case he needed to use it to obtain his mother’s assets from France in case of her death 
or to assist her in moving her money from France to the United States when she sold 
her real estate in France and moved to the United States. AG ¶ 10 (a) (5) applies.  
 
Applicant voted in the second round of the French presidential election in 2002 at 
his mother’s request. She was concerned a candidate she did not favor might win and 
wanted her son’s support to elect that man’s opponent. AG ¶ 10 (a) (7) applies.  
 
AG ¶ 11 provides six conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Three 
conditions apply: 
 
(a) dual citizenship is based solely on parents' citizenship or birth in a 
foreign country; 
 
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship; and 
 
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant 
security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
 
 Applicant’s dual citizenship is based on his mother’s French citizenship. 
Applicant was born in the United States and that event is the source of his U.S. 
citizenship. AG ¶ 11 (a) is established.  
 
 Applicant testified at the hearing he would renounce his French citizenship 
because he has no use for it. He has not had a French passport since the last one was 
issued in 1998. That passport is now invalid because of the passage of time. AG ¶ 11 
(b) and (e) are established.  
 
 Voting in the French 2002 presidential election is mitigated by the passage of 
time and it being a one-time occurrence. There is no other basis on which to assess this 
disqualifying condition. It was not frequent or recent.  
 
7 
 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes nine conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. Two conditions may apply: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
 Applicant’s father is an Iranian citizen and resident. His mother is a French and 
U.S. citizen who lives in France. Applicant has more frequent contact with his mother. 
He last saw his father in 2012 in Turkey. Applicant has not been to Iran since he was 
last there in 1976 when he was 10 years old. His elderly father does not travel much 
anymore. Contact with anyone in Iran could create a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion because of the nature of 
the Iranian government and theocracy, about which the U.S. government has many 
security, human rights, and political concerns. AG ¶ 7 (a) is established.  
 
 For the same reasons Applicant’s connections to his father, however infrequent, 
create a potential conflict of interest between Applicant’s obligation to protect sensitive 
information or technology and his desire to help his father by providing that information 
if his father is pressured by the Iranian government to obtain such information as part of 
their industrial espionage program against the United States. Applicant also has a half-
brother with Iranian citizenship who lives in the U.S. and has a resident alien card. AG ¶ 
7 (b) is established based on the historical concerns of the United States about Iran and 
its government.   
 
 
8 
 
 
AG ¶ 8 provides six conditions that could mitigate security concerns. Three 
conditions may apply: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or      
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
  
AG ¶ 8 (a) applies to his father and his half-brother and their connections to 
Applicant. Applicant’s father is 81-years-old and semi-retired as a pathologist in Iran. He 
has no connections with the Iranian government. He works in a private medical testing 
lab. Applicant last saw him in 2012 in Turkey. He speaks with him by telephone several 
times a year but has no further contact with him.  
 
There is no conflict of interest because Applicant lives and works in the United 
States and has since 1976. He was educated here, married here, and his two sons 
were born in the United States. Applicant has deep and longstanding relationships and 
loyalties to the United States, and it is quite clear he would resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the United States. AG ¶ 8 (b) is established. 
 
Finally, there are no property or inheritance issues relating to Applicant’s father in 
Iran, according to his testimony. Any inheritance from his French-born mother will be 
received in the United States when she relocates here from France, which Applicant 
expected to be in late 2015. That property would be split with his brother from that 
marriage between his mother and father that was ended in 1969. The assets would 
most likely be invested in the United States and not have any involvement with French 
law. AG ¶ 8 (f) is established.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
 
9 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 AG ¶ 2(c) requires each case must be judged on its own merits.  Under AG ¶ 
2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 49-years-old and lives in 
the United States. His immediate family lives here. They were born in the United States. 
His parents are 81 and 76 years old. His father lives in Iran and is in the private medical 
profession. His mother is a translator who is about to sell her property assets in France 
and move to the United States where she can be closer to her two sons. Applicant’s 
situation arises from family history and circumstances. Only his French passports in the 
past, and his one vote in a French presidential election 14 years ago in 2002, raise any 
immediate concerns. They are mitigated. Applicant is willing to renounce his French 
citizenship because it is of no use to him. He only votes in U.S. elections. All the 
security concerns are resolved.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his Foreign Preference 
and Foreign Influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
