 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 14-05240 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not mitigate the drug involvement and criminal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 18, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guidelines H (drug 
involvement) and J (criminal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; DOD Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) implemented by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on June 8, 2015, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government’s written case was 
submitted on October 31, 2015. A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) 
was provided to Applicant, who was afforded an opportunity to file objections and 
submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns. Applicant 
 
2 
 
received the FORM on November 13, 2015. He responded with a letter and court 
documents that I have marked Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B. The case was 
assigned to me on March 2, 2016. The Government exhibits included in the FORM and 
AE A and B are admitted without objection.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 40-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since February 2014. He is a high school graduate. He is single 
with two children, ages 18 and 10.1   
 
 Applicant has a history of drug abuse and criminal conduct dating back to the late 
1990s. He smoked marijuana about twice a week from about 1998 to September 2011. 
He used methamphetamine about twice a week from about 2004 to September 2011. 
He purchased marijuana and methamphetamine during those periods.2 
 
 Applicant’s criminal arrests were primarily related to drugs, domestic violence, 
and failure to appear at his court dates. There is also an arrest for burglary, as 
discussed below.3 
 
 Applicant was arrested in 1999 and charged with unlawful possession of drug 
paraphernalia and being under the influence of a controlled substance. The charges 
were dismissed.4 
 
 Applicant was arrested in December 2003 and charged with battery-domestic 
violence. The charge was dismissed.5 
 
 Applicant was charged in March 2004 with battery-domestic violence. He 
pleaded guilty in May 2004. He was sentenced to 2 days in jail, 48 hours of community 
service, 6 months of domestic-violence counseling, and a fine. A bench warrant was 
issued in August 2004, because Applicant did not complete the sentence requirements. 
He was arraigned on the matter in March 2005, and the case was continued to enable 
him to complete the requirements.6 
 
 Applicant was arrested in July 2004 and charged with burglary, a felony. He was 
issued a citation for unlawful possession of drug paraphernalia. He pleaded guilty to the 
lesser misdemeanor charges of petit larceny and trespassing. The drug paraphernalia 
                                                          
1 Item 2.  
 
2 Items 1-4.  
 
3 Items 1-4.  
 
4 Items 1, 3, 4; AE B.  
 
5 Items 1, 3, 4; AE B.  
 
6 Items 1, 3, 4; AE B.  
 
3 
 
citation was dismissed. He was sentenced to 25 days in jail, with credit for time served. 
Applicant stated during his background investigation that he did not commit the crimes, 
and he pleaded guilty in order to get out of jail on time served.7 
 
 Applicant was issued a citation in July 2007 for unlawful possession of drug 
paraphernalia. He pleaded guilty in August 2007. He was sentenced to a $500 fine.8 
 
 Applicant was charged in 2007 with three counts of battery-domestic violence. A 
bench warrant was issued. Applicant was arrested on the bench warrant in 2011. In 
September 2011, he pleaded guilty to one count of battery-domestic violence, and the 
remaining two counts were dismissed. He was sentenced to six months in jail.9 
 
 Applicant denied any illegal drug use or criminal activity after his September 
2011 conviction. He disclosed his drug use and criminal history on his Questionnaire for 
National Security Positions (SF 86), which he submitted in February 2014. He wrote: “I 
was young and stupid when using and have learned my lesson from encounters with 
the law. I do not intend to ever use again.” He discussed his drug use and criminal 
record when he was interviewed for his background investigation in April 2014. He 
noted that all his arrests occurred when he was under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
He stated that he no longer used drugs or alcohol. He wrote in his response to the SOR: 
“I have learned from my mistakes and plan to stay on the right side of the law . . . now, 
and in the future.”10  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
                                                          
7 Items 1, 3, 4; AE B.  
 
8 Items 1, 3, 4; AE B.  
 
9 Items 1, 3, 4; AE B.  
 
10 Items 2-4.  
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guidelines H (Drug Involvement) and J (Criminal Conduct) 
 
 The security concerns for drug involvement and criminal conduct are set out in 
AG ¶¶ 24 and 30:   
  
24. The Concern. Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, 
both because it may impair judgment and because it raises questions 
about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
30. The Concern. Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into 
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and 
regulations. 
 
 The guidelines note conditions that could raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 
25 and 31. The disqualifying conditions potentially applicable in this case include:   
 
 
5 
 
 25(a) any drug abuse;11  
 
25(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug 
paraphernalia; 
 
 31(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
31(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether 
the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 Applicant has multiple arrests and convictions. He possessed and used illegal 
drugs for more than ten years. The above disqualifying conditions are applicable.  
 
 SOR ¶¶ 2.d, 2.f, 2.g, 2.j, and 2.k allege conduct that duplicates conduct alleged 
in other allegations. Those allegations are concluded for Applicant. 
 
 AG ¶¶ 26 and 32 provide conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The 
following are potentially applicable:  
 
26(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
 
 26(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
 
  (1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;  
 
  (2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
  (3) an appropriate period of abstinence;  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
32(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or 
it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; and 
 
32(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not 
limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment 
record, or constructive community involvement. 
 
                                                          
11 Drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.  
 
6 
 
 Applicant has not used any illegal drugs and there is no evidence of any other 
criminal activities since his 2011 conviction. His employment with a defense contractor 
is a sign of rehabilitation. He is credited with divulging his actions on the SF 86 and 
during his background interview. However, the length and volume of his criminal 
conduct, which includes more than ten years of illegal drug use, leave me with doubt as 
to whether Applicant is ready to be entrusted with access to classified information. I am 
required to resolve that doubt in favor of national security. I find that drug involvement 
and criminal conduct security concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines H and J in this whole-person analysis.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant did not 
mitigate the drug involvement and criminal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   Against Applicant 
   
 
 
7 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.f-2.g:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.h-2.i:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 2.j-2.k:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
