1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ADP Case No. 06-20216
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
                                                                            
March 12, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On August 13, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the trustworthiness concerns under
Guideline F for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1990), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); Department of
Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as
amended (Regulation); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on September 1, 2008, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was originally set for
hearing before another Administrative Judge on December 5, 2008, but because of a
potential conflict of interest, it was reassigned to me on December 12, 2008. DOHA
issued a second notice of hearing on December 16, 2008, and I convened the hearing
as scheduled on January 27, 2009, in Sacramento, California. The Government offered
2
Exhibits 1 through 10, which were received without objection.  Applicant testified on her
own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through C, which were admitted without objection.
Her fiancee also testified on her behalf. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on February 4, 2009. Upon a
request by Applicant, I allowed the record to remain open until February 27, 2009, so
that Applicant could offer documentation to show that her debts were discharged in
bankruptcy. An additional document was timely received and has been identified and
entered into evidence as Exhibit D, but it only was an indication of the opinion of
Applicant’s attorney regarding the status of the bankruptcy. Nothing definitive
concerning the bankruptcy status was offered. The record also was open to allow
Applicant to offer positive character letters or employment evaluations, but none were
received. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony,
eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.
Findings of Fact
In the SOR, the Government alleges concern under Adjudicative Guideline F
(Financial Considerations) of the Directive. The SOR contains 14 allegations, 1.a.,
through 1.n., of overdue debt under Guideline F.  After a complete and thorough review
of the evidence in the record, including Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and
the live testimony, and upon due consideration of that evidence, I make the following
findings of fact: 
Applicant is 52 years old. She is currently separated from her husband, and she
has three daughters. She received a Bachelor of Science Degree in Accounting.
Applicant is an Internal Auditor for a defense contractor, who seeks an ADP-I/II/III
position on behalf of the Applicant.  
In her RSOR, Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. She testified that
while these debts are now owed, she believes they will be discharged in bankruptcy.
The admitted allegations are incorporated herein as findings of fact, and they will be
reviewed in the same order as they were listed in the SOR: 
1.a. This overdue debt to Creditor 1 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $2,343. 
1.b. This overdue debt to Creditor 2 is cited in the SOR in the amount of
$12,972. 
1.c. This overdue debt to Creditor 3 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $51. 
1.d. This overdue debt to Creditor 4 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $202. 
1.e. This overdue debt to Creditor 5 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $671. 
1.f. This overdue debt to Creditor 6 is cited in the SOR in the amount of
$3,296.36.
3
1.g. This overdue debt to Creditor 7 is cited in the SOR in the amount of
$1,501.07.
1.h. This overdue debt to Creditor 8 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $849. 
1.i. This overdue debt to Creditor 9 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $97. 
1.j. This overdue debt to Creditor 10 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $256. 
1.k. This overdue debt to Creditor 11 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $698. 
1.l. This overdue debt to Creditor 12 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $3,149.
1.m. This overdue debt to Creditor 13 is cited in the SOR in the amount of
$1,029.24. 
1.n. This overdue debt to Creditor 14 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $110. 
Applicant testified that in 2006, she consulted with a debt counselor and then
she consulted with an attorney in 2007. They both recommended to her that based on
the size of her debt and her income that her best course of action was to file for
bankruptcy. She finally filed the Petition for Bankruptcy on December 3, 2008 (Exhibits
A and B), showing the amount of claims from unsecured creditors in the amount of
$64,315, and indicating that there would be a meeting of creditors on January 6, 2009.
Exhibit C established that February 6, 2009, was the last date for any creditor to file an
objection. 
The post hearing document offered by Applicant is an email from Applicant’s
bankruptcy attorney to her (Exhibit D), indicating that he anticipated that the Bankruptcy
Court should issue her discharge after March 9, 2009, and while he did not anticipate
any issues, it was possible that a creditor could raise one.  The list of creditors on the
Bankruptcy Petition does not correspond completely to the list of debts on the SOR, but
it appears that all or most of the SOR debts would be resolved if they are discharged in
bankruptcy. However, as indicated above, even though the record was kept open until
February 27, 2009, no definitive evidence was introduced to show that these debts
have been discharged in bankruptcy. 
Applicant testified that even if all of the debts listed in the bankruptcy are
discharged, she still has some additional debts. These include approximately $22,000
for her student loans, $5,000 for a new student loan for her daughter, which she will
start owing in September 2009, and $14,000 for a car loan for a vehicle that she
purchased in 2008, and for which she pays $363 a month. All of these debts are3 being
resolved responsibly. 
Applicant contended during her testimony that her primary financial problems
occurred during the years between 2003 and 2005, when she was unemployed or
underemployed. However, in her responses to interrogatories on November 22, 2007,
4
(Exhibit 3), she stated that the majority of her debt was incurred from 4 to 10 years
before her response, or from 1997 to 2003. 
Applicant’s fiancee testified that he and Applicant plan to marry after the
bankruptcy is filed and she can divorce her current husband, from whom she has been
long separated. He believes that Applicant can handle her finances now and will not be
in financial trouble in the future.  
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel
are afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the
Administrative Judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable
trustworthiness decision. 
5
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
sensitive information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations
is set out in AG & 18:  
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise trustworthiness concerns.
Disqualifying Condition (DC) 19 (a), an Inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is
potentially disqualifying. Similarly (c), a history of not meeting financial obligations may
raise security concerns. Applicant accumulated significant delinquent debt and was
unable to pay some obligations for a period of time. The evidence is sufficient to raise
these potentially disqualifying conditions, requiring a closer examination.
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate
trustworthiness concerns arising from financial difficulties.
Under Mitigating Condition 20 (b), it may be mitigating where the conditions that
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. As noted
above, most of the financial problems arose from Applicant’s loss of employment and
underemployment.  Applicant  acted responsibly in continuing to take care of her minor
6
daughter and more recently identifying and attempting to resolve these debts. I find this
potentially mitigating condition is a factor for consideration in this case. 
Similarly, MC 20 (d) applies where the evidence shows the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to resolve debts. Applicant has been attempting to resolve all the
delinquent debts, through bankruptcy, and based on the court documents and the
representation from the attorney for Applicant, the bankruptcy appears to be in the final
stages. She is now more financially sound and better prepared for future contingencies.
I conclude these potentially mitigating conditions apply.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  Applicant’s financial problems
largely resulted because she was a single parent for a number of years with a limited
income, and she accumulated debt due to circumstances largely beyond her control.
Significantly, she has taken affirmative action to resolve her delinquent debts.
Overall, the record evidence is favorable as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability
for a public trust position under the whole person concept. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the trustworthiness concerns arising from her financial
considerations. 
7
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.k.: For  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.l.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.m.: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.n.: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is granted.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
