 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 08-03428 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Jonathan Bell, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines B (Foreign 
Influence) and E (Personal Conduct). Eligibility for access to classified information is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on July 16, 2007. On 
May 11, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified him that it 
was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
access to classified information, and it recommended that his case be submitted to an 
administrative judge for a determination whether to grant or deny his application. DOHA 
set forth the basis for its action in a Statement of Reasons (SOR), citing security 
concerns under Guidelines B and E. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on May 21, 2012; answered it on May 24, 2012; 
supplemented his answer on July 25, 2012; and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 1, 2012, 
and the case was assigned to me on September 7, 2012. The hearing was tentatively 
scheduled for the week of October 9-12, 2012, but it was postponed because of 
Applicant’s attorney’s scheduling conflicts. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 
1, 2012, scheduling it to be conducted by video teleconference on October 22, 2012. I 
convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were 
admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified and requested that the record 
be kept open to enable him to present two documents in addition to the documents 
appended to his answer to the SOR. I kept the record open until October 24, 2012, and 
he timely submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A and B, which were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on November 1, 2012. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of relevant facts 
about Bangladesh. The request and the documents attached as enclosures to the 
request are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibit I. Applicant did not object, and I 
granted Department Counsel’s request. Applicant also requested that I take 
administrative notice of the facts recited in a U.S. Government document attached to his 
answer to the SOR, and I granted his request. (Tr. 13-14.) The facts administratively 
noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶ 1.b and 
denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 2.a, and 2.b. His admissions in his 
answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old security officer employed by a federal contractor since 
May 2001. He has held a security clearance since April 2003. 
 
 Applicant was born in Bangladesh. He completed college in June 1975, with a 
bachelor’s degree in commerce. After graduating, he lived about 300 miles away from 
his family. He worked as a receptionist at the front desk of a hotel, was promoted to 
night auditor after three years, and then was made a supervisor. He worked at the hotel 
until early 1985, when he decided to move to the United States in search of a better life. 
(Tr. 23-24.) He flew to Mexico with a tour group and then traveled by ship to the United 
States, where he entered legally as a tourist, but without disclosing his intention to 
remain permanently in the United States. He contacted his brother, who already resided 
in the United States, and worked “off the books” at various jobs. In June 1985, he 
moved to a farm that hired illegal aliens and worked as a clerk and bookkeeper. He 
returned to his brother’s home in October 1985 and worked in a grocery store and as a 
laborer. He obtained a work permit in November 1988, pursuant to an amnesty program 
for illegal aliens. He began working at various security officer positions in June 1988. He 
 
3 
 
 
became a U.S. citizen in August 1996. He began his current job in May 2001. (GX 2 at 
1-6.) 
 
 Applicant married in October 1991. His wife, a native of Bangladesh, came to the 
United States in 1995 and became a U.S. citizen in 2002. Their 16-year-old son is a 
native-born U.S. citizen. (GX 1 at 14-18; Supplemental Answer to SOR at 3-4.) 
 
 Applicant took no sick leave or vacation time from 2005 to 2011, because he was 
saving his money to buy a home. He bought a home for $170,000 in December 2011. 
(Tr. 38-39.) 
 
 Applicant’s parents are deceased. His father passed away in 1985. (Tr. 24.) His 
mother became seriously ill in 2003 and passed away in April 2009.  
 
 Applicant has four brothers and four sisters. He is the oldest of the male siblings, 
and older than three of his four sisters. The SOR alleges foreign influence concerns 
raised by the citizenship and location of his siblings. The table below summarizes the 
information about Applicant’s siblings. 
 
Sibling Citizenship/ 
Residence 
Occupation Spouse 
Occupation 
Frequency  
of Contact 
Evidence 
Brother #1 United  
States 
Cab Driver Housewife 
(U.S. citizen)
Monthly by 
telephone; in 
person every 2-
3 months 
GX 3 at 12-
13; Answer 
Brother #2 Bangladesh Bank clerk 
 
Housewife Monthly; sends 
annual gift 
GX 3 at 14; 
Answer 
Brother #3 Bangladesh Hotel 
marketing 
Housewife None since April 
2009 
GX 3 at 26 
Brother #4 Bangladesh Food/drink 
distributor 
Bank officer None since April 
2009 
GX 3 at 27 
Sister #1 United 
Kingdom 
Housewife Restaurant 
Owner 
(U.K. citizen)
Monthly GX 3 at 14-
15 
Sister #2 Bangladesh Housewife Retired 
teacher 
None since April 
2009 
GX 3 at 25 
Sister #3 Bangladesh Housewife Police 
inspector 
None since April 
2009 
GX 3 at 26 
Sister #4 Bangladesh Housewife Bank officer None since April 
2009 
GX 3 at 26 
 
 Brother #1 came to the United States in early 1985, before Applicant’s arrival, 
and Applicant lived with him for about 20 years. This brother became a U.S. citizen in 
September 2009. (GX 3 at 12-13; Supplemental Answer to SOR at 12-13.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
 Brother #2 manages the family agricultural property and works as a clerk in a 
bank that provides loans to farmers. In a sworn statement in November 2009, Applicant 
stated that his brother was employed by a government-owned bank, but in his 
supplemental answer to the SOR he denied that the bank is owned by the government. 
At the hearing, he testified he “doesn’t think” the bank is owned by the government. 
Applicant has telephone contact with Brother #2 about once a month and personal 
contact every three or four months. He sends Brother #2 an annual gift of about $300. 
(GX 3 at 14; Supplemental Answer to SOR at 10; Tr. 52, 63-64.) 
 
 Applicant speaks to Sister #1 about once a month. (GX 3 at 14-15.) He had no 
contact with Brother #3, Brother #4, or his other sisters until his mother’s death in 2009. 
When Applicant’s mother died, his wife telephoned each of his siblings and suggested 
that he “say something.” He briefly spoke to each sibling, asking them to pray for their 
mother. He has had no contact with Brother #3, Brother #4, or his three sisters in 
Bangladesh since April 2009. (GX 3 at 25-26; Tr. 66-68, 85-86.) 
  
Applicant traveled to Bangladesh to visit his wife annually in 1991 through 1994, 
but he had no contact with any of his siblings during these visits. He visited his ailing 
mother and Brother #2 in Bangladesh in 2003 but had no contact with his other siblings. 
(Tr. 42-43.) 
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) in April 2001, as part 
of his in-processing for his current job. He had no previous experience with employment 
by a federal contractor or with the security clearance process. In Section 9, asking him 
to list his relatives and associates, he listed his parents, Brother #1, an extended family 
member who lived with Brother #1, Brother #2, and Sister #1. He listed the full address 
for Brother #1 and Sister #1, but he listed only a post office for his Brother #2. He 
omitted the other siblings who live in Bangladesh. (GX 2.) He testified that he omitted 
five of his siblings because he had only about two hours to complete all his paperwork, 
including the SCA, did not know the whereabouts or dates of birth of his siblings, and 
did not understand the importance of listing all his siblings. At the time he completed 
this SCA, he had no contact with the five siblings he omitted. (Tr. 32-34.) He testified 
that he did not simply list their names, without the other information required on the 
form, because he thought that incomplete information “would be a problem.” (Tr. 82.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he had some information about his family members in a 
notebook that he carried in his back pocket, such as his mother’s maiden name, his 
naturalization certificate number, and his sister’s telephone number in the United 
Kingdom. He attempted to call Brother #1 to obtain additional information, but could not 
reach him. He was able to call his wife and obtain her personal information. (Tr. 74-79.)  
 
 Applicant completed another SCA in July 2007, seeking to continue his 
clearance. In Section 15, asking him to his relatives and associates, he listed his 
parents and the same three siblings that he listed on his previous SCA. He did not list 
his other siblings who are citizens and residents of Bangladesh. (GX 1.) 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by a security investigator in November 2007, and he 
verified the information regarding the family members that he listed on his July 2007 
SCA. He was not asked if he had any family members other than those he listed on his 
SCA. (Tr. 48.)  
 
Applicant was interviewed again in November 2009. He testified that the 
interview was triggered because his background investigation revealed a second home 
address and a second job in his name. He told the investigator that he noticed several 
suspicious entries on his credit report, challenged them with the credit reporting 
agencies, and reported the apparent identity theft to the police. This investigator also 
verified the information Applicant had provided regarding the siblings listed on his July 
2007 SCA. Applicant realized after the detailed questioning in November 2009 about his 
childhood and family history that he should have listed all his siblings on his SCA. When 
he mentioned his concern about the omitted information to his wife, she suggested that 
Brother #1 might be able to provide the information. (GX 2 at 24-25; AX B; Tr. 48-51, 
89.) 
 
 On the following day, Applicant contacted the security investigator and informed 
him that he wanted to add the information about his other siblings to his investigative 
file. He provided information about all eight siblings in a sworn statement dated 
November 20, 2009. (Tr. 51; GX 3 at 25-28.) 
 
 In November 2011, DOHA asked Applicant to verify that the summary of his 
November 2007 interview was accurate. He verified that the summary accurately 
described the interview, but he added the information about the siblings who were not 
discussed during that interview. (GX 4 at 3-12.) 
 
 Applicant’s duties since May 2001 have included protection of senior officials of 
the United States and foreign countries. After the terrorist attacks of September 11, 
2001, he distinguished himself by voluntarily remaining at his duty station for 24 hours 
to protect senior officials and U.S. property. He distinguished himself again in 2003 
during a significant diplomatic event, and during an emergency evacuation of a 
government building in 2007. He was appointed as a Special Deputy U.S. Marshal in 
2007. He has received numerous certificates of appreciation and accolades from 
officials ranging from his immediate superiors to senior government officials. He enjoys 
a reputation for honesty, integrity, and devotion to duty. (Enclosures to Supplemental 
Answer to SOR.)   
 
 Bangladesh is a parliamentary democracy. The president is the chief of state, but 
the post is primarily ceremonial, with the real executive power held by the prime 
minister, who is elected by the legislature every five years. The legislature is a 300-seat 
unicameral body, elected by universal suffrage every five years. The judiciary is a civil 
court system based on the British model. 
 
 Bangladesh is one of the world’s poorest and most densely populated countries. 
Its economy is primarily agricultural. The United States is Bangladesh’s third-largest 
 
6 
 
 
export market. Despite the country’s dysfunctional political system, weak governance, 
and pervasive corruption, Bangladesh has begun competing in the global clothing 
market, exporting significant amounts of garments and knitwear to the United States. 
 
 Bangladesh pursues a moderate foreign policy that relies heavily on multinational 
diplomacy, especially at the United Nations. In recent years, it has played a significant 
role in international peacekeeping activities.  
 
 The United States’ relationship with Bangladesh initially was troubled because of 
strong U.S. ties to Pakistan, but it developed quickly after Bangladesh gained its 
independence from Pakistan in 1971. U.S.-Bangladesh relations now are excellent. In 
May 2012, the United States and Bangladesh signed a partnership agreement, affirming 
their strong bonds of friendship and shared values. The two countries pledged to 
develop deeper and broader people-to-people ties and to further support the exchange 
of information, skills, and technology. 
 
 Bangladesh has experienced significant human rights problems involving killings 
and torture by security forces, societal violence, government discrimination, and life-
threatening prison conditions. Members of the security forces often act with impunity. 
Corruption within security forces and the judiciary is a serious problem. Terrorist and 
extremist groups have targeted the United States and the United Kingdom as “enemies 
of Islam.” Nevertheless, the government has conducted numerous arrests and seizures 
as part of its commitment to counterterrorism. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
7 
 
 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant has one brother who is a citizen of Bangladesh 
and resides in the United States (SOR ¶ 1.a) and three brothers and three sisters who 
are citizens and residents of Bangladesh (SOR ¶ 1.b). It also alleges that one of his 
brothers is employed by a bank owned by the Bangladesh government (SOR ¶ 1.c), 
and one of his sisters is a police inspector in Bangladesh (SOR ¶ 1.d). 
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
 
8 
 
 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Two disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case: 
 
AG ¶ 7(a): contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 AG ¶ 7(b): connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s 
obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing 
that information. 
 
 AG ¶ 7(a) requires substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” The “heightened 
risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a relatively low standard. 
“Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk inherent in having a family 
member living under a foreign government. 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, “even friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the 
United States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national 
security.” ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 
2002). Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United 
States, especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. In considering the nature of 
the government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
 
9 
 
 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 When an applicant’s family ties are at issue, the totality of an applicant’s family 
ties to a foreign country as well as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR 
Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). Applicant has isolated himself from 
his siblings and their families in Bangladesh, except for Brother #2. Nevertheless, his 
family ties in Bangladesh are numerous. Brother #2 has a possible government 
connection at the bank where he works, and Sister #4 is married to a senior police 
official. In addition, there is some likelihood that Applicant’s family members could be 
targeted by radical terrorist groups because of their connection to “enemies of Islam.” 
These factors are sufficient to raise the “heightened risk” required under AG ¶ 7(a) and 
the possibility of a conflict of interest under AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
 Three mitigating conditions under this guideline are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 8(a): the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country 
in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S;  
 
AG ¶ 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s 
sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and  
 
AG ¶ 8(c): contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.   
 
 Bangladesh is a friendly country with a moderate foreign policy and a strong 
commitment to counterterrorism. It has an agricultural and light manufacturing economy 
that is not dependent on sensitive technological information, and there is no evidence 
that it targets the United States for economic or military intelligence. Nevertheless, the 
instability of the Middle East and the activities of anti-U.S. terrorist groups in 
Bangladesh preclude a finding that a possible conflict of interest is unlikely. Thus, I 
conclude that AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. 
 
 On the other hand, Applicant has deep and longstanding ties to the United 
States. He has resided in the United States for 27 years, has been a citizen for 16 
years, and has held a security clearance for 11 years. He is married to a U.S. citizen, 
his son is a native-born U.S. citizen, Brother #1 is a U.S. citizen, and the spouse of 
Brother #1 is a U.S. citizen. Applicant has demonstrated his dedication to duty on 
numerous occasions. He has occasional contact with Brother #2, but no contact with his 
 
10 
 
 
other siblings or their families in Bangladesh. I am satisfied that Applicant would resolve 
any conflict of interest in favor of the United States. Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶ 
8(b) is established. 
 
There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate family 
member in a foreign country are not casual. ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 1, 2002). I am not satisfied that Applicant’s contacts with Brother #2 are “minimal,” 
and he has not rebutted the presumption that those infrequent contacts are not casual. 
However, Applicant has had no contact with his other siblings in Bangladesh since April 
2009. I conclude that AG ¶ 8(c) is not established for Brother #2, but it is established for 
Applicant’s other siblings in Bangladesh. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified a security clearance application in July 
2007 by omitting two brothers and three sisters in response to question 15, asking him 
to list his relatives and associates (SOR ¶ 2.a). It also alleges that he falsified an SCA in 
April 2001 by omitting two brothers and four sisters (SOR ¶ 2.b). The concern under this 
guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. 
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 Applicant deliberately failed to list some of his siblings on his 2001 SCA and 
again on his 2007 SCA. His explanation that he believed that providing partial 
information would be “a problem” is plausible and credible, but it does not refute his 
admissions that he deliberately omitted the information on both SCAs. He weighed the 
option of providing incomplete information about his siblings against the option of 
providing an incomplete listing of his siblings, and chose the second option, not fully 
 
11 
 
 
understanding the importance of the omitted information. I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is 
raised. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 17(a): the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the 
facts; 
 
AG ¶ 17(c): the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the 
behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.; and 
 
AG ¶ 17(d): the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained 
counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such 
behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
 Applicant receives partial credit under AG ¶ 17(a). He did not correct his 
omissions promptly after submitting his SCAs in 2001 and 2007, but he contacted the 
investigator shortly after his interview in 2009, and he volunteered the information about 
his siblings without being confronted with any evidence that his SCAs were incomplete. 
 
 Applicant also receives partial credit under AG ¶ 17(c). His intentional omissions 
were not “minor.” The fact that he provided incomplete information on two successive 
SCAs and the initial November 2009 interview militates against a conclusion that his 
conduct was “infrequent.” However, it has been more than three years since he supplied 
full information about his siblings, he has continued to perform his duties with dedication 
and integrity, and he continues to enjoy the support of his supervisors. His 
misunderstanding of the importance of the information about his siblings, his remorse 
about his omissions, and his recognition of the importance of full disclosure make 
further intentional omissions of material information unlikely to recur. His supervisors 
have no doubts about his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. 
 
 Finally, Applicant receives partial credit under AG ¶ 17(d). He has acknowledged 
his behavior and expressed remorse for it. He did not intend to be deceptive, and none 
of the omitted information was derogatory. The factor that caused his conduct, i.e., his 
misunderstanding of the importance of the omitted information, has been overcome. I 
am satisfied that his behavior is unlikely to recur. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
 
12 
 
 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guideline B and E in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guideline(s), but 
some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant was sincere, candid, and credible at the hearing. His explanation for 
omitting information about his siblings was plausible, and his remorse was genuine. He 
has continued to perform his duties with distinction even though it has been more than 
five years since he submitted his SCA and almost three years since he provided 
detailed information about all his siblings. He has held a clearance for 11 years, 
apparently without incident. He has been isolated from his family members in 
Bangladesh since he graduated from college in 1975, and that isolation was intensified 
when he came to the United States in 1985. His strong ties to the United States leave 
me with no doubt that he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United 
States.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B and 
E, evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, and mindful of my duty 
to resolve close cases in favor of national security, I conclude Applicant has mitigated 
the security concerns based on his foreign family ties and his personal conduct. 
Accordingly, I conclude he has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    For Applicant 
 
 
13 
 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
