Applicant completed security applications (SF-86) on May 23, 2001 and December 2, 2002, which are part1
of the record. GE 1; GE 2.
1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-04144
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
 
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Statement of the Case
Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations
Processing (e-QIP) on December 8, 2008.  The Defense Office of Hearings and1
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 23, 2012,
detailing security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, Guideline C, Foreign
Preference, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under Executive
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960),
as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
2
Adjudicative Guidelines For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
(AG) implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant received the SOR on May 9, 2012, which he answered on May 16,
2012. Applicant requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the
request, and Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 17, 2012. I received
the case assignment on July 20, 2012. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on August 8,
2012, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on August 29, 2012. The Government
offered exhibits (GE) marked as GE 1 through GE 9, which were received and admitted
into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. He submitted one exhibit marked as
AE A, which was received and admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 7, 2012. I held the record open until
September 30, 2012, for Applicant to submit additional matters and to arrange a date for
a witness to testify by video-teleconference. Applicant timely submitted AE B - AE E,
which were marked and admitted without objection. He did not arrange a date for his
witness to testify as he had not been able to locate his witness. The record closed on
September 30, 2012.
Procedural Rulings
Continuance
Prior to the hearing, Applicant requested a continuance of the hearing date to
allow a witness time to get permission to testify at his hearing. Applicant’s request was
denied by Order dated August 21, 2012. He was advised that the record would be held
open until the end of September 2012 to allow him time arrange a date for his witness to
testify by video-telephone conference.
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts relating to Iran. Applicant objected to this request, arguing that the facts
in the document had nothing to do with him and he had nothing to do with the Iranian
government or the Iranian people. His objection was overruled. The request was not
admitted into evidence, but was included in the record as Hearing Exhibit 1. The facts
administratively noticed will be limited to matters of general knowledge and matters not
subject to reasonable dispute, and are set out in the Findings of Fact below. 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a and
2.a (1)-(3) of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He
W hen  SOR allegations are controverted, the Government bears the burden of producing evidence sufficient2
to prove controverted allegations. Directive, ¶ E3.1.14. “That burden has two components. First, the
Government must establish by substantial evidence that the facts and events alleged in the SOR indeed took
place. Second, the Government must establish a nexus between the existence of the established facts and
events and a legitimate security concern.” See ISCR Case No. 07-18525 at 4 (App. Bd. Feb. 18, 2009),
(concurring and dissenting, in part) (citations omitted). The guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection
between proven conduct under any of the criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See
ISCR Case No. 08-06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17,
2009).
GE 6; GE 8; AE B - AE D; Tr. 49-50, 145-147.3
3
denied the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.b, 2.a, 2.a(4) and 3.a-3.h of the SOR.  He also2
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security
clearance. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the
following additional findings of fact.  
Applicant, who is 62 years old, works as a security trainer and specialist for a
Department of Defense contractor. Applicant was born in Iran and immigrated to the
United States in 1974 with his family. At that time, the Shah of Iran ruled. After attending
college for a few years, Applicant enlisted in the United States Army in late 1978. After
nearly 22 years of service, he retired from the Army in late 2000 at the rank of master
sergeant (E-8). Applicant spent most of his Army career as a Special Forces Green
Beret. He received numerous awards and ribbons during his years of service, including
seven Good Conduct Medals, two Meritorious Service Medals, six Joint Service and
Army Commendation Medals, National Defense Medal, Southwest Asia Service Medal
with two bronze service stars, two Army Achievement medals, Armed Forces
Expeditionary Medals, and overseas awards. After retiring from the Army, Applicant
began working as a contractor on overseas assignments. He has spent much of the last
11 years working in high-risk conflict areas of the world. For most of the last 34 years,
Applicant has worked overseas with the Army and as a contractor, and he has held a
security clearance during these years. Two friends and former Special Forces members
wrote letters highly praising Applicant’s work and reputation in the Special Forces unit.
Both consider him highly trustworthy and a loyal American. They considered him
dependable, reliable, and skilled at his work. During all his years of work, Applicant
sustained injuries on three occasions.3
Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference
Applicant completed his college degree after he retired. He became a naturalized
U.S. citizen in March 1982. His mother was born in Iran, became a U.S. citizen, and
lived in the United States for many years before she died. His two sisters and two
brothers are naturalized U.S. citizens who reside in the United States. Applicant’s father
immigrated to the United States in 1974. His father, who was the Chief of Police under
the Shah, returned to Iran in 1985, after the change in government leadership, on a
GE 1 - GE 3; Tr. 51-53, 96, 103.4
Tr. 53, 86.5
Tr. 53, 105-107.6
Tr. 54-58, 92-97.7
English is Applicant’s second language, which may impact his communication skills and ability to fully8
complete his answers to the e-QIP.
GE 7, Personal Interview on September 9, 2011; Tr. 227.9
Applicant’s family members do not travel to Iran. Tr. 52.10
4
business trip. His father was killed on this trip. His uncle administered his father’s estate
in Iran and helped his mother obtain a pension from the Government of Iran.  4
Applicant does not have any assets in Iran. He owns two houses in the United
States. About a year ago, Applicant purchased a second house, where he now lives.
One brother, who is disabled, and his mother lived in the first house which he
purchased in 1993 and used as his official address for many years. Applicant lived in
this house when he was at home.  5
Applicant’s elderly uncle is a citizen and resident of Iran. His uncle, who is
approximately 75 years old, retired 15-20 years ago from his position as one of the
heads of the Iranian Drug Enforcement Agency. Applicant has no idea why his uncle
was never a target of the Iranian government after the fall of the Shah. Applicant last
saw his uncle in 1986 and last spoke with his uncle in late 2011 or early 2012.  He does
not know if his uncle receives any benefits from the Iranian government or if the Iranian
government has approached his uncle.6
Applicant’s brother continues to live in Applicant’s first house. This brother talks
with Applicant’s uncle in Iran two to four times a year. Applicant will talk with his uncle if
he is at the house where his brother lives when the uncle calls, which may be once a
year. Applicant does not independently contact his uncle by telephone, email, or letter
nor does his uncle contact him independently.7
Applicant is fluent in Farsi, Dari, Arabic, and English.  He has a working8
knowledge of Spanish. Because of his heritage, Applicant blends with Afghani and
Middle Eastern people. Applicant called the United States his country and his
government at the hearing. He does not feel any allegiance or obligation to Iran.9
Applicant has not traveled to Iran since his departure in 1974.  Applicant entered10
the United States in 1974 on his Iranian passport. After becoming a U.S. citizen in 1982,
Applicant obtained a U.S. passport, which he routinely renews. Applicant renewed his
This passport carried this notation: “This passport is not valid for traveling as an immigrant.” GE 7.11
Tr. 52, 99-10, 110.12
The summary of his personal interview on November 9, 2011 erroneously indicated that he renewed his13
Iranian passport at the Iranian consulate in New York City. Iran does not have a consulate in New York. GE
7; Tr. 141-144.
GE 4; GE 5; GE 7 - Summary of personal subject interviews on August 13, 2003 and September 9, 2011;14
Tr. 59-65, 110-122, 124-129.
5
Iranian passport in 1983 and 1986. His Iranian passport expired in 1989.  Around 2000,11
Applicant expressed an intent to visit his uncle in Iran. His family expressed serious
concern about this intent because if he traveled on his U.S. passport, he would be
killed, particularly if the Iranian government learned he was a Green Beret. They
convinced him that it was not safe for him to visit Iran. Applicant concurs with his
family’s view about the dangers to him if he were to travel to Iran. In 2000, Applicant
renewed his Iranian passport for five years, which was extended for five more years. His
Iranian passport expired in 2010 and has not been renewed. At the hearing, he
indicated that he would not travel to Iran in the future, even for his uncle’s funeral,
because he is concerned about his possible arrest by the Iranian government should it
learn about his career as an Army Green Beret and because Iran is on the Department
of State’s list of terrorist countries. He believes that Iran knows about all Iranians in the
United States, but he does not know if Iran has any specific knowledge about his
family.12
Applicant renewed his Iranian passport in 1983 and 2000 by mailing the required
documents to the Pakistani Embassy in Washington D.C. In 1986, he mailed the
required documents to the Algerian Embassy in Washington D.C. to extend his
passport. In 2005, Applicant presented, in person, the required documents to extend his
Iranian passport to staff at the Pakistani Embassy in Washington D.C.  Both the13
Pakistani and Algerian embassies had authority to act on behalf of the Iranian
government in this matter. He never attempted to obtain his Iranian passport at an
overseas embassy. During his September 2011 personal subject interview, Applicant
indicated that he obtained the Iranian passport at the request of another U.S. agency,
but would not reveal the name of the agency. He also told the investigator that he used
his Iranian passport as identification while working on official government business
overseas. At the hearing and in his answers to interrogatories, he denied that he made
this statement, indicating that he always left his Iranian passport at home when he
traveled. He used his U.S. passport or a black U.S. Department of State passport
whenever he traveled overseas and for identification. He also used a military
identification card, which is part of the record.14
Applicant retains possession of his Iranian passport. He has kept the passport for
memory and sentimental reasons and as a souvenir. He may display it in his house for
these reasons. On his three security clearance applications in the record, Applicant
advised that he had dual citizenship with Iran, but he denied dual citizenship during his
Tr. 59-63, 124-126, 147-149.15
Tr. 58, 108-110.16
SOR.17
Tr. 64-69, 151-158.18
Tr. 68-69, 159-165.19
6
2003 subject interview, where he also denied possessing an Iranian passport. He
indicated at the hearing and during his September 2011 interview that he would
renounce his Iranian citizenship, but he has not formally written to the Iranian consulate
renouncing his Iranian citizenship because he does not want to bring himself to the
attention of the Iranian government. He does consider himself an American.15
Applicant’s family knows that he served in the U.S. Army and that he works for
the U.S. government overseas. He does not discuss the specifics of his work with his
family.16
Personal Conduct
Applicant completed his most recent security clearance application (e-QIP) on
December 16, 2008,while in Afghanistan. The SOR alleges five intentional falsifications
in his answers. SOR allegation 3.a alleges that Applicant falsified his answer in Section
17 of his 2008 e-QIP and Section 14 of his 2002 and 2001 SF-86 when he answered
“no” about his contacts with a foreign government, its embassies or consulates, or
representatives inside or outside the United States. The allegation asserts that he did
not disclose his visits to foreign embassies to obtain or renew his Iranian passport. SOR
allegation 3.b alleges that Applicant falsified all three security applications when he
failed to acknowledge that he had an active Iranian passport.17
Applicant denies any contact with foreign governments or embassies for any
reason outside of his work. He did not consider his entrance into the Pakistan embassy
to submit the paperwork to renew his Iranian passport in 2005 as a contact. He viewed
a contact with a Pakistan embassy as “face to face” to do something at the embassy
outside of submitting paperwork for his Iranian passport. He mailed his earlier requests
to renew his Iranian passport and did not consider the mailing as a contact.18
Concerning the Iranian passport, Applicant stated at first that it was not an active
passport, but after a careful review of the dates of the e-QIP and issuance of his Iranian
passport, he said his failure to acknowledge this passport was a mistake.19
SOR 3.c alleges that Applicant falsified his answer to the questions in Section 22
of his e-QIP when he failed to disclose the circumstances of his termination from jobs
with two employers in the last 7 years. When Applicant completed his 2008 e-QIP, he
answered “no”, but then stated:
GE 3.20
SOR; GE 3; GE 9; Response to SOR; Tr. 82.21
SOR; GE 1-3; Tr. 73. Applicant had not seen his uncle since 1986, which more than 20 years prior to his22
completion of his 2008 e-QIP. Throughout the hearing, Applicant routinely mixed up dates and time. Based
on this other information in the record, this time frame is incorrect..
7
I was working for [employer] on 2006 as a US embassy guard
commander. We had PM that didn’t listen to and after 90 days told me that
I have to leave We will talk to yu [you] in our office in state. He didn’t tell
me drictlly [directly] that I have to quit my jo [job]. 
This statement from Applicant’s e-QIP contains numerous grammatical and
typographical errors.20
On November 18, 2005, the senior director for his then employer wrote an email
to Applicant advising Applicant that it was releasing him from his employment
agreement with the company. The senior director advised Applicant that it was
exercising its right to terminate Applicant without cause under the early termination
clause of the employment agreement because Applicant demonstrated poor judgment,
lack of responsibility for personal actions, and lack of accepting guidance and direction
from senior leadership. The senior director and the company provided no other reasons
to Applicant for terminating the contract. However, in a letter dated December 21, 2005,
the company provided the Government with an incident report listing numerous issues
with Applicant. Included in this list was a rumor, or in legal terms embedded hearsay,
that Applicant was fired from a contract with another employer. Applicant denies being
fired.21
SOR paragraph 3.d alleges that Applicant intentionally falsified information in
section 14/15 of his 2008 e-QIP when he did not list his uncle in Iran as a relative.
Applicant did not list his uncle on his 2001 and 2002 SF-86 applications. He explained
that he did not list his uncle because he had not had any contact with him in 30 years.  22
Finally, SOR paragraph 3.e alleges that Applicant intentionally falsified his 2008
e-QIP because he did not list all the countries he had visited in the last seven years.
Travel on U.S. government orders was exempted, but not travel as a contractor.
Applicant listed Afghanistan and Iraq, but not trips to Columbia, Jordan, Pakistan,
Singapore, Thailand, Sudan, Mexico, Germany, Spain, United Arab Emirates, and
Azerbaijan. Applicant traveled to the Sudan, Columbia, and Pakistan on a black
passport for the State Department to teach hostage rescue to police departments and
special units. On his way to or from the United States, from or to Pakistan or
Afghanistan, Applicant traveled though the United Arab Emirates, Azerbaijan, or Jordan.
He would stay one night in a hotel before traveling on to the United States. He
acknowledged that he vacationed in Mexico and Thailand. He worked in Singapore and
Spain while on active duty and for the State Department in Germany. He does not know
why Mexico, Germany, Columbia, Pakistan, and the Sudan were not listed on his e-QIP.
GE 7; Tr. 73-82.23
SOR; GE 9.24
GE 9; Tr. 82, 168-175.25
8
He did not consider his one-night stay in the other countries a visit to the country as he
was passing through the country on his return trip to the United States.23
Under the Personal Conduct guideline, the SOR alleges three employment
related issues (3.f, 3.g, and 3.h). Two issues related to Applicant’s employment with
Company A and one issue relates to Company B. In November 2005, Company A sent
Applicant an email and a letter, stating that it was exercising its contractual right to
terminate Applicant’s employment without cause. Company A cited poor judgment, lack
of responsibility for personal actions, and lack of accepting guidance and direction from
senior leadership as its reasons to terminate the contract. Company A later filed an
incident report on his termination. The report listed numerous issues with Applicant’s
employment, which are personnel issues, including 1) creating a degraded security
situation which constituted a serious breach of security at the U.S. Embassy in
Afghanistan and Applicant’s temporary exclusion from the Embassy grounds, and 2)
employment termination by Company B under unfavorable circumstances. Company A
did not provide a copy of this incident report to Applicant.24
Applicant denies being fired from Company B. After a change in supervisors,
certain events took place at the work site, which led to Applicant file a discrimination
complaint against his supervisor. Company B recalled him to the United States to
discuss the situation. After this meeting, Applicant received no further job assignments.
The incident report based its conclusion that Applicant was fired on statements of
Company B trainers, which is embedded hearsay, not on a formal letter from Company
B. Concerning the incident at the Embassy while he worked for Company A, Applicant
acknowledged that he parked a car in front of the U.S. Embassy, while he delivered two
boxes and obtained some papers. Applicant acknowledged that the security guard was
required to report his parking of the car, but denies that his actions constituted a
security breach, since the incident was investigated by security, and his access was
reinstated. From this report and Applicant’s testimony, it is clear that the work situation
between Applicant and Company A did not work for multiple reasons.25
Administrative Notice
I take administrative notice of the following facts. In 1979, the Iranian Revolution
occurred, which ended the rule of the Shah of Iran. In December 1979, Iranian rulers
prepared a new constitution which defines the political, economic and social order of
this Islamic Republic. Iran is now an authoritarian, constitutional, theocratic republic,
dominated by Shi’a Muslim clergy. Although human rights violations are prohibited by
law, the Iranian government does not enforce the law. Human rights violations continue,
particularly against journalists who speak out against Iran’s current government,
9
minority religions, such as the Baha’i faith, and political activists, who oppose the
current ruling regime. Serious mistreatment of prisoners occurs. Because Iran does not
recognize dual citizenship, Iranian-born, naturalized U.S. citizens are considered solely
Iranian citizens by the Iranian authorities, and are required to enter and exit Iran on an
Iranian passport. While traveling or residing in Iran, they are subject to surveillance,
search, harassment, arrest, and imprisonment. More recently, Iran has prevented a
number of Iranian-American citizens from leaving Iran, and in some cases, Iran has
charged individuals with espionage and being a threat to the regime, including American
citizens, not of Iranian birth or descent.
Iran’s government is hostile to the United States, and the United States does not
have a diplomatic relationship with Iran. Current U.S. concerns about Iran are based on
its efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction, support for
and involvement in international terrorism, and support of violent opposition to the
Middle East peace process and efforts towards democracy. Iran has provided guidance,
training, and weapons to Shia political and militant groups in Iraq and other Middle East
countries. It also provides encouragement, training, funding, and weapons to anti-Israeli
terrorist groups and other terrorists groups in its efforts to undermine the Arab-Israeli
peace process, as well as advocating the destruction of Israel. The United States has
designated Iran as a state sponsor of terrorism. In 1979 in Executive Order 12170, the
President declared a national emergency with respect to Iran pursuant to the
International Emergency Powers Act (50 U.S.C. 1701-1706). The national emergency
continues. The United States continues to have significant concerns about Iran’s plans
to develop nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction. Iran actively seeks to
obtain dual use technologies from the United States. Iran has dramatically increased the
depth and complexity of its intelligence operations, including cyber capabilities, against
the United States in recent years. Iran has shown more interest in recent years in
attacking the United States at home.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
10
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
11
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.
Applicant’s immediate family, which includes his brothers and sisters, are citizens
and residents of the United States. His parents are deceased. Thus, no security
concern is raised by these family members. His elderly uncle is a citizen and resident of
Iran, and has regular contact with one of Applicant’s brothers. Applicant owns the house
where his brother lives. Applicant last saw his uncle in 1986. Applicant does not initiate
telephone, email, or written contact with his uncle, and his uncle does not initiate any
contact with him. Applicant may speak with his uncle about once a year if Applicant is in
the United States and at his brother’s home. When he was in the United States,
Applicant lived with this brother until about one year ago, when Applicant purchased the
house where he now lives. Applicant has worked overseas for much of the last 34
years. He has not traveled to Iran since his departure in 1974. His family relationship is
not per se a reason to deny Applicant a security clearance, but his contact with his
uncle must be considered in deciding whether to grant Applicant a clearance. The
Government must establish that this family relationship creates a risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion by terrorists or would
create a potential conflict of interest between his obligations to protect sensitive
information and his desire to help his family member who may be threatened by
terrorists. 
In determining if such a risk exists, I must look at Applicant’s relationship and
contact with his uncle and his brother’s contact with his uncle as well as the activities of
the government of Iran and terrorist organizations within this country. The risk that an
applicant could be targeted for manipulation or induced into compromising classified
information is real, not theoretical. Applicant’s and his brother’s relationships and
contacts with his uncle in Iran raise a heightened risk of security concern because the
terrorist threats to safety and security are real and of great concern. The evidence of
record shows that the Iranian government engages in espionage activities in the United
States and that it targets U.S. citizens in the United States or Iran by exploiting,
manipulating, pressuring, or coercing them to obtain protected information. Thus, the
concern that the Iranian government will seek classified information is high.
Under the guideline, the potentially conflicting loyalties must be weighed to
determine if an applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of U.S.
12
interests. In determining if Applicant’s contacts in Iran cause security concerns, I
considered that Iran and the United States do not have a diplomatic relationship, and
that Iran actively supports terrorism and terrorist organization. The human rights issues
in Iran, the conduct of the Iranian government towards U.S.-Iranian citizens, and the
terrorist organizations in Iran that target U.S. citizens and interests continue to be a
concern. While none of these considerations by themselves dispose of the issue, they
are all factors to be considered in determining Applicant’s vulnerability to pressure or
coercion because of his family members in Afghanistan. Because of the significant
lawless activities of the Iranian government and its support of terrorism, Applicant and
his brother’s occasional contacts with his uncle raise a heightened risk under AG ¶¶
7(a) and (b).
AG ¶ 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the
U.S.;
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign
influence or exploitation.
Applicant’s relationship with his family members is not a basis to deny him a
security clearance; however, his burden of proof on mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a) requires
him to provide information that shows that his family is not subject to coercion. His
brother has not lived in Iran for more than 30 years, and his brother has no association
or contacts with the Iranian government. However, his uncle held a high position in the
Iranian Drug Enforcement Agency from which he retired. His uncle has not been
targeted by the Iranian government or terrorists, nor has his uncle suffered any abuses
from the Iranian government or been threatened by terrorists. Applicant’s immediate
and closest family members are citizens and residents of the United States. Applicant
owns no property nor does he have financial assets in Iran. Applicant’s contact with his
uncle occurs only when Applicant is in the United States and is the result of a telephone
call by his uncle to his brother. When he works overseas, Applicant does not contact his
uncle, and he does not discuss his work with his siblings. Balancing these factors as
well as Applicant’s many years of service in the Army Special Forces against the
conduct of the Iranian government, I find that Applicant would resolve any conflict in
13
favor of the U.S. interests. Likewise, any threats by terrorists organizations against
Applicant’s uncle in Iran would be resolved in favor of U.S. interests because Applicant’s
relationship with his uncle is casual and infrequent. Applicant will be unable to help his
uncle in Iran if there are  threats to him as Applicant fears returning to Iran. His loyalties
are to the United States, not Iran or terrorist organizations. Applicant has mitigated the
Government’s security concerns as to his family contacts specified in the SOR under
AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c).
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”
AG ¶ 10 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family
member.  This includes but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport; and
(b) action to acquire or obtain recognition of a foreign citizenship by an
American citizen.
Applicant possesses an expired Iranian passport, which was active until two
years ago. After gaining U.S. citizenship, Applicant continued to periodically renew his
Iranian passport. He is a dual citizen of the United States and Iran. AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) and
10(b) apply in this case.
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship;
(d) use of a foreign passport is approved by the cognizant security
authority; and
(e) the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant
security authority, or otherwise invalidated.
Applicant expressed a willingness to renounce his Iranian citizenship during his
interview and at the hearing. He has not taken formal steps to do so he does not want to
raise the interest of the Iranian government in him. AG ¶ 11(b) applies. Since the record
lacks any evidence the Iranian passport has been approved by the cognizant security
14
authority, AG ¶ 11(d) is not applicable. Finally, Applicant’s Iranian passport expired two
years ago. Applicant has not returned to Iran since his departure 38 years ago, and he
has no future intent to return because he fears arrest and imprisonment by the Iranian
government. While he considered visiting Iran about 10 years ago, he credibly testified
to reconsidering his decision after talking with his family and reevaluating the
possibilities of harm to him by the Iranian government. AG ¶ 11(e) applies because his
Iranian passport is invalidated. Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under
Guideline C.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information; and
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or other group.
See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov.17, 2004)(explaining holding in ISCR Case No. 02-2313326
at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)).
15
For AG ¶ 16(a) to apply, Applicant’s omission must be deliberate. Applicant’s
failure to list his departure from Company B as a termination is not an omission because
Applicant denied he was terminated and the only evidence of record supporting this
allegation is unreliable rumor. The Government established that Applicant omitted
material facts from his May 2001 SF-86, December 2002 SF-86, and December 2008 e-
QIP, when he failed to acknowledge that he had an active Iranian passport and that he
had contacted the Algerian and Pakistan embassies to obtain this passport. The
Government also established that Applicant omitted material facts from his 2008 e-QIP
when he did not list his uncle in Iran as a relative, failed to list all the countries he
visited, and did not fully explain the circumstances surrounding his departure from
Company A. This information is material to the evaluation of Applicant’s trustworthiness
and honesty. In his response, he denied intentionally falsifying his answers to these
questions. He again denied intentionally falsification of his answers at the hearing.
When the allegation of falsification is controverted, the Government has the burden of
proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an
applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge
must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the
omission occurred.26
Applicant did not deliberately fail to provide information about his contacts with
the Pakistani and Algerian Embassies because he did not consider mailing or personally
delivering the papers to renew his Iranian passport a contact. Given his past work
experience, which involved face-to-to face contact with embassy personnel in many
countries for matters related to work, his understanding of the meaning of contact is not
unreasonable. While Applicant did not acknowledge any employment terminations, he
did provide an explanation on his 2008 e-QIP which indicated problems existed with his
employment at Company A. His explanation is not a model of clarity, but it is sufficient
to give the Government notice of a problem at the workplace and does not indicate an
intent to falsify his answer. Since Applicant has not seen his uncle who lives in Iran in
26 years and his failure to list his uncle as a relative in earlier security clearance
applications did not raise a security concern, his failure to identify his Iranian uncle on
his 2008 e-QIP does not reflect intentional falsification. Because Applicant viewed his
overnight stays in Jordan, United Arab Emirates and Azerbajan as mere stopovers on
his travels between the United States and Afghanistan or Pakistan, his failure to list
these countries was not intentional falsification. Likewise, his failure to list other
countries where he worked on behalf of the United States government or vacationed
reflected carelessness not intentional conduct because he did list three countries where
he worked, which is an acknowledgment that he traveled overseas. The Government
has not established intentional falsification for the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 3.a, 3.c, 3.d
and 3.e, which are found in favor of Applicant.
16
Concerning his failure to acknowledge the existence of an active Iranian passport
for 10 years, Applicant was fully aware that he had obtained this passport. While he
never used this passport, his nonusage does not excuse his failure to acknowledge the
existence of the passport. He has not provided a reason for not acknowledging that he
had this passport. The Government has established its case as to SOR allegation 3.b
under AG ¶ 16(a).
SOR allegations 3.f and 3.g arise out of Applicant’s working relationship with
Company A. This employer exercised its contractual right to terminated its employment
contract with Applicant without cause, meaning that it could end the employment
relationship for any reason. The Company advised Applicant in general terms about its
reasons for terminating him. In a separate document not given to Applicant, Company A
outlined its specific issues with Applicant including an incident at the U.S. Embassy in
2005. The Government has established its case as to these two allegations under AG
¶¶ 16 (c) and (e).
Finally, the Government has not established that Applicant was terminated from
his job with Company B. The Government relies on an embedded hearsay statement in
an incident report from Company A. Applicant denies that he was fired from his job with
Company A, and the record contains no documentation from Company A which reflects
that Applicant was terminated for cause or for any reason. SOR allegation 3.h is found
in favor of Applicant.
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.
Based on the information in the record, the working relationship between
Applicant and Company A involved numerous conflicts which resulted in the termination
of their contractual relationship. Applicant’s long and successful career in the Army and
his successful working relationship with prior and subsequent employers substantiates a
finding that his problems with Company A arose as a result of the circumstances unique
to the work environment in which he found himself. Applicant recognized that the
disagreements existed, but these disagreements and the subsequent termination of his
employment contract do not raise a security concern. The incident report created after
Applicant left his employment outlines numerous issues with which Applicant disagrees.
Company A provided no supporting documentation for its allegations, making this
The circumstances surrounding the termination of Applicant’s employment contract with Company A raise27
numerous personnel issues which will not be addressed in this decision. 
17
document nothing more than a list of complaints not properly verified when the
problems could be verified.  Applicant acknowledged that the security guard at the gate27
to the U.S. Embassy properly reported that Applicant’s car was parked at the gate, but
denied that his action created a degraded security situation because, after an
investigation by Embassy security, his access to the Embassy was reinstated within a
week of the incident. Applicant has mitigated the security concerns as SOR allegations
3.f and 3.g.
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns about his intentional failure to
acknowledge the existence of his Iranian passport under the Guideline E mitigating
factors.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
successfully served in the United States Army for 22 years in war zones and in
dangerous situations. He continues to serve the United States as a contractor in the war
18
zones of Iraq and Afghanistan. He is an American citizen and considers the U.S.
government his government. He has no loyalties to Iran or any of its citizens. Applicant’s
direct contacts with Iran are nonexistent, and his contact with his one relative in Iran is
sparse. Applicant worked in an unfavorable work environment while employed by
Company A. While problems clearly existed between he and Company A, these
problems are not a reason to deny him a security clearance. His father was killed on a
visit to Iran in 1985, and Applicant fears harm to himself should he return to Iran. When
he actually considered a trip to Iran about 10 years ago, his family convinced him that it
would be too dangerous for him to return. He agrees with their assessment and has no
plans to return in the future. He wants to keep a copy of his Iranian passport as a
memento to his heritage, not to use for travel to Iran which he has not visited in more
than 38 years. He appears to have an attachment to the passport as a tie to his
heritage. Although he has rendered admirable service to the United States for many
years, his failure to acknowledge the existence of his Iranian passport in three security
clearance applications and in his personal subject interview in 2003 raises serious
questions about his judgment which he has not overcome in this case. Applicant is a
loyal citizen of the United States. His loyalty is not in question in this process, but his
judgment is. His eligibility for a security clearance is based upon a determination that
the issues raised in the SOR do not create a situation for him where he can be
pressured, coerced, or exploited because of his actions and Iranian uncle. After a
careful consideration of all the evidence in the record, a concern continues about his
failure to be truthful on his security applications and in an personal subject interview.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guidelines B (Foreign Influence)
and C (Foreign Preference), but he has not mitigated the security concerns raised under
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a(1): For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a(2): For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a(3): For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.a(4): For Applicant
19
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.d: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.e: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.g: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.h: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
