                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-07504
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Jr., Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record evidence presented, Applicant does not mitigate security
concerns covered by the financial considerations and personal conduct guidelines.
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
History of the Case
On April 18, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), (Directive);
and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the Department of Defense after
September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on May 25, 2012, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
2
Material (FORM) on August 21, 2012, and timely responded with supplemental
information. He provided updated explanations of his credit management problems,
accumulated debt delinquencies, and reasons for not wanting to reopen old accounts
more than seven years delinquent. He attached summaries of employer withholdings of
state tax levies and student loan debts as well as copies of his unsigned 2008, 2009,
and 2010 federal tax returns and his 2010 state tax return. The case was assigned to
me on September 18, 2012. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly: (a) incurred an adverse judgment against
him in January 2004 in the amount of $754; (b) accumulated nine delinquent consumer
debts exceeding $25,000; (b) experienced the repossession of his vehicle in April 2005;
(c) was late with his mortgage payments and was subject to foreclosure proceedings in
November 2004; (d) failed to file his federal tax returns for tax years 2008 through
2010; and (e) failed to file his 2010 state tax return.
Under Guideline E, Applicant allegedly (a) falsified the electronic questionnaire
(e-QIP) he completed in March 2010, by omitting his resignation from his prior employer
under unfavorable circumstances and (b) by understating his employee counseling
sessions associated with his accessing employer web sites containing sexual content
during working hours when completing DOHA interrogatories in January 2012.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted most of the alleged debts and
judgment. He denied the allegations in subparagraph 1.g (claiming he had paid the
underlying car loan). He claimed he has since filed his delinquent federal and state
returns and has since received a refund on his 2008 federal tax return. He claimed his
failure to admit his resignation from his employer in 2003 under unfavorable
circumstances was attributable to his embarrassment. Applicant admitted the
allegations pertaining to his falsifying his e-QIP and DOHA interrogatories and
attributed his omissions to embarrassment.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 42-year-old assembly and test technician for a defense contractor
who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by
Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
                                  
Applicant married his first spouse in October 1991 and has one adult child from
this marriage. (Item 4) He divorced his first wife in July 1997. He married his second
and current wife in July 2002 and has one adult stepchild from this marriage. (Item 4)
Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Army in July 1990 and served six years of active duty. He
received his honorable discharge in November 1996. (Item 4) He is currently enrolled in
a local college. (Item 4) 
3
Applicant’s finances
Applicant accumulated a number of consumer debts between 2000 and 2005
that have since become delinquent. His listed delinquencies are documented in both of
his credit reports and exceed $25,000 in aggregate indebtedness. (Items  8-10)  One of
these debts was reduced to a judgment against him in January 2004. This judgment
remains outstanding. 
In his interrogatory responses, Applicant attributed his debt delinquencies to his
unsuccessful business efforts,  his wife’s losing her job, and his assumption of financial
responsibility forhis adopted family. (Items 5 and  6)  With his limited income he could
not pay his outstanding bills. To date, he has not provided any evidence of how his
business losses and wife’s unemployment hampered his ability to cover his debts. Nor
he has he provided any documentation of payments or payment plans. 
Applicant disputed several of his listed debts: creditors 1.a ($463), 1.b ($339),
1.c ($1,125), 1.d ($13,151), and 1.j ($158). (Item 6) He acknowledged as valid debts
those debts covered by creditors listed as creditor 1.e ($754), creditor 1.f ($3,952), and
creditor 1.k ($5,938) and expressed his intention to contact these creditors to resolve
the listed debts. (Item 6) To date, he has not provided any documentation of dispute
correspondence with the creditors he disputes or correspondence with the creditors
whose debts he recognizes. 
In Applicant’s furnished 2012 personal-financial-statement, he reported net
monthly income of $5,800 and monthly expenses of $3,200. (Item 6) This leaves him
with a monthly net remainder of $1,450. He provided no evidence, though, of how he
used all or some of the remainder to address his listed debts. 
Besides his incurring delinquent consumer debts, Applicant fell behind in his
mortgage payments in 2004. Foreclosure proceedings were started against him in
November 2004. (Items 5, 9, and 10) However, he was able to restore his mortgage to
current status with the lender and avert foreclosure. (Item 8)  In April 2005, Applicant’s
car was repossessed. Credit reports reveal that he redeemed the vehicle and re-
established current payment arrangements with the lender. (Item 8)
Applicant failed to file timely federal tax returns for the tax years 2008-2010.
(Items 5 and 6) He failed to file a timely state tax return for tax year 2010. He has since
filed his federal tax returns for tax years 2008-2010, and documents net refund
entitlements on his federal returns. He filed his state tax return for 2010 and currently
pays $644 a month in state wage garnishments for tax year 2008 and $290 a month
from his checking account for tax years 2009 and 2010. (Item 6 and post-FORM
submissions)   
Applicant’s e-QIP and DOHA omissions 
In completing his March 2010 e-QIP, Applicant failed to acknowledge his
employer resignation upon his being informed he could be discharged for violating
company policies related to misuse of company information systems.  (Items 3-5) In his
4
SOR response, he admitted the allegations. He attributed his omissions to
embarrassment and pledged it will never happen again. When responding to the
FORM, he qualified his SOR admission to incorporate his belief that his resignation was
more than seven years old and did not need to be answered. (post-FORM submission)
Applicant never withdrew his pleading admission, though, and without more persuasive
explanations than embarrassment and misunderstanding of dates, he cannot avert
inferences that his misstatements and omissions regarding his work history were both
knowing and wilful.  
When Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories in January 2012, he
understated the number of times he was counseled by his employer over his accessing
websites containing sexual content during work hours. (Item 6) He made no attempt to
correct the misstatement before responding to the SOR and admitted the misstatement
in his SOR response without explanation or qualification.
Afforded a post-FORM opportunity to respond to the FORM, Applicant qualified
his pleading admission to understating the number of counseling sessions with his
employer over his accessing company websites to include sessions not covering
specific website incidents. See Applicant’s post-FORM response. His post-FORM
qualifications are not sufficient to vacate or modify his pleading admissions, or to
otherwise avert inferences that his misstatements and omissions regarding the extent of
his counseling sessions over his website accessing violations were knowing and wilful.  
Endorsements
Applicant provided no endorsements or performance evaluations on his behalf.
Nor did he provide any proof of community and civic contributions or awards and
commendations during his military service.
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
5
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial
crimes including espionage.  Affluence that cannot be explained by known
sources of income is also a security concern.  It may indicate proceeds
from financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Personal Conduct
The Concern: Conduct involving questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information.  Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  AG ¶ 15.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
6
materiality of that evidence. See United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 509-511
(1995).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is an assembly and test technician of a defense contractor who (a)
accumulated a number of delinquent debts (to include an adverse judgment) during
periods of business losses and (b) failed to timely file federal and state tax returns for
prior tax years. His accumulation of delinquent debts and his past failures to address
most of these debts and timely file federal and state tax returns raise security
concerns about his judgment, reliability, and trust. 
Additional security concerns are raised by Applicant’s misstatements and
omissions of material information about his work history in his completed e-QIP and
ensuing misstatements about the number of employer-related counseling sessions he
submitted to over his accessing of work sites containing sexual content during working
hour
Financial concerns
Applicant’s pleading admissions of the delinquent debts covered in the SOR
negate the need for any independent proof (see McCormick on Evidence, § 262 (6th
ed. 2006)).  Each of Applicant’s listed debts are fully documented in his credit reports
and provide ample corroboration of his debts.
Applicant attributes his debt delinquencies in part to his income losses from his
consulting company and his wife’s loss of her job. His tax returns cover past years
7
that are not covered by any approved extensions. Afforded an opportunity to detail
and explain his debt repayment and tax-filing efforts, he provided accepted copies of
his filed federal and state tax returns. He did not provide any details, though, of how
his business and spousal employment losses impacted his ability to repay his
delinquent debts. While he was able to bring his auto and mortgage loans current, he
has not to date addressed any of his other listed debts. These other debts remain
unsatisfied and lacking in dispute documentation.
Applicant’s delinquent debts and failure to file timely federal and state tax
returns merit the application of several disqualifying conditions. Disqualifying
conditions (DC) are applicable as follows: DC ¶ 20(a), “inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts;” DC ¶ 20(c), ”a history of not meeting financial obligations;” and  DC ¶
20(g), “failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required or
the fraudulent filing of the same.”
Based on the record evidence in the FORM, some extenuating circumstances
are associated with Applicant’s inability to pay of or otherwise resolve his debts.
Available to Applicant is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn,
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly.” Limited application of MC ¶ 20(b) is warranted based on his
furnished explanations.
Judgment problems persist, too, over Applicant’s unexplained  delinquencies
and his failure to demonstrate he acted responsibly in addressing his listed debts
once the adverse financial conditions associated with his failing business had passed
or eased and his finances had improved. See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd.
Sep. 24, 2004).  Not only are his listed debt delinquencies ongoing, but he has failed
to address them in any documented way.
    
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). 
By consulting tax specialists and filing his federal and state returns for the tax
years in issue (i.e., 2008-2010 for the federal returns and 2010 for the state return),
Applicant may take advantage of  the mitigating benefits of MC ¶ 20(c), “the person
has received counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the
problem is being resolved or is under control.” Applicant mitigates security concerns
related to his failure to file timely federal and state returns. However, he fails to
provide any documentation to warrant the application of any of the other mitigating
conditions under the financial considerations guideline to his situation.
8
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent debts. Since his
discharge from the Army in 1996, he has shown limited interest in addressing his
covered debts to mitigate his still delinquent accounts. Resolution of his delinquent
accounts is a critical prerequisite to his regaining control of his  finances.
While business losses and spousal unemployment might have played a
considerable role in his accumulation of delinquent debts, he failed to provide any
meaningful documentation material for consideration. Endorsements and
performance evaluations might have been helpful, too, in making a whole-person
assessment of his overall clearance eligibility, but were not provided. Overall,
clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant based on the limited amount of
information available for consideration in this record does not enable him to establish
judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome security concerns arising out of his
accumulation of delinquent debts.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations, his lack of any exhibited explanations for his debt
accruals, and his failure to provide any proof of  corrective actions taken to address
his old debts, it is still soon to make safe predictive judgments about Applicant’s ability
to repay his debts and restore his finances to stable levels commensurate with the
minimum requirements for holding a security clearance.
Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraphs 1.a through 1.f, and 1.i through 1.k of Guideline F. Subparagraphs 1.g,
1.h , 1.l, and 1.m are mitigated.
Personal conduct concerns
Security concerns over Applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness are
raised under Guideline E as the result of his admitted (a) knowing and wilful omission
of his resignation from his previous employer under unfavorable circumstances and
(b) his  understating of the counseling sessions he had with his former employer over
his accessing of web sites containing sexual content during work hours in the
responses he provided to furnished DOHA interrogatories. 
By omitting the circumstances under which he resigned from his former
employer and understating the counseling sessions he had with his former employer
over accessing of websites containing sexual content during work hours, Applicant
failed to provide materially important background information about his prior work
history that was needed for the Government to properly process and evaluate his prior
security clearance applications. He attributed his acknowledged misstatements and
omissions to embarrassment, and subsequently to mistaken understanding.
Separately and collectively, his misstatements and omissions reflect his conscious
decisions to omit and mislead when answering questions concerning his prior work
history. 
9
Applicant’s recurrent misstatements and omissions about his work history
invite application of several disqualifying conditions under the personal conduct
guideline: DC ¶ 16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award
fiduciary responsibilities,” DC ¶ 16(b), “deliberately providing false or misleading
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official,
competent medical authority, or other government representative,” and DC ¶ 16(d),
“credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other guideline
and may not be sufficient for an adverse determination, but which, when combined
with all available information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable
judgment, trustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with
rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may no
properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited to
consideration of: DC ¶ 16(d)(3), “a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations.”
Applicant’s admissions and post-FORM supplemental explanations were
neither prompt nor voluntary, and preclude application of MC ¶ 17(a), “the individual
made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification
before being confronted with the facts.” Applicant’s admissions and explanations
were prompted by questions in DOHA’s interrogatory and the pertinent allegations in
the SOR and FORM comments and, as such, do not meet the MC 17(a) requirements
of prompt, good-faith disclosures. 
From a whole-person perspective, Applicant has established no independent
probative evidence of his overall honesty with his supervisors, coworkers, and friends.
Still of concern are Applicant’s multiple misstatements and omissions about his prior
work history and his accessing of company websites containing sexual content.
Because motivation is never easy to objectively establish, the placement of
reasonable time lines on clearance applicants to test and absolve themselves of
recurrence risks makes safe and practical sense when balancing the interests of
protecting national security with the interests of those who seek access to the Nation’s
secrets.  
Considering the record as a whole, at this time there is too little seasoning of
Applicant’s mitigation efforts to avert foreseeable risks of making material
misstatements and omissions on a security clearance application and other forms
designed to facilitate Government background investigations. It is still too early to
make safe predictions about his ability to restore his honesty and trustworthiness
sufficient to justify his eligibility to hold a security clearance. 
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
judgment and trust lapses, Applicant fails to mitigate security concerns related to his
personal conduct issues. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c. of Guideline E.
10
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   Subparas. 1.a through 1.f and 
       1.i through 1.k:         Against Applicant
Subparas. 1.g, 1.h, 1.l, and 1.m:     For Applicant
GUIDELINE E: (PERSONAL CONDUCT):            AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparas. 2.a through 2.c:    Against Applicant   
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
11
  
