1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ADP Case No. 11-02932 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Greg A. Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E 
(personal conduct) security concerns. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on April 9, 2010. On August 10, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines F (financial considerations) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, 
dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 
1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue access to sensitive information for him, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether such access should be denied or revoked. 
 
On November 18, 2011, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations, and initially 
elected to have a hearing. However, on January 26, 2012, he elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated March 28, 2012, was provided to him by letter dated April 2, 
2012. Applicant signed the receipt for the DOHA transmittal letter on May 30, 2012. He 
was afforded a period of 30 days to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. He timely submitted additional material. The case was 
assigned to me on October 2, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all the allegations alleged. (Item 4.) His admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the 
following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 45-year-old development engineer, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since September 2004. (GE 1.) He seeks access to sensitive 
information in conjunction with a public trust position. 
 
 Applicant was awarded a bachelor of arts degree in December 2007, and was 
awarded a master’s degree in human services in May 2010. He served in the Navy 
Reserve from June 1999 to December 2004. Applicant and his wife married in January 
1996. He has two sons from his marriage, ages 15 and 12. He also has a 20-year-old 
stepdaughter. All three children reside with Applicant and his wife. (GE 1.)  
 
 Applicant has a history of documented financial problems that have been 
ongoing since 2004. The SOR alleges 28 separate allegations under Guideline F 
(financial considerations) – two allegations of financial criminal conduct and 26 
delinquent debts totaling $27,723. Also alleged in the SOR under Guideline E (personal 
conduct) are two allegations of falsifying his E-QIP by failing to disclose delinquent 
debts, and one allegation restating Applicant’s criminal behavior of financial misconduct 
as personal conduct concerns.  
 
 In his July 2010 Office of Personnel Management (OPM) interview, Applicant 
explained that in November 2000, he wrote a check to a supermarket for $132 with 
insufficient funds in his account. He stated that his spouse was responsible for paying 
family bills at the time and he did not find out about the check incident until he was 
arrested in December 2004. He hired an attorney to investigate the charge and defend 
him.  
 
 During that same period, Applicant learned that his spouse, who was the 
President of the Parent Teacher Association (PTA) for their local school, had opened 
3 
 
two fiduciary credit accounts on behalf of the PTA, but used the accounts for her 
personal gain. News of her misappropriation was aired on the local news and was so 
devastating to her that she attempted suicide. She has since been diagnosed with bi-
polar disorder and Applicant asserts that her condition explains her behavior and 
subsequent problems with their family finances.  
 
 Applicant was again arrested in June 2006 for misappropriation of fiduciary 
funds. In July 2006, he pled guilty to misappropriation and the previous check fraud 
offense and was sentenced to pay a fine and serve two years probation. During his 
OPM interview, he claimed that although he was represented by counsel, he should not 
have pled guilty because he did not have an opportunity to explain the circumstances of 
the case to the judge or separate his hearing from his spouse’s case. 
 
 In his OPM interview, Applicant further claimed that his financial problems were 
caused by his spouse’s financial irresponsibility. He and his spouse remain married; 
however, Applicant now handles the family finances. Applicant submitted no evidence 
that any of the alleged debts have been paid or resolved or that he sought financial 
counseling. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
When Applicant completed his April 2010 e-QIP, he failed to list two allegations 
of financial criminal conduct and any of the 26 debts alleged in the SOR. Applicant 
certified by his signature when completing his e-QIP that the information he provided 
was true, complete, and correct to the best of his knowledge and belief and made in 
good faith. He further acknowledged that a knowing and willful false statement on his e-
QIP can be punished by fine or imprisonment or both.  
 
Applicant admitted that he did not list his two allegations of financial criminal 
conduct or any of his debts claiming that he did not know about all of his debts and was 
unable to disclose them all. Applicant further stated that, “No deceit or attempt to hold 
back information for this investigation does not exist. I simply want it stated for the 
record that even though no one will believe me, I could not and never would harm this 
country or the security measures that are in place.” (Response to FORM.) 
 
Policies 
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
(See Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.)  “The standard that must be met for 
. . . assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the 
person’s loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (See 
Regulation ¶ C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence 
and Security) Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness 
adjudications will apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service 
and Office of Personnel Management.  Department of Defense contractor personnel are 
4 
 
afforded the right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final 
unfavorable access determination may be made. (See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable 
trustworthiness decision. 
  
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
sensitive information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
 
 
 
   
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The trustworthiness concern relating to the guideline for financial considerations 
is set out in AG & 18:   
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect [sensitive] information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an applicant’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012.) 
 
Applicant’s admissions in his SOR answer, corroborated by his credit reports and 
OPM interview, establish all the allegations in the SOR. The evidence of the two 
allegations of financial criminal conduct and 26 delinquent debts totaling $27,723 is 
sufficient to establish the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG & 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
 
AG & 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
AG ¶ 19(e): consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions are established. Applicant’s two allegations of 
financial criminal conduct and 26 delinquent debts totaling $27,723 are numerous, 
recent, and not the result of circumstances making them unlikely to recur. The only 
mitigating condition raised by the evidence submitted was his wife’s bi-polar condition at 
the time she was managing the family budget. However, there is no evidence that he 
acted responsibly. While he claims to have taken responsibility for managing the family 
budget, Applicant has not submitted any evidence that he has engaged his creditors at 
any level or made any effort to regain financial responsibility. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the concern is that conduct involving questionable judgment, 
lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15.) 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes one condition that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately provided false information or omitted 
required information on his April 2010 e-QIP. Applicant’s explanation that that he did not 
know about all of his debts and was unable to disclose them is not credible. The e-QIP 
was quite explicit regarding the financial background information being sought. His 
added explanation that there was no attempt to “deceive” or “hold back information” 
rings hollow given his education level and the number of debts owed. The Government 
established through the evidence presented the disqualifying condition in AG ¶¶ 16(a). 
7 
 
Six personal conduct mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
A statement is false when it is made deliberately -- knowingly and willfully. An 
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely 
forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely 
thought the information did not need to be reported. Here, Applicant knew of financial 
problems and chose not to disclose them. He certified his answers to be true and 
correct. Had Applicant’s information been relied upon without verification, he may well 
have successfully vetted for a public trust position. Regardless of the reason Applicant 
chose not to be forthcoming, the process does not allow for applicants to pick and 
choose which answers they will answer correctly. When applicants lie on their public 
trust position applications, they seriously undermine the process as Applicant did in this 
case. I find that none of the mitigating conditions fully apply.1  
                                                          
1
 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
8 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
in the Analysis section in my whole-person analysis.  
 Applicant is a mature, intelligent adult. He is a talented and dedicated employee 
of his company. He served in the Navy Reserve for five years. Applicant is married and 
is a responsible husband and a father. He took over the family finances after recognizing 
his spouse’s shortcomings. 
 A security clearance adjudication is aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to 
establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish a 
plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. 
There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts 
simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid 
first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant may have 
good intentions, but he did not present any evidence of a financial plan or evidence of 
significant steps taken to regain financial stability.  
Applicant’s deliberate failure to disclose information on his e-QIP is serious, 
recent, and not mitigated. Overall, I have concerns about his current ability and 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
9 
 
whole-person, I conclude he has not mitigated security concerns pertaining to financial 
considerations and personal conduct.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to a public trust position. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
  Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. – 1.bb: Against Applicant 
 
  Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.b.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a public trust 
position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
