 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-02441 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Martin P. Hogan, Esq. 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems dating back to 1991. Some of his 
financial problems were caused or aggravated by circumstances beyond his control, 
and he recently started making some efforts to resolve his financial problems. 
Notwithstanding, the evidence fails to establish that Applicant showed financial 
responsibility in the acquisition and resolution of his delinquent debts. He also failed to 
timely file his income tax returns and to pay his taxes. It is too soon to conclude that 
Applicant has a viable plan to resolve his delinquent debt, and that he is in control of his 
financial situation. The record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on November 18, 
2009. On April 18, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guideline F 
 
2 
 
 
(Financial Considerations).1 Applicant answered the SOR on May 12, 2012, and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge.  
 
The case was assigned to me on August 8, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on August 29, 2012, scheduling a hearing for September 19, 2012. At the 
hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 13. Applicant testified, and 
submitted exhibits (AE) 1 through 7. AE 7 was received post-hearing.2 All exhibits were 
received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 
26, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a through 1.j, 1.l through 
1.o, and 1.r. He denied SOR ¶¶ 1.k, 1.p, and 1.q. His admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of all the evidence, including his demeanor and 
testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 55-year-old program analyst. He lost his civil service position with a 
government agency when his security clearance was withdrawn because of the pending 
SOR allegations. Applicant is being sponsored for his security clearance by the same 
government contractor he worked for before he was hired for his civil service position. 
(Appellate Ext. 2, 3, and 4) 
 
Applicant married his first spouse in May 1977, and they divorced in November 
1981. He has two children of this marriage. He married his second spouse in April 1996, 
and they were divorced in May 1997. He married his current spouse in February 1999, 
and they have been separated for eight years. Applicant has a total of seven grown 
children. (GE 12)  
 
Applicant served in the U.S. Army on active duty from February 1977 until 
February 1987. After his honorable discharge, he served in the National Guard for one 
year, and then worked one year for a government contractor. In 1990, he joined the 
National Guard. In 1991, he was hired as an active duty National Guardsman and 
served on active duty until he was honorably retired in February 2003. His military 
occupational specialties were finance and armor, and he retired with the rank of master 
sergeant (E-8). He was credited with a total of 26 years of active duty service.  
 
                                            
1 DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive) (January 2, 1992), as amended; and the 
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG), implemented 
by the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 Applicant mislabeled AE 7. He did not include document “#9” in AE 7. See Appellate Exhibit 1 
(email from Applicant’s attorney, dated November 8, 2012, addressing this issue). 
 
3 
 
 
While in the service, Applicant received numerous awards and decorations, 
including among others the Army Meritorious Service Medal, the Army Commendation 
Medal, and the Army Good Conduct Medal (3). At his hearing, he presented several 
certificates of appreciation for a job well done. He was selected by the then Army Chief 
of Staff to participate in a training and development panel. Additionally, he received the 
Care Giver Award from the governor of his state for taking care of his mother for 21 
years. Applicant’s mother suffered from serious medical problems and was dependent 
on Applicant’s care and financial support. Some of her medical expenses were covered 
by the military (she was Applicant’s dependent) and her Social Security benefits. 
Applicant was financially responsible for any remaining medical expenses. Applicant’s 
mother passed away in July 2009. 
 
After his retirement, Applicant worked a period of three months for a private 
company before he was laid off. He was unemployed for two months. From August 
2003 until January 2009, he worked for a government contractor. He was laid off as a 
result of the contractor’s reorganization, and he was unemployed for a period of four 
months. He worked for a government contractor from May 2009 until November 2009 as 
a budget analyst. In November 2009, he was hired as a government employee 
performing the same duties. Applicant was laid off in September 2010, when he lost his 
security clearance as a result of the pending financial considerations concerns. He has 
been unemployed since September 2010. Applicant possessed a security clearance at 
the secret level from 1977 until September 2010. There is no evidence that he ever 
compromised or caused others to compromise classified information. Applicant testified 
he has no criminal record, and a clean driving record. 
 
Applicant claimed he was awarded a bachelor’s degree in June 2006. However, 
he stated in his 2009 SCA that he needed additional courses to receive his degree. He 
completed training as a compliance agent, personal protection specialist, private 
security training, and he received other specialized training while serving in the Army 
and the National Guard.  
 
In his November 2009 SCA, Applicant disclosed that he had filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy protection once (to save his home from foreclosure), and that in 2008, he 
had a $400,000 mortgage foreclosed and the property repossessed. The subsequent 
background investigation revealed that Applicant filed for bankruptcy protection five 
times. He filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in February 1991 (dismissed); 
October 1992 (discharged in March 1996); September 2007 (dismissed in November 
2007); and in December 2007 (converted to a Chapter 7 in November 2008, and 
dismissed in April 2009). He filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection in January 2005 
(discharged in May 2005). Additionally, the investigation revealed nine delinquent 
consumer credit accounts, totaling over $15,000, and two federal tax liens, totaling 
approximately $45,000. The total owed for the first and second mortgage foreclosed 
was over $485,000. Applicant failed to disclose in his 2009 SCA four of his bankruptcy 
filings, the nine delinquent consumer credit accounts, the two federal tax liens, and that 
he failed to timely file income tax returns, and pay his income tax for tax years 2003 
through 2006. 
 
4 
 
 
  
Concerning his February 1991 bankruptcy, Applicant explained that his then 
fiancé moved away with their daughter and left him with the household debts. He was 
caring for two of his sons and his mother who was in a wheelchair. His earnings were 
not sufficient to pay for his day-to-day living expenses and his accumulated debts. He 
filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection; however, he asked for the filing dismissal 
when he returned to active duty in April 1992. 
 
Applicant filed again for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection in October 1992. He 
explained that his vehicle was repossessed erroneously and he filed for bankruptcy 
protection to prevent losing the vehicle. Applicant claimed that although he was making 
payments on the vehicle, the bank was not crediting the payments properly. In March 
2006, the bankruptcy court discharged him of financial responsibility for his 
dischargeable debts. 
 
In January 2005, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection, and he was 
discharged of financial responsibility for his dischargeable debts in May 2005. Applicant 
explained that after his 2003 retirement, he had trouble finding a job. To protect his 
credit, he sold his home to his father-in-law with the understanding that it would be later 
sold back to him. Applicant used the proceeds of the sale (his equity) to pay for his 
family’s day-to-day living expenses. Later, his father-in-law refused to transfer the 
property back to Applicant, and obtained an $8,000 garnishment of wages against 
Applicant for pass-due mortgage payments Applicant failed to pay. To avoid paying 
what he considered was an illegal garnishment, Applicant filed for bankruptcy 
protection.  
 
In 2006, Applicant purchased a home for $500,000 using an adjustable rate 
mortgage (ARM). He was unable to refinance the house because the appraised value 
was below the balance owed. When the mortgage rate increased, he was unable to 
make the mortgage payments. Applicant also averred that his financial problems were 
aggravated because he paid about $7,000 in legal fees for his son. In December 2007, 
Applicant filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection trying to force the mortgage holder 
to lower the interest rate and to modify the mortgage. The filing was converted to a 
Chapter 7 around November 2008, and dismissed in April 2009.  
 
Applicant’s mortgage was foreclosed and the house sold in 2008. Applicant 
testified that he received an IRS Form 1099 from the mortgage company for the 
difference in the sale price and the amount owed. Applicant did not present 
documentary evidence to show that the mortgage companies forgave or cancelled his 
debt after the sale of his house. He also failed to present documentary evidence 
showing the total debt owing on his first and second mortgages resulting from the 
foreclosure.  
 
Applicant did not timely file his income tax returns or pay his taxes for tax years 
2003, 2004, 2005, and 2006. He did not file his income tax returns because he did not 
own a house and had no deductions to write off. He became indebted to the Internal 
 
5 
 
 
Revenue Service (IRS) in the approximate amount of $45,000 for back taxes, penalties, 
and interest. The IRS filed two tax liens against Applicant, and started to levy on 
Applicant’s wages in 2009-2010. (SOR ¶¶ 1.i and 1.j) Apparently, Applicant filed his 
2003-2006 income tax returns and requested a payment arrangement with the IRS in 
2009-2010. He is using the services of the Tax Defense Network to help him resolve his 
problems with the IRS. 
 
Based on the evidence presented, the status of the remaining delinquent debts 
alleged in the SOR is as follow: 
 
SOR ¶ 1.f ($495). Applicant opened a new account with the creditor and 
transferred the delinquent $495 to the new account. As of September 2012, he owed 
$523, after making a payment of $150. 
 
SOR ¶ 1.g ($604). Applicant returned the creditor’s satellite TV equipment. As of 
September 2012, he owed $54. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.h ($1,779) and 1.k ($9,852). In March 2010, Applicant retained the 
services of a credit restoration company to dispute some debts and clean his credit 
report of inaccuracies. On September 24, 2012, Applicant retained the services of a 
debt resolution company to help him resolve the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.g, 1.h, and 
1.k. He presented no documentary evidence to show payments made to either of the 
creditors or to the debt resolution company. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.l ($1,241) and 1.m ($363). Applicant claimed he contacted both 
creditors after his hearing and established payment plans that will start in October 2012. 
He presented no documentary evidence of those payment agreements, or of payments 
made to either of the creditors. 
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.n ($301) and 1.o ($122). Applicant initially claimed these were not his 
debts. He later acknowledged the debts were his. After his hearing, Applicant claimed 
that he had settled and paid both debts on January 11, 2011. He failed to present 
documentary evidence of any payments made.  
 
SOR ¶ 1.p ($526). Applicant claimed he disputed this debt because it should 
have been paid by his then employer’s medical insurance company. He presented no 
documentary evidence to show that he referred the claim to his prior employer.  
 
In sum, of the 13 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, two were resolved after 
the hearing (SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g). He failed to present documentary evidence to show 
that he resolved SOR ¶¶ 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.l, 1.n, 1.p, 1.q, and 1.r. He claimed to have a 
payment agreement with the IRS, but presented no documentary evidence of it. He also 
claimed to have received an IRS 1099-C, but failed to present documentary evidence of 
the document or about the total owed to the creditor. Most of his efforts to contact 
creditors started after he was confronted by a government investigator about his 
financial problems in December 2009. Applicant presented little documentary evidence 
 
6 
 
 
of contacts with creditors or payments made before December 2009. Most of his 
payment agreements were scheduled to start after his hearing.  
 
Applicant claimed circumstances beyond his control prevented him from paying 
his delinquent debts. He explained that his financial problems were caused by his 
periods of unemployment and underemployment, separations and divorces, and his role 
as the sole provider for two of his children and his mother. He incurred additional 
expenses paying for his mother’s medical expenses. Applicant testified that he was 
making payments on other small debts that were not alleged in the SOR because they 
were paid. He believes he did all that he could do based on his circumstances.  
 
After the foreclosure of his house in 2008, Applicant entered into a lease-to-
purchase agreement for a large house (5,900 square foot, a 1,700 square foot 
basement, on six acres). (Answer to the SOR.) He also indicated that at some point 
after 2008, he entered into a contract to build a large house on prime real estate with a 
value of $525,000. He claimed he started to resolve his delinquent debts before he was 
confronted by the government investigator because of his anticipated house purchase. 
(GE 12) Notwithstanding, except for retaining the services of the credit restoration 
company to dispute some debts, Applicant presented little evidence of contacts with 
creditors, payments made, or of other efforts to resolve his financial problems short of 
repeatedly filing for bankruptcy protection. 
 
After he was terminated from his job in September 2010, Applicant did not have 
the financial means to pay his delinquent debts more aggressively. Applicant lives with 
his girlfriend and they follow a budget. He has participated in financial counseling 
through the bankruptcy process. He considers himself to be a patriot. He dedicated his 
life to serve the United States as a soldier and a civil service employee. He believes that 
his years of service to the United States establish his loyalty, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. He would like to continue his service to his country and to resolve his 
delinquent financial obligations. He needs his security clearance to retain his job. He 
believes that with his job, he will have the ability to pay all of his delinquent debts. 
 
Policies 
 
Eligibility for access to classified information may be granted “only upon a finding 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
The AG list disqualifying and mitigating conditions for evaluating a person’s 
suitability for access to classified information. Any one disqualifying or mitigating 
condition is not, by itself, conclusive. However, the AG should be followed where a case 
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to 
 
7 
 
 
classified information. Each decision must reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
consideration of the whole person and the factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). All available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable must 
be considered.  
 
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government 
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does, 
the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. The 
applicant bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue his or her security clearance.  
 
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship 
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the Government has a 
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interest as their own. 
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any 
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government. 
“[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” 
Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; AG ¶ 2(b). Clearance decisions are not a determination of the 
loyalty of the applicant concerned. They are merely an indication that the applicant has 
or has not met the strict guidelines the Government has established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Under Guideline F, the security concern is that failure or inability to live within 
one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. AG ¶ 18. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems that date back to 1991. His financial 
problems continue to present as evidenced by his delinquent debt, totaling about 
$68,000 without considering what he owes for his two foreclosed mortgages. Two of the 
financial considerations disqualifying conditions apply: AG ¶ 19(a): inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts and AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.  
 
 AG ¶ 20 lists six conditions that could mitigate the financial considerations 
security concerns:  
 
 
8 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under 
control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;  
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions 
to resolve the issue; and 
 
 (f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 Applicant’s favorable evidence fails to fully establish the applicability of any 
mitigating condition. His financial problems are ongoing, he has extensive delinquent 
debt, and the evidence fails to show that he acted responsibly in the acquisition of the 
debts, or that he acquired the debt under such circumstances that the behavior is 
unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. 
 
 Applicant’s periods of unemployment and underemployment, divorces and 
separations, his mother’s medical condition, and his role as the sole provider for his two 
sons and mother are circumstances beyond his control that contributed to his financial 
problems. Notwithstanding, his favorable evidence is not sufficient to show that he acted 
responsibly in the acquisition of his debts or addressing his financial obligations.  
 
 Applicant has a history of acquiring large debts and filing for bankruptcy 
protection when he cannot afford them. Notwithstanding his delinquent debts and his 
two tax liens, between 2008 and 2011, Applicant attempted to acquire expensive real 
estate properties without first resolving his delinquent debts. AG ¶ 20(b) partially 
applies, but does not fully mitigate the financial concerns. 
 
 Applicant presented little evidence of efforts to resolve his delinquent debt until 
after he was confronted by a government investigator about his financial problems in 
2009. I considered Applicant’s recent efforts (September 2012) to resolve his debts by 
establishing payment plans with some creditors. However, questions remain about the 
viability of such payment arrangements since most payments were scheduled to start in 
 
9 
 
 
the future. Questions also remain about Applicant’s current financial situation and his 
ability and willingness to continue making his ongoing payments. He has been 
unemployed since he lost his job in September 2010 after the withdrawal of his security 
clearance. On balance, the evidence available is not sufficient to establish that 
Applicant has a track record of financial responsibility. AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies, but 
does not fully mitigate the financial concerns. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) applies because Applicant participated in financial counseling. 
However, it does not mitigate the financial considerations concerns. Considering the 
number of debts and the aggregate total of the debts, I cannot find that there are clear 
indications that his financial problems are being resolved or under control. AG ¶ 20(e) 
partially applies since Applicant disputed some of his debts. However, it is not clear 
whether he had a reasonable basis for the disputes. The remaining mitigating condition 
(AG ¶ 20(f)) is not applicable to the facts of this case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, and under the whole-person 
concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
 
Applicant is an honorably retired master sergeant with over 26 years of service. 
He possessed a security clearance from 1977 until 2010 without any problems or 
concerns, except for the current financial considerations concerns. He is a loving son 
and father. While in the service, he held important positions that required technical 
proficiency, knowledge, and financial responsibility. Some of Applicant’s financial 
problems were caused or aggravated by circumstances beyond his control, and he 
recently started making some efforts to resolve his financial problems. 
 
Notwithstanding, the record evidence fails to establish that Applicant showed 
financial responsibility in the acquisition and resolution of his delinquent debts. Because 
of his extensive financial background and years in the service holding a security 
clearance, Applicant knew or should have known about the importance of maintaining 
financial responsibility and about the Government’s financial considerations concerns. 
Moreover, Applicant’s unexplained failure to disclose in his 2009 SCA the full extent of 
his financial problems adversely impacts on his credibility and evidence of extenuation 
and mitigation.3 Considering the record as a whole, it is too soon to conclude that 
                                            
3 The SOR did not allege that Applicant falsified his 2009 SCA. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 
(App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an 
SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole-person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
10 
 
 
Applicant has a viable plan to resolve his delinquent debt, and he is in control of his 
financial situation. At this time, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:      Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.f and 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.h-1.r:      Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                             
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). I have considered the non-SOR behavior accordingly. 
 
