1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-01538
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
 For Government: Tovah Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed to mitigate the sexual behavior and personal conduct security
concerns generated by his viewing adult and child pornography on his U.S. Army-issued
laptop computer and failing to be forthcoming about the conduct during this investigative
process. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On April16, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing allegations under Guideline D,
Sexual Behavior, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant answered the SOR on May 2, 2012, admitting subparagraphs 1.a, 1.b,
and 2.a., and denying subparagraphs 1.c, 2.b, and 2.c. He did not address
subparagraph 2.d in his answer.
 The case was assigned to me on August 30, 2012. A notice of hearing was
issued on September 19, 2012, scheduling the hearing for October 22, 2012. The
hearing was held as scheduled, and I received six Government exhibits and the
testimony of Applicant. The transcript (Tr.) was received on November 1, 2012.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 45-year-old married man with an adult stepdaughter. He has a high
school  diploma and, over the years, has earned two years of college credits. Since July
2009, Applicant has worked as a systems administrator for a defense contractor. (Tr.
39)
Applicant served in the U.S. Army from 1987 to 2003. During this period, he
earned several awards and accolades including a National Defense Service Medal,
Kuwait Liberation Service Medal, and three Bronze Service Stars. (GE 4 at 2)
From approximately 1998 to 2003, Applicant, while assigned overseas as an
administrative clerk, downloaded and viewed pornography on his Government-issued
laptop computer. (GE 6 at 3; Tr. 22) The pornographic images included pictures of
children. Also, during this period, Applicant occasionally photographed pictures of
himself nude in his Government office, and posted them on Internet chat rooms using
his Government-issued computer. 
In 2003, as Applicant was preparing for a re-assignment, he “attempted to clean
[his] Government computer hard drive and get rid of child and adult pornography [that
he] had downloaded. He then attempted to mail the computer home to use for his
personal use. He had no intention of returning it to the base from which he was
transferring. (GE 6 at 3)
In March 2004, Applicant executed a signed, sworn statement, as part of a U.S.
Army criminal investigation into his conduct. At that time, he admitted viewing child
pornography out of curiosity, and he admitted obtaining the images of child pornography
from Internet chat rooms. (GE 6 at 3-4) A forensic analysis conducted as part of the
Army’s investigation revealed there were eight child pornographic images located on
two floppy disks.
On March 12, 2004, Applicant was charged with larceny, receiving child
pornography, and possessing child pornography. Subsequently, Applicant was
discharged under other than honorable conditions in lieu of trial by court martial.
(Answer; GE 2 at 3)
Has any of the following happened to you in the past 7 years?1
1. Fired from job.
2. Quit a job after being told you would be fired.
3. Left a job by mutual agreement following charges or allegations of misconduct.
4. Left a job by mutual agreement following notice of unsatisfactory performance.
5. Left a job for other reasons under unfavorable circumstances.
6. Laid off from a job by employer.
3
Applicant completed a security clearance application in June 2010. In response
to Section 13C,  Applicant answered, “Yes,” and listed the charges of larceny and1
improper use of government equipment. He did not list the charge relating to child
pornography. Applicant testified that he did not list the charge because it was
dismissed. (Tr. 34) Applicant also testified that he probably took pictures of himself
naked between 1998 and 2003, but could not recall taking any of these pictures while at
work. (Tr. 26)
In June 2010, a DoD investigator interviewed Applicant and asked him whether
he viewed child pornography between 1998 and 2003. Applicant responded that he did
not intentionally view any child pornography. (GE 2 at 3)
Applicant was arrested and charged, once in 1989 and once in 1992, with driving
under the influence of alcohol. He did not list these arrests, as required, in response to
Section 22 of his security clearance application. Applicant testified that he did not list
these arrests because he mistakenly thought he was only supposed to list arrests that
occurred within the past seven years of completing the security clearance application.
(Tr. 37) 
Applicant is active in his church, participating as a deacon, an usher, and a
member of the choir. He has not undergone any pastoral counseling, or any other type
of counseling, related to the episode that led to his discharge from the Army. (Tr. 39)
None of his church friends and acquaintances know about the circumstances
surrounding his discharge from the Army. (Tr. 39) Applicant testified that he has not
viewed any pornography since 2003. (Tr. 40)
Policies
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions.These
guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human
behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
4
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” Applicant
has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security decision.
Analysis
Guideline D, Sexual Behavior
Under this guideline, “sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a
personality or emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.” (AG ¶ 12) Applicant’s conduct triggers the application of the following
disqualifying guidelines under AG ¶ 13:
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion,
exploitation, or duress; and 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects a lack of
discretion or judgment.
Applicant did not testify truthfully about whether or not he intentionally viewed
child pornography. Moreover, he falsified his security clearance application by failing to
include the child pornography charge when setting forth the reason for his general
discharge under other than honorable conditions from the military. (See Personal
Conduct section, infra.) He repeated this falsification during an interview with a DoD
investigator. I conclude that Applicant is not a credible witness.
Applicant’s lack of credibility undermines his testimony that he has not viewed
child or adult pornography since 2003. Applicant has not received any counseling
related to his misconduct. Also, his friends at church do not know about it.
Consequently, even if he was telling the truth about the passage of time since he last
viewed child pornography, his rehabilitation remains in question, and he remains
vulnerable to coercion. None of the mitigating conditions apply.
Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
5
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.” (AG ¶ 15)
Applicant’s omission of  the child pornography and the alcohol-related charges
from his security clearance application, and his statement to the DoD investigator that
he did not intentionally view any child pornography, raises the issue of whether the
following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 apply:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and
(b) deliberately providing false of misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative.  
Applicant’s 2010 statement to a DoD investigator, in response to questions about
his misuse of a government computer between 1998 and 2003, that he did not
intentionally view any child pornography contradicted what he told a U.S. Army
investigator in 2004. I conclude that AG ¶ 16(b) applies without mitigation.
Under these circumstances, Applicant’s explanation for not listing either the
pornography charge or the alcohol-related charges, as required, on his security
clearance application is not credible. AG ¶ 16(a) also applies without mitigation.
Applicant’s sexual misconduct, as analyzed under the previous section, also
triggers a personal conduct concern under AG ¶ 16(e), “personal conduct, or
concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to
exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known,
may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing . . . .” Applicant
failed to mitigate the concerns under this guideline for the same reasons, as set forth in
the evaluation of the sexual behavior security concern. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
6
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I have considered the applicability of the whole-person factors in my analysis of the
guidelines above, and I conclude that they do not warrant a favorable conclusion. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline D: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a-1.c: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a-2.d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
