 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-05932 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 23, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 8, 2012, and requested a hearing on June 
6, 2012. The case was originally assigned to another administrative judge and was 
reassigned to me on August 1, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 6, 
2012, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on August 29, 2012. At the hearing, 
 
2 
 
Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 that were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s list of exhibits was 
marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. Applicant testified and offered documents marked as 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through C that were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The record was left open until September 5, 2012, for Applicant to submit 
additional matters. He timely submitted AE D. On September 25, 2012, Applicant 
submitted AE E. AE D and E were admitted into evidence without objection. Department 
Counsel’s memoranda forwarding Applicant’s post-hearing exhibits were marked as HE 
2 and 3. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 7, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
working for his current employer for about eight years. He graduated from high school in 
June 1981 and later attended college for about a year. He enlisted in the U.S. Army in 
June 1981, attained the grade of staff sergeant (E-6), and retired honorably in June 
2001. He has been married twice. His first marriage began in June 1989 and ended in 
divorce in June 2002. He married his current wife in September 2002. He has three 
children, ages 7, 9, and 22, and two step-children, ages 13 and 31. For most of the past 
30 years, he has held a security clearance without incident.1  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant received a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 
October 2002 and that he had 15 delinquent debts totaling about $78,000. Those debts 
were listed on credit reports obtained on December 16, 2010, and February 10, 2012. In 
his Answer, Applicant admitted each of the delinquent debt allegations. He noted the 
debts remained unpaid, but were listed in a pending bankruptcy. His admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact.2 
 
 In June 2002, Applicant filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy. He attributed his financial 
problems in that bankruptcy to his ex-wife. He indicated that, before their divorce, his 
wife started sending money to a neighbor whom she later married. She also had a 
power of attorney from Applicant and used that authority to incur debts. He also claimed 
that, after the divorce, she went on a military post and wrote bad checks. He received a 
bankruptcy discharge in October 2002. He estimated that debts totaling between 
$50,000 and $60,000 were discharged in that bankruptcy.3 
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application in November 2010. In that 
application, he did not disclose that he had any reportable financial delinquencies. At 
the hearing, he indicated that he was not aware of the debts alleged in the SOR until he 
learned of them during the subsequent security clearance investigation.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6-7, 25-34, 69; GE 1, 3, AE D. 
 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2, 4, 5. 
 
3 Tr. at 25, 34-36, 59-61; GE 2-5. 
 
4 Tr. at 25, 36-48; GE 1, 3. 
 
 
3 
 
   Applicant’s current wife has a chronic illness and is unemployed. He stated that 
she is very sick, and her illness prevents her from working. His wife handles their 
finances. He noted that he travels often for his job, which precludes him from handling 
the finances. She has a power of attorney from him. At the hearing, he attributed his 
current financial problems to her illness. During an Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) interview, he acknowledged that his failure to monitor family finances also led to 
his financial problems.5  
 
 The date of last activity on the alleged debts ranges from July 2004 (SOR ¶ 1.p) 
to May 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.b). Most of those debts became delinquent in 2005 and 2006. 
Four of the delinquent debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.f, 1.i, 1.j, and 1.o) were for vehicle loans. During 
the OPM interview, Applicant stated that he had a vehicle involuntarily repossessed in 
about September 2003. At that time, his wife had not informed him of any pending 
financial problems, and he only became aware that she was not making the monthly 
payments when the vehicle was repossessed. Another of the delinquent debts (SOR ¶ 
1.i) was for a truck that he sent to a repair shop after it was vandalized in 2005. While 
the truck was in the repair shop, he decided that he no longer wanted to keep it and 
requested the creditor pick up the truck at the repair shop. He later moved from the 
state where the truck was being repaired and did not know whether the creditor ever 
picked up the truck from the repair shop. Two other debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.k and 1.l) were for 
furniture purchased in 2003 and 2004. This furniture was purchased for his wife’s 
cousins, and he was not aware of those purchases at the time they were made. The 
cousins were supposed to pay for the furniture, but failed to do so.6 
 
  On June 27, 2012, Applicant again filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy. His bankruptcy 
petition reflected that he had $1,050 in assets and $241,208 in liabilities. All of his 
liabilities involved creditors holding unsecured, nonpriority claims. Schedule F of the 
bankruptcy petition listed all of the debts alleged in the SOR. On September 4, 2012, he 
was granted a Chapter 7 discharge. He presented no evidence that he made any 
attempts to resolve the delinquent debts before filing bankruptcy.7 
 
Applicant participated in credit counseling as a prerequisite to filing bankruptcy. 
At the hearing, Applicant stated that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e was the same as the one in 
SOR ¶1.n.  An examination of the credit reports supports his contention. SOR ¶ 1.e 
listed the original creditor, while SOR ¶ 1.n listed the collection agency.8 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 25, 37, 49-53, 55, 58-62, 65-68, 75-76; GE 3. 
 
6 Tr. at 36-37, 40-42, 45-48 62-63; GE 2, 3, 4. SOR ¶ 1.o most likely alleges the delinquent debt 
for the truck repossessed in September 2003. At the hearing, Applicant stated that his uncle who worked 
for a car company supposedly stated that truck should have never have been repossessed because the 
payments were being made. After the repossession, Applicant never got the truck back.  
 
7 Tr. at 48-54, 69-74; GE 3; AE A-C, E. 
 
8 Tr. at 43-45, 49, 67; GE 2-4. 
 
 
4 
 
 In October 2011, Applicant and his wife entered into a rent-to-own agreement to 
purchase a home. At the end of the first year of rent payments, they will be able to 
purchase the home. He did not know the exact sales price, but estimated it to be about 
$160,000, with about $30,000 having already been paid through monthly rent payments.  
Between July and October 2011, he opened four credit card accounts and an 
installment contract. Those credit card accounts and the installment contract were not 
listed in the SOR, but were discharged in the bankruptcy.9 
 
 In March 2012, Applicant submitted a Personal Financial Statement (PFS) that 
reflected his net monthly income was $4,838 and his total monthly expenses were 
$4,738. Of note, the PFS was submitted before his most recent bankruptcy petition and 
did not list any debt payments. In the PFS, he indicated that his net monthly remainder 
was $100. However, he also provided a handwritten note that indicated he forgot to 
provide information about his telephone services. The note indicated that he paid $280 
for his cell and home telephone services, which would result in him having a negative 
net monthly remainder.10 
  
 In the Army, Applicant was awarded the Joint Service Commendation Medal, two 
Army Commendation Medals, four Army Achievement Medals, and five Good Conduct 
Medals.11  
 
 Policies  
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 28-31, 63-65; GE 2, 5. Conduct not alleged in the SOR may be considered to assess an 
applicant’s credibility; to decide whether a particular adjudicative guideline is applicable; to evaluate 
evidence of extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant has 
demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of the whole-person analysis. ISCR Case No. 03-20327 
at 4 (App. Bd. Oct 26, 2006). I have considered Applicant’s non-alleged debts for these limited purposes. 
10 Tr. at 54-59; GE 3. 
 
11 Tr. at 69-70; AE D. 
 
 
5 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant received a Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 2002. Since then, he 
accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy for an extended 
period. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s wife has a chronic illness that resulted in her unemployment. Her 
illness is a condition beyond Applicant’s control that contributed to the delinquent debts. 
For AG ¶ 20(b) to apply fully, an individual must not only experience one or more 
conditions beyond his or her control that contributed to the financial problems, but also 
must have acted responsibly under the circumstances. Here, Applicant received a 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharge in 2002, incurred additional delinquent debts over an 
eight year period, and again filed Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 2012. No evidence was 
presented to show he took any action to attempt the resolve the debts before filing the 
second bankruptcy. Another cause for concern is his reliance on his wife to manage 
their finances. In that regard, he indicated that he was not aware that his wife was not 
making monthly payments on his vehicle until it was involuntarily repossessed in 2003. 
After that repossession, he should have known that he needed to monitor his finances 
better, but he failed to do so. During the OPM interview, he indicated that he was 
unaware of many of his delinquent debts and acknowledged that his failure to monitor 
family finances led to his financial problems. From the evidence presented, I cannot find 
that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies.   
 
7 
 
Applicant received financial counseling as a prerequisite to filing bankruptcy. 
While bankruptcy is intended to provide a person with a fresh start financially, it does 
not immunize an applicant’s history of financial problems from being considered for its 
security significance.12 In this case, Applicant has a long history of financial problems. 
His most recent bankruptcy discharge was granted after the hearing was held. He has 
failed to establish a track record of fiscal responsibility. Based on the record evidence, 
the likelihood of him encountering future financial problems cannot be ruled out. The 
alleged debts, even though discharged in the most recent bankruptcy, continue to cast 
doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) and 
20(d) do not apply. AG ¶ 20(c) partially applies.   
 
Applicant claimed that the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e is a duplicate of the one in SOR ¶ 
1.n. The credit reports support his contention. AG ¶ 20(e) applies to SOR ¶ 1.e.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant served in the Army for 20 years and retired in the grade of staff 
sergeant. He has held a security clearance for about 30 years without incident. Despite 
the presence of some mitigation, Applicant’s financial problems remain a security 
concern. In the past ten years, he received two Chapter 7 bankruptcy discharges. He 
                                                          
12 See e.g., DISCR Case No. 87-1800 (February14, 1989) at p.3 n. 2 (“Although bankruptcy may 
be a legal and legitimate way for an applicant to handle his financial problems, the [administrative judge] 
must consider the possible security implications of the history of debts and problems that led to the filing 
of bankruptcy”).  
 
8 
 
filed his latest bankruptcy after the SOR was issued and was granted a discharge after 
the hearing. Most importantly, he has failed to establish a record of fiscal responsibility. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.f – 1.p:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
