 
1 
 
                                                            
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-03235   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny her eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. She failed to present evidence of a 
plan to rehabilitate her financial situation or resolve her $44,000 in delinquent debt. 
Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on June 15, 2012, 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) detailing security concerns under the financial considerations guideline. DOHA 
recommended the case be submitted to an administrative judge for a determination to 
revoke or deny Applicant’s access to classified information.  
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was 
assigned to me on August 30, 2012. At the hearing convened on October 2, 2012, I 
admitted Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 and Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A 
through H, without objection. After the hearing, I admitted AE I without objection and 
appended the Government’s memorandum regarding the exhibit to the record as HE 1. I 
received the transcript (Tr.) on October 5, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, 35, is a divorced mother of four children. Her youngest children, 12-
year-old twins, are from her marriage, which ended in 2009. Her two older children, 
ages 17 and 15, are from a previous relationship. Employed with a federal contractor as 
an information technology technician since June 2012, her annual salary is 
approximately $78,400. Between October 2009 and May 2012, she worked in this 
position as a temporary employee earning $80,000 annually.2  
 
 Applicant claims that her financial problems began when she and her ex-
husband separated in 2007. Before the separation, her ex-husband paid the $2,300 
mortgage on their home and contributed another $3,000 to the household expenses. 
After they separated, he continued to pay the mortgage, but refused to provide any 
additional financial support. As a result, Applicant could not pay all of the household 
bills. Under the terms of the divorce decree, Applicant’s ex-husband pays the mortgage 
on the home where Applicant and the children continue to reside in lieu of child support. 
Despite living rent-free for the past five years, Applicant is still unable to meet all of her 
financial obligations. According to the SOR, Applicant is indebted to eight creditors for 
approximately $44,332.  As of September 2012, she has paid at least $1,300 towards 
the SOR debts and $3,300 in non-SOR debts, relying primarily on her 2011 tax refund.3 
 
 Applicant claims that she is unable to make regular payments toward her debts 
because a large amount of her income is diverted to home repairs. Although, 
Applicant’s ex-husband pays the mortgage, he is not required to contribute any money 
for the maintenance or repair of the home’s deteriorating electrical and plumbing 
systems. As a result, Applicant’s utility costs vacillate. Since January 2012, she has 
incurred $4,801 utility costs. She is unable to pay the bills in full each month. Applicant 
testified that she could petition the court for child support, if she moved out of the home. 
However, she does not have the money to move.4  
 
 In 2010, Applicant contacted a debt consolidation company for help. After 
completing the initial counseling session, she decided not to participate in the program 
because she did not like the idea of having a third party pay her bills. At hearing, 
                                                          
2 Tr. 17, 19-20, 23-25. 
 
3 Tr. 25, 35-36, 57-58,70; GE 2, 3; AE I. 
 
4 Tr. 28-34, 68-69; AE D, H. 
 
 
3 
 
Applicant did not convey any concrete plan for reducing her indebtedness or 
rehabilitating her financial situation.5  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
5 Tr. 39-41; AE B. 
 
4 
 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
Unresolved, delinquent debt is a serious security concern because such “[f]ailure 
or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may 
indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is 
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.”6 
Here, Applicant has accumulated over $44,000 in delinquent debt. This shows both an 
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts”7 and “a history of not meeting financial 
obligations.”8  
 
When the facts proven by the Government raise doubts or security concerns, the 
ultimate burden of persuasion rests with the applicant,9 who has the burden of 
demonstrating that he or she is not an unacceptable security risk. An applicant must 
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation sufficient to overcome the 
Government’s prima facie case.10 This evidence must be sufficient to address the 
security concerns by establishing mitigating conditions such that "it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest" to grant or continue access to classified information for 
Applicant. Given that some of Applicant’s financial problems were caused by events 
beyond her control, she receives some credit for consulting a debt consolidation 
program and for the payments she has made toward her delinquent debts. Accordingly, 
financial considerations mitigation conditions AG ¶¶ 20(b),11 (c)12 and (d)13 are partially 
                                                          
6  AG ¶ 18. 
 
7 AG ¶ 19(a). 
 
8 AG ¶ 19(c).  
 
9 ISCR Case No. 94-1075at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995); ISCR Case No. 94-1011 at 3-4 n. 2(App. Bd. 
Jul. 14, 1995); ISCR Case No. 94-0569 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 30, 1995). 
 
10 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995); ISCR Case No. 93-1234 at 7 (App. Bd. May 
19, 1995). 
 
11 The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss 
of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), 
and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
 
12 The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications 
that the problem is being resolved or is under control. 
13 The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 
5 
 
applicable. However, these factors are not sufficient to mitigate the underlying security 
concerns. While Applicant is not required to be debt-free nor to develop a plan for 
paying off all debts immediately or simultaneously, she is required to act responsibly 
given her circumstances and develop a reasonable plan for repayment, accompanied 
by actions that evidence a serious intent to effectuate the plan.14 She has failed to 
present evidence that she has a plan to improve her current financial position or resolve 
the delinquent debt alleged in the SOR.  
 
Applicant is understandably caught between a rock and a hard place. She is 
living in a home rent-free even though doing so is stressing her limited finances. In 
addition, she may have legitimate reasons for not wanting to remove her children from 
the environment that they have grown accustomed to over the past seven years. 
However, Applicant’s precarious financial situation remains a significant security 
concern that must be resolved in favor of the Government. This decision should not be 
construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the type of financial 
stability necessary to justify the granting of a security clearance. The award of a security 
clearance is not a once-in-a-life-time occurrence, but is based on applying the factors, 
both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence presented. A clearance is not 
recommended with the Applicant’s current circumstances, but should she be afforded 
an opportunity to reapply for a security clearance in the future, she may well 
demonstrate persuasive evidence of her security worthiness. However, a clearance at 
this time is not warranted. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a.– 1.h.:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
14 See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-06567 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct 29, 2009). 
