 
1 
 
 
                                                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
                                        DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
      )  ISCR Case No. 11-00566 
                                                                      )                                            
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony in this case, I 
conclude that Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
                                       Statement of Case 
 
Applicant completed and certified the following security clearance applications: a 
Personnel Security Questionnaire, dated March 10, 1996; an Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP), dated January 12, 2007; and an e-QIP, dated 
June 15, 2010. On May 31, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant’s notarized answer to the SOR was dated July 12, 2012. He elected to 
have a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on 
September 13, 2012. I convened a hearing on October 26, 2012, to consider whether it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced five exhibits, which 
were marked Ex. 1 through 5 and entered in the record without objection. Applicant 
testified and introduced one exhibit, which was marked as Applicant’s Ex. A and entered 
in the record without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 
5, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains four allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.c., and 1d.). In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted all four Guideline E allegations. Applicant’s admissions are entered 
as findings of fact. (SOR; Answer to SOR.) 
  
 Applicant is 42 years old, married, and the father of a 15-year-old son and a nine-
year-old daughter. In 1993, he earned a Bachelor of Science degree in Physics and 
Astronomy. Applicant has worked for his current employer for six years, and he is 
employed as a production test manager. (Ex.1; Tr. 24-27, 50.) 
 
 Applicant enlisted in the United States military in 1996, when he was 26 years 
old. He was first awarded a security clearance in 1996. He was honorably discharged 
for medical reasons in 2000. (Ex. 1; Tr. 24.) 
 
 When Applicant was a college student and 19 years old, he began using 
marijuana. He told an authorized investigator that he used marijuana about once a 
month from 1992 until 1993.1 (Ex. 3; Tr. 30, 50-51.) 
  
 Soon after enlisting in the military in 1996, Applicant completed a personnel 
security questionnaire. Section 22 on the questionnaire is entitled “Drug/Alcohol Use 
and Mental Health. Item “a” under Section 22 asks: “Have you ever tried or used or 
possessed any narcotic (to include heroin or cocaine), depressant (to include 
quaaludes), stimulant, hallucinogen (to include LSD or PCP), or cannabis (to include 
marijuana or hashish), or any mind-altering substance (to include glue or paint), even 
one time or on an experimental basis, except as prescribed by a licensed physician?” 
Applicant answered “No” to Section 22, Item “a.”  At his hearing, he acknowledged that 
his failure to list his drug use on the personnel security questionnaire was deliberate. 
This conduct is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. (Ex. 5; Tr. 32-33.) 
 
                                            
1
 At his hearing, Applicant denied he used marijuana once a month while a college student, and he did 
not recollect telling the investigator that he did so. He stated that he used marijuana in college “a handful 
of times.” (Tr. 30-31.) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant was subsequently awarded a security clearance. Between 1996 and 
2000, he used marijuana on at least five occasions while holding a security clearance. 
This conduct is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. (Ex. 3; Tr. 33-34.) 
 
 Applicant was discharged from the military in 2000, and he no longer had a 
security clearance. In August 2006, Applicant purchased Ecstacy and cocaine. He and 
his wife experimented with the drugs on two separate occasions in August 2006. (Ex. 1; 
Ex. 3; Tr. 36-41.) 
 
 In January 2007, Applicant completed an e-QIP. Section 24 on the e-QIP is 
entitled “Your Use of Illegal Drugs and Drug Activity.” Item “a” under Section 24 reads: 
“Since the age of 16 or in the last 7 years, whichever is shorter, have you illegally used 
any controlled substance, for example, marijuana, cocaine, crack cocaine, hashish, 
narcotics (opium, morphine, codeine, heroin, etc.) amphetamines, depressants 
(barbiturates, methaqualone, tranquilizers, etc.), hallucinogenics (LSD, PCP, etc.), or 
prescription drugs?” Applicant responded “No” to Section 24, Item “a.” At his hearing, 
Applicant said he had no good reason for failing to list his 2006 drug use on his 2007 e-
QIP. This conduct is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.c. (Ex. 1; Ex. 3; Tr. 36-39.) 
 
 Applicant was again awarded a security clearance. Then in October and 
December of 2009, Applicant attended two parties with his wife and again used the 
illegal drug marijuana while holding a security clearance. This conduct is alleged at 
SOR ¶ 1.d. (Ex. 1; Tr.39-43.) 
 
 Applicant stated that he no longer associates with some of the individuals with 
whom he used illegal drugs in the past. He stated that he does not intend to use drugs 
in the future. He has attended a “handful” of Narcotics Anonymous meetings. He stated 
that he has thought about attending Al-Anon meetings and may do so in the future. For 
about one and one-half years, he has been in counseling with a licensed social worker 
to understand his past behavior with drugs. The licensed social worker is not a 
specialist in drug treatment. (Tr. 44-48.) 
 
 Applicant’s counselor provided a written evaluation for the record and concluded 
that Applicant was not a drug abuser or drug dependent. He stated that he did not 
recommend treatment for Applicant. The counselor also stated: 
 
I evaluated [Applicant] for possible substance abuse problems on 2/24/11. 
[Applicant] was self referred after his employer discovered he had used 
cannabis. The evaluation revealed no maladaptive pattern of use of 
cannabis leading to any psycho-social impairment or distress. There is no 
evidence of recurrent use despite negative consequences (e.g. ability to 
fulfill obligations at work or home, hazardous behavior, legal problems, 
social or interpersonal problems). Also, there is no evidence of repeated 
use resulting in the development of tolerance. [Applicant] denies the use 
of any other illicit substance, and there is no evidence to the contrary. (Ex. 
2.) 
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant provided a letter of character reference from his manager at work. The 
manager stated that Applicant was a valued professional and conscientious worker. He 
also praised Applicant’s trustworthiness and good judgment. (Ex. A.) 
  
                                                        Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
5 
 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
  
Applicant used marijuana as a college student during 1992 and 1993. In 1996, he 
answered “No” when asked on a personnel security questionnaire if he had ever used 
cannabis or marijuana. He was subsequently issued a security clearance by his military 
superiors, who had no knowledge of his former drug use. Between 1996 and 2000, 
while in military service, Applicant used marijuana while possessing a security 
clearance. 
 
In October and December of 2006, Applicant purchased and used Ecstacy and 
cocaine with his wife. In January 2007, he executed an e-QIP and, responded “No” to a 
question asking if he had used an illegal drug in the last 7 years, thereby failing to 
acknowledge his use of Ecstacy and cocaine in October and December of 2006. Again, 
Applicant was awarded a security clearance. In 2009, while holding a security 
clearance, Applicant again used marijuana on two separate occasions. Applicant’s 
personal conduct raises security concerns under AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(e)(1). 
 
AG ¶ 16(a) reads: “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
 
6 
 
 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(e)(1) reads: “personal conduct, or concealment of 
information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect 
the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. . .  .” 
 
Several Guideline E mitigating conditions might apply to Applicant’s personal 
conduct. If “the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts,” then AG ¶ 17(a) 
might apply.  AG ¶ 17(d) might apply in mitigation if “the individual has acknowledged 
the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive 
steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to occur.” AG ¶ 
17(e) might apply if “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” 
 
In 1996 and in 2007, Applicant executed security clearance applications. On both 
applications, he answered “No” when asked about illegal drug use, even when he knew 
he had used illegal drugs. He made no effort to correct the falsifications on his security 
clearance applications, even though he knew his answers denying drug use were false. 
Lacking knowledge of Applicant’s illegal drug use, his military and civilian superiors 
awarded him security clearances. Then, while holding these security clearances, 
Applicant twice again used illegal drugs. He concealed his illegal drug use, thereby 
demonstrating poor judgment and unreliability. The fact that this behavior occurred 
when Applicant was a mature adult continues to cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment.  
 
At his hearing, Applicant stated he had been consulting a licensed social worker 
for a year and one-half in an attempt to alleviate the factors that caused his drug use. In 
a report, the counselor offered an evaluation of Applicant’s drug use and concluded that 
he was not a drug abuser or drug dependent. Applicant’s reliance on the licensed social 
worker’s evaluation is misplaced. At issue in this case is not Applicant’s repeated drug 
use but, instead, his repeated dishonesty about his drug use. After observing Applicant 
carefully at his hearing, listening to his testimony, and assessing his credibility, I 
conclude that his unreliable and untrustworthy behavior has not been mitigated and is 
likely to recur. Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 17(a), 17(d), and 17(e) do not apply in 
mitigation in this case. 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
 
7 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult whose 
military and civilian contractor experience has provided him with knowledge of the 
security clearance process and its policies. He knows, or should know, of the 
importance of telling the truth on a security clearance application. Applicant deliberately 
falsified material facts on two security clearance applications in response to a question 
about his use of illegal drugs. After being awarded these security clearances, he then 
used illegal drugs. Applicant’s personal conduct raises serious concerns about his 
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness.  
 
The record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his personal conduct. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a.-1.d.:   Against Applicant 
 
                                       Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                            ________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
