 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00326 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert Kilmartin, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
Tuider, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant committed sexual crimes in 2001, 2005, and 2006. He exaggerated the 
therapy and counseling he received after the most recent offense on his SF 86 and 
during two interviews conducted by Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigators. Sexual behavior, criminal conduct, and personal conduct concerns are not 
mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 13, 2010, Applicant submitted his Questionnaire for National Security 
Positions (SF 86). (GE 1) On March 1, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of reasons (SOR) to Applicant, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 
1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) the President promulgated on 
December 29, 2005. 
 
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines D (sexual behavior), J 
(criminal conduct), and E (personal conduct). The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA 
was unable to find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
continue a security clearance for Applicant, and it recommended that his case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether his clearance should 
be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
On April 19, 2012, Applicant’s response to the SOR was received at DOHA.  On 
July 11, 2012, Department Counsel indicated he was ready to proceed on Applicant’s 
case. On July 13, 2012, DOHA issued a hearing notice, setting the hearing for July 25, 
2012. Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled. Applicant waived his right to 15 days 
of notice of the date, time, and location of his hearing. (Tr. 6; AE A) Department 
Counsel offered two exhibits, and Applicant offered two exhibits. (Tr. 16-17; GE 1-2; AE 
A-B) There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-2 and AE A-B. (Tr. 16-17) 
Additionally, I admitted the hearing notice, SOR, and Applicant’s response to the SOR. 
On August 2, 2012, I received the transcript.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s SOR response admitted with explanations all of the SOR allegations. 
(Tr. 20) He also provided mitigating information. His admissions are accepted as 
findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old network engineer employed by a defense contractor. 
(Tr. 17, 19; GE 1) He has never served in the military. (GE 1) In 1994, he graduated 
from high school. (Tr. 18) He earned an online bachelor’s degree in information systems 
security in 2006. (Tr. 17-18) He is not married, and he does not have any children. (Tr. 
17, 20; GE 1) 
 
Sexual Behavior and Criminal Conduct 
 
In February 2001, the police arrested Applicant for indecent exposure and lewd 
and lascivious behavior. He pleaded nolo contendere, and the court found him guilty 
and fined him. (SOR ¶ 1.a) 
 
In April 2005, Applicant solicited a 15-year-old girl to commit a lewd act, and he 
exposed himself and committed a lewd act in her presence. (SOR response) The police 
arrested Applicant for lewd and lascivious behavior against a child (fondling), a felony, 
and lewd and lascivious exhibition.1 The court found him guilty of indecent exposure, a 
misdemeanor. (SOR ¶ 1.b) 
 
                                            
1
The 2005 police report indicates on the first occasion, Applicant blocked the sidewalk with his 
vehicle, and offered $50 to two 12-year-old girls, if they would watch him masturbate. The two children 
told him that they were 12 years old. Applicant exposed his penis to them and began to masturbate. They 
subsequently picked his photograph out of a lineup at their grade school. In the second instance, 
Applicant pulled his vehicle up next to another vehicle containing two individuals, pulled down his 
trousers, exposed his penis, and began to masturbate. He was not arrested until several days later. There 
is no evidence in the police report that he was under the influence of alcohol when he committed either of 
these offenses. (GE 2) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
In May 2006, the police arrested Applicant for indecently exposing himself to two 
individuals. One of the individuals was a minor. Appellant pleaded nolo contendere, and 
the court found him guilty, fined him $300, and sentenced him to supervised probation 
for one year and a mental health evaluation. (Tr. 21; SOR response) If the mental health 
evaluation recommended treatment, he was required to enroll in the treatment program 
within 60 days. (SOR ¶ 1.c) 
 
In May 2008, a psychologist, Dr. B, PhD, evaluated Applicant and recommended 
therapy. (Tr. 22-24; SOR response; GE 2) Applicant did not comply with this 
recommendation. (SOR ¶ 1.d) On July 9, 2008, Applicant went to Dr. B’s office and 
requested a letter verifying he was participating in therapy. (GE 2) Dr. B wrote that 
Applicant attended an initial 55-minute session; however, he did not attend therapy or 
any other sessions. (Tr. 26; GE 2) Applicant is credited with meeting with Dr. B on two 
occasions, in May and July 2008. 
 
On March 1, 2011, the probation office said Applicant successfully completed 
probation. (Tr. 24-25) The probation report indicates he completed his mental health 
evaluation, and does not list any requirement to complete any therapy or counseling. 
(GE 2) 
 
Applicant conceded that Dr. B and a therapist recommended ongoing therapy. 
(Tr. 27-28) The therapist referred Applicant to Dr. B. Applicant said he saw Dr. B in May 
2008 and July 2008. (Tr. 27) Dr. B recommended six months of weekly therapy 
sessions. (Tr. 28, 30) Applicant said he did not go to more than three therapy sessions 
because his probation ended, and he could not afford the therapy costs of $80 a week 
for six months. (Tr. 29) Dr. B opined, “Without this therapy there is a very high likelihood 
that this behavior will be repeated.” (Tr. 30)      
 
In March 2012, Applicant obtained an evaluation from Dr. L, a licensed clinical 
psychologist. (Tr. 31; SOR response) Dr. L’s report indicates Dr. L’s sole basis for his 
opinion is Applicant’s interview and test results. Applicant blamed his sexual 
misbehavior on excessive alcohol consumption. Dr. L opined that “[g]iven that he 
reports abstaining from all illicit drug and alcohol use, the probability of risks appears 
low for the recurrence of sexually inappropriate acting-out behaviors now and in the 
future.” (SOR response)  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Section 21 of Applicant’s July 13, 2010 SF 86, which seeks information 
concerning his “Mental and Emotional Health, requests, “Dates of treatment and/or 
counseling.” (SOR ¶ 1.b; GE 1) Applicant responded that he received treatment and/or 
counseling from Dr. B from November 2006 to April 2007. (GE 1) In Section 22, which 
pertains to “Police Record,” Applicant said: 
 
I was under the influence of alcohol. I was going through a very hard time 
in my life and handled it very poorly. All requirements of the court have 
been fulfilled and the case has been closed. I have attended counseling 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
after my latest offense and understand why I acted like I did. My actions 
were of my own fault. I’ve learned from them and have actively strived to 
better my life since then. All requirements of the court have been satisfied 
and the cases closed. 
 
In the “Additional Comments” section on pages 49-50 of his SF 86, Applicant said: 
 
I am worried about the charges on my criminal record. Please be aware I 
have been in counseling for the latest incident and now understand why I 
committed [those] acts that I did. I no longer abuse alcohol and have since 
taken every opportunity to better my life. Please consider that I realize my 
mistakes were of my own cause and am actively bettering myself 
everyday. 
 
Applicant explained that he did not know the exact dates of therapy or counseling so he 
“encompassed the dates within that time frame.” (Tr. 34) 
 
  On his August 31, 2010 OPM personal subject interview (PSI), Applicant said 
that he received therapy from Dr. B from November 2006 to April 2007. (SOR ¶ 3.c) 
Applicant explained that he visited Dr. B’s office at the most, three times. (Tr. 34) 
 
 On Applicant’s October 15, 2010 OPM PSI, Applicant said that he received 
therapy from Dr. B from November 2006 to April 2007, attending four or five, one hour 
sessions with Dr. B during that time, which revealed that alcohol was the cause of his 
behavior. (SOR ¶ 1.d) He explained that at most he went to three sessions and that he 
just got the dates wrong. (Tr. 35) In regard to his 2005 offense, he said in 2005 he was 
caught after exposing himself to some girls. Actually, he was also charged with soliciting 
a lewd act from a minor. (SOR ¶ 1.e) In regard to his 2006 offense, he said he was 
arrested for exposing himself and he did not recall the details because he was 
intoxicated. (Tr. 36; GE 2; SOR ¶ 1.f) He did not reveal that he exposed himself to two 
people, and one was a minor. (SOR ¶ 1.f) 
 
 The police reports pertaining to the arrests in 2001 and 2006 are not part of 
Applicant’s file. Such reports might clarify the role of alcohol in these two offenses.     
 
Character Evidence2 
 
 A retired senior enlisted person, who is Applicant’s uncle, has known Applicant 
for 20 years and describes him as mature, responsible, and reliable. He will make the 
right decision even when under stress. A program manager and Applicant’s supervisor 
describes Applicant as honest, responsible, reliable, conscientious, mature, and 
ambitious. A colleague who worked with Applicant in 2010 described him as 
conscientious, diligent, honest, and trustworthy. None of Applicant’s character 
references’ statements evidence knowledge of his sexual crimes. Applicant completed 
                                            
2
The sources of the character evidence are statements submitted as part of Applicant’s SOR 
response. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
several technology-related courses, and has several certificates showing his efforts to 
improve his technical expertise.   
 
Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon meeting the criteria 
contained in the adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Adverse clearance decisions are made “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the [a]pplicant concerned.” See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision 
on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines D (sexual behavior), J (criminal conduct), and E 
(personal conduct) with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR. 
 
Sexual Behavior 
 
  AG ¶ 12 describes the security concern pertaining to sexual behavior: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. No adverse inference 
concerning the standards in this Guideline may be raised solely on the 
basis of the sexual orientation of the individual. 
 
  AG ¶ 13 lists four conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying including: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
  In February 2001, April 2005, and May 2006, Applicant exposed himself in public 
areas. Sometimes he exposed himself to children and masturbated. AG ¶¶ 13(a) to 
13(d) are all established. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  AG ¶ 14 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns including: 
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
 
  Applicant’s exposed himself in public areas, to adults and children, and he 
publicly masturbated most recently when he was approximately 30 years old. Dr. B 
recommended that Applicant receive counseling and therapy on a weekly basis for six 
months. Applicant was evaluated; however, he did not receive any therapy or 
counseling. Dr. L’s opinion is not sufficiently reliable to mitigate security concerns 
because he did not have access to the police reports describing Applicant’s offenses 
and he did not have corroborating information concerning Applicant’s alcohol 
consumption. Applicant provided some good character evidence; however, this 
evidence is not sufficient to establish he has changed. The sexual behavior is likely to 
recur, and as such it continues to serve as a basis for coercion and it casts doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. None of the mitigating conditions 
fully apply.  
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
  AG ¶ 30 details the concern arising from criminal conduct as follows: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
  AG ¶ 31 provides two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, “(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;” and 
“(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was 
formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.” The four criminal offenses are 
described in the sexual behavior section, and AG ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) are established. 
 
  AG ¶ 32 includes four conditions which may be applicable in this case: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
  Applicant admitted he committed the offenses, and he was not pressured into 
committing the offenses. The criminal conduct is not mitigated for the reasons stated in 
the sexual behavior section.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Four personal conduct disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 are potentially 
applicable. Those four disqualifying conditions provide:   
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an . . . investigator . . . ;3 
 
                                            
3
The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)). 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: . . . (3) a pattern of . . . or rule 
violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing.  .  .  .   
 
AG ¶ 16(b) applies. The Government produced substantial evidence that 
Applicant lied when he exaggerated the therapy and counseling he received in his SF 
86 and twice to an OPM investigator during his PSIs. He did not actually receive any 
significant therapy and counseling. Prior to completing his SF 86 and making two 
statements to OPM investigators, Applicant was referred by a therapist to Dr. B around 
May 2008, received an evaluation from Dr. B in May 2008, and went to Dr. B’s office to 
request a letter falsely indicating he was receiving therapy for his probation officer in 
July 2008.  
 
 The allegations in SOR ¶¶ 3.e and 3.f that he failed to list all the charged 
criminal offenses when interviewed by OPM investigators is not supported by 
substantial evidence. He provided the gist of his criminal offenses in 2001, 2005, and 
2006. The OPM interviews are summaries and the questions the investigators asked 
Applicant are not included. He denied that he intentionally omitted information.   
 
AG ¶ 16(d) applies. Applicant violated rules when he committed four criminal 
offenses, and when he exaggerated his receipt of counseling and therapy on his SF 86 
and during his two OPM PSIs.   
 
AG ¶ 16(e) applies. When Applicant committed four criminal sexual offenses, and 
when he exaggerated his receipt of counseling and therapy on his SF 86 and during his 
two OPM PSIs, he engaged in conduct which adversely affects his personal, 
professional, and community standing. Further analysis concerning applicability of 
mitigating conditions is required.    
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
AG ¶ 16(c) does not apply. There is sufficient credible adverse information under 
the sexual behavior and criminal conduct guidelines for an adverse determination. 
 
Four mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;   
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
AG ¶ 17(f) applies to the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 3.e and 3.f that he failed to list all 
the charged criminal offenses when interviewed by OPM investigators. He provided the 
gist of his criminal offenses in 2001, 2005, and 2006 to the OPM investigators.  
 
The personal conduct allegations in SOR ¶ 3.a duplicated the sexual behavior 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.d. The scope of his security-related conduct is thoroughly 
addressed under Guideline D and the Whole-Person Concept, infra. As such, SOR ¶ 
3.a is found for Applicant as a duplication of SOR ¶¶ 1.a to 1.d. 
 
The other SOR allegations in SOR ¶¶ 3.b, 3.c, and 3.d are that he intentionally 
provided false information when he exaggerated the therapy and counseling he 
received. This conduct was recent (July 13, 2010, August 31, 2010, and October 15, 
2010), is serious, and is not mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines D, J, and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) warrant additional comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting mitigation of security concerns under the whole-
person concept; however, they are insufficient to fully mitigate security concerns. 
Applicant is a 36-year-old network engineer, who earned an online bachelor’s degree in 
information systems security in 2006 as well as several certificates. He has completed 
numerous technical courses. Three character witnesses, including supervisors, a 
coworker, and an uncle, describe him as mature, responsible, reliable, honest, 
conscientious, mature, ambitious, diligent, and trustworthy. There are no allegations that 
Applicant violated security. He has the ability and maturity to comply with security 
requirements. He is an intelligent person, who understands the importance of 
compliance with security rules. There is no evidence of disloyalty. His admissions that 
he committed the sexual offenses are an important step towards rehabilitation and 
mitigation of security concerns.   
 
The evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more substantial at 
this time. In February 2001, April 2005, and May 2006, Applicant exposed his penis in 
public areas. Sometimes he exposed himself to children and masturbated. He was 
charged with four sexual behavior-type offenses. On July 13, 2010, he completed his 
SF 86. He listed the criminal offenses on his SF 86 and claimed he was receiving 
counseling or therapy from November 2006 to April 2007. Dr. B had recommended that 
he receive six months of weekly therapy. In reality he did not receive any therapy or 
counseling sessions. On August 31, 2010 and October 15, 2010, Applicant exaggerated 
the extent of his therapy and counseling to OPM investigators. Accurate information in a 
security context is crucial to national security. His sexual misbehavior in 2001, 2005, 
and 2006, and his false statements on his SF 86 and to OPM investigators show lack of 
judgment and raise unresolved questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information. 
  
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude sexual behavior, criminal 
conduct, and personal conduct concerns are not mitigated. For the reasons stated, I 
conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information.  
 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 3.b to 3.d:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 3.e and 3.f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
