 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-00168  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated personal conduct, financial considerations, and 
criminal conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 3, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines E (personal conduct), F (financial considerations), and J (criminal conduct). 
The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 22, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 20, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 3, 2012, scheduling the hearing for 
 
2 
 
October 25, 2012. The hearing was convened as scheduled. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 2, 2012.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 19 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. The Government also offered a demonstrative exhibit that was marked 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, called two witnesses, and submitted 
Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were admitted without objection.  
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Upon motion by Department Counsel, and without objection by Applicant, I made 
two minor amendments to the SOR by changing “1.f” to “2.f” in SOR ¶ 1.e, and by 
changing “December 1, 2005” to “December 21, 2005” in SOR ¶ 2.i. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer or a predecessor defense contractor on the same contract since 
2009. He is on administrative leave pending the result of this decision. He is applying for 
a security clearance for the first time. He is attending college. He has never married, 
and he has no children.1 
  
 Applicant has an extensive record of criminal actions and traffic infractions. He 
worked for a bank in 2004. He stole about $2,000 from the bank. He was charged with 
and convicted of the felony offense of embezzlement by bank employee. In February 
2006, he was sentenced to four months in prison, supervised release for three years, 
and drug treatment as directed.2 
 
 Applicant was arrested in August 2004 and charged with concealing 
merchandise, a misdemeanor. He pleaded guilty, and the finding was deferred. He 
completed community service, and the charge was dismissed.3   
 
 In November 2004, Applicant stole the wheels off a car. He was arrested and 
charged with grand larceny. He pleaded guilty to petit larceny. In January 2005, he was 
sentenced to 180 days in jail, with 170 days suspended, and probation for one year. His 
probation was revoked in January 2006 for a probation violation.4 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 23-26, 29, 43, 52; GE 1-3. 
 
2 Tr. at 21-22, 32-33; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 7, 8. 
 
3 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 19. 
 
4 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 8, 11, 14, 18. 
 
3 
 
 In August 2005, Applicant was cited for reckless driving, for driving 60 miles per 
hour (MPH) in a 25 MPH zone. He was tried in absentia, found guilty, and sentenced to 
a $200 fine and $87 in fees.5 
 
 Applicant was charged with assault in October 2005 and December 2005, 
stalking in December 2005, and impersonating law enforcement in May 2006. All the 
charges were eventually dismissed. He was cited in January 2006 for operating a 
vehicle with a radar detector/jamming device. The citation was dismissed.6  
 
 In December 2005, Applicant was cited for reckless driving. He was tried in 
absentia on February 1, 2006, and found guilty. He was sentenced to a $200 fine, $87 
in fees, and his driver’s license was suspended for 90 days.7 
 
 On December 20, 2005, Applicant violated a protective order that was issued 
against him. He pleaded guilty to the misdemeanor charge of violating a protective 
order. He was sentenced to 12 months in jail, with 11 months suspended for two years 
conditioned upon good behavior.8 
 
 Applicant was arrested in January 2006 and charged with the misdemeanor 
offenses of impersonating law enforcement, driving under revocation/suspension, and 
unlawful purchase/possession of alcoholic beverage. He pleaded guilty in May 2006 to 
impersonating law enforcement, and the other charges were dismissed. He was 
sentenced to 360 days in jail, with 340 days suspended for two years.9   
 
 In about March 2009, Applicant stole three or four laptop computers from his 
employer and sold them at a pawn shop. He was terminated from his job, but he was 
never prosecuted.10  
 
 A protective order was issued against Applicant in April 2010. It was rescinded 
upon the petitioner’s request in May 2010. There is no evidence that Applicant ever 
violated the protective order.11     
 
 
                                                          
5 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 17. 
 
6 Tr. at 31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 5, 8, 9, 13, 14, 16. 
 
7 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 17. 
 
8 Tr. at 20, 31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 6, 8, 12. 
 
9 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 8, 10. 
 
10 Tr. at 22, 33-35; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
11 Tr. at 31; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 4. 
 
 
4 
 
 In September 2010, Applicant was cited for speeding by going 100 MPH in a 55-
MPH zone. He pleaded guilty to driving 84 MPH. He was sentenced to a $207 fine and 
$25 court costs.12 
 
 Applicant has had a troubled employment history. As discussed above, he lost 
jobs in 2004 and 2009 after stealing from his employers. He was terminated by his 
employer in December 2003 for deliberately entering inaccurate information on his time 
sheet, and he lost jobs in August 2004 and August 2005 for absenteeism.13  
 
 Applicant has had financial issues for a number of years. He filed Chapter 7 
bankruptcy in 2008, and his debts were discharged in 2010.14  
 
 Applicant did not file his federal and state income tax returns or pay his taxes 
when they were due for tax years 2005, 2007, 2008, and 2010. He filed the returns in 
June 2012. He has been making payments to the state since 2010. He paid $369 in 
2010 and $2,191 in 2011. As of June 2012, he owed the state $9,408. In July 2012, he 
established a $297 per month payment plan with the state. He has made five payments. 
He paid $2,726 to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in October 2011. As of June 
2012, he owed the IRS about $11,994. In July 2012, he entered an installment 
agreement with the IRS to pay $170 per month. He has made five payments. He has 
received financial counseling.15  
 
It has been more than three and a half years since Applicant stole the laptop 
computers from his employer and more than two years since his last speeding violation. 
Applicant credibly testified that he has matured and moved beyond his reckless youthful 
actions. He lives with his grandparents and helps take care of them. He is striving to 
make his family proud of him. He has a good job where he is highly regarded, and he 
earns a good salary. He will remain employed with or without a clearance. He plans to 
complete his bachelor’s degree and then continue his education and earn a master’s 
degree.16   
 
Two witnesses, including Applicant’s grandfather and a police officer, testified on 
Applicant’s behalf. Both testified that Applicant has matured and changed into a 
dependable, hard-working, honest young man. Applicant submitted a voluminous 
amount of character letters, including several from senior military officers. The authors 
praised his excellent job performance, professionalism, work ethic, intelligence, 
                                                          
12 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3. 
 
13 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
14 Tr. at 36-38; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
15 Tr. at.38-53; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
16 Tr. at 19-30, 44, 52-53. 
 
 
5 
 
dedication, competence, dependability, reliability, honesty, maturity, loyalty, and 
integrity.17 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
                                                          
17 Tr. at 56-72; GE 2; AE A. 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and  
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program.  
 
Applicant’s multiple offenses, arrests, convictions, and probation violation are 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 The criminal charges in SOR ¶¶ 2.c, 2.g, 2.h, and 2.j were all dismissed without 
a conviction. That is some evidence that Applicant did not commit the offenses. AG ¶ 
32(c) is applicable to those allegations.  
 
 It has been more than three and a half years since Applicant stole the laptop 
computers from his employer and more than two years since his last speeding violation. 
Applicant credibly testified that he has matured and moved beyond his reckless youthful 
actions. He has a good job where he is highly regarded and he earns a good salary. I 
 
7 
 
was quite impressed with Applicant and how he presented himself. Despite his lengthy 
record, Applicant is still a young man. I believe he is on the right path to rehabilitation. 
However, his offenses were numerous and occasionally serious. Moreover, he did not 
fulfill his legal obligation to file his state and federal tax returns until June 2012. 
Applicant has not established a track record of responsible law-abiding behavior. He 
has started down that road, but he is not there yet. AG ¶ 32(a) is not applicable; AG ¶ 
32(d) is partially applicable. I conclude that criminal conduct concerns remain despite 
the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; 
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of propriety information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information; 
 
      (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
8 
 
 Applicant has a history of dishonesty and an unwillingness to comply with rules, 
regulations, and the law. He failed to show up for work, lied to employers, and stole 
from them. He disregarded a protective order and the rules of the road. All of the above 
disqualifying conditions are applicable. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant ever violated the protective order issued 
against him in April 2010. It was rescinded upon the petitioner’s request in May 2010. 
The citation for operating a vehicle with a radar detector/jamming device was dismissed. 
AG ¶ 17(f) is applicable to SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.d.  
 
Applicant’s efforts to modify his conduct are addressed under the criminal 
conduct discussion. Personal conduct concerns are not mitigated for the same rationale 
discussed under that guideline.  
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
 
9 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(g) failure to file annual Federal, state, or local tax returns as required or 
the fraudulent filing of the same. 
 
 Applicant had a number of debts discharged in bankruptcy. He did not file his 
state and federal tax returns and pay his taxes as required. The evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant filed his state and federal tax returns in June 2012. He has been 
making payments since 2010, and he entered installment agreements with the state and 
the IRS in July 2012. However, he still owes the state and the IRS about $20,000. 
Applicant received financial counseling, but he has not yet established a track record of 
responsible fiscal behavior. His financial issues are recent and ongoing. I am unable to 
 
10 
 
determine that they are unlikely to recur. They continue to cast doubt on Applicant’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(c) is partially applicable. 
There are no other applicable mitigating conditions.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines E, F, and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant has an extensive history of criminal actions, traffic infractions, and 
irresponsible financial decisions. He clearly appears to be headed in the right direction. 
However, he has not yet established a track record of responsible behavior sufficient to 
warrant a security clearance. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated personal conduct, financial considerations, and criminal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e-1.i:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 2.c:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.d-2.f:   Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 2.g-2.h:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.i:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.j:    For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 2.k-2.m:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline F:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 3.a-3.e:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
