 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-06126 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Fahryn Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 5, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F. 
This action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
In an undated letter, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The 
case was assigned to me on July 18, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on August 
6, 2012, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on August 29, 2012. At the 
hearing, Department Counsel offered Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 that were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s list of exhibits was 
 
2 
 
marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits 
(AE) A through G that were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant’s list of 
exhibits was marked as HE 2. The record was left open until September 26, 2012, to 
provide Applicant an opportunity to submit additional matters. He timely submitted 
documents that were marked as AE H through T and admitted into evidence without 
objection. Department Counsel’s memorandum forwarding Applicant’s post-hearing 
submission was marked as HE 3. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
September 7, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
working for his current employer since March 2010. He graduated from high school in 
2000. He served in the U.S. Air Force from 2000 to 2005, achieved the grade of senior 
airman (E-4), and received an honorable discharge. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 
2007. He is married and has two step-children, ages 14 and 15. In the Air Force, he 
held a security clearance without incident.1  
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant had 11 delinquent debts totaling $50,702. In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied two debts (SOR ¶¶ 1b and 1.e) totaling $9,626 
and admitted the remaining debts totaling $41,076. His admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact.2 
 
 Applicant attributed his financial problems to periods of unemployment, low 
paying jobs, and expenses incurred in moving to different states to obtain employment. 
After his discharge from the Air Force, he attended college for two years to complete his 
bachelor’s degree. His plan was to become a teacher. While attending school, he 
worked as a sales associate in a department store and as a waiter in a restaurant. After 
completing school, he moved to another state and was unemployed from March 2007 to 
August 2007. At that point, he was living with his future wife who also had a bachelor’s 
degree and was planning to be a teacher. Neither was able to obtain a full-time teaching 
job. They worked as substitute teachers, but their work was not steady. They married in 
August 2008. Their total income was $30,943 in 2008 and $17,999 in 2009. He stated 
that they found themselves “juggling credit cards just to stay afloat.” He continued 
working as a substitute teacher in two school districts from August 2007 to August 2009. 
They then moved again to another state and temporarily lived with her parents. He was 
unemployed from August 2009 to October 2009. During his periods of unemployment, 
he did not collect unemployment compensation. Again, they moved to another state for 
him to obtain employment. Since October 2009, he has worked as an aircraft mechanic 
for defense contractors. His wife was unemployed from August 2009 to about the fall of 
2011. She now works as a customer representative for a major telephone company. He 
indicated that, since his wife has obtained her job, they have sufficient monthly income 
to start resolving the debts. Additionally, he was recently diagnosed with skin cancer, 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 6-7, 26-29, 62-63; GE1, 5, 7. 
 
2 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 2-4, 6.  
 
 
3 
 
underwent major surgery, and missed work for about two and a half weeks. While 
recovering from his surgery, he received $300 of disability pay per week.3 
 
 The alleged debts are addressed separately below. 
  
 SOR ¶ 1.a – collection account for $592. This was a credit card account with a 
date of last activity of January 2011. Applicant settled and paid this debt on July 19, 
2012.4 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.b – collection account for $41. This was a medical account that had a 
date of last activity of January 2011 and was placed for collection in July 2011. 
Applicant denied this debt because he had no knowledge of it. He testified that he called 
the company in March 2012 and was told him the debt belonged to another person. In 
his post-hearing submission, he indicated that it was his wife’s debt. He provided a letter 
from a collection agency showing a medical debt for $22 was paid on September 14, 
2012.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c – collection account for $5,888. This was a credit card account from a 
jewelry store that he used primarily for cash advances. It had a date of last activity of 
August 2009. He testified that this debt was settled. In support of that claim, he 
indicated that the debt no longer appeared on his credit report, but provided no proof of 
payment.6 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d – collection account for $4,498. This was a credit card account with a 
date of last activity of September 2009. Applicant settled and paid this debt for $1,439 in 
August 2012.7  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.e – charged-off account for $9,585. This was a credit card account with 
a date of first delinquency/date of last activity of November 2009. Applicant used this 
credit card for expenses arising from his wedding. He denied this debt because he 
believed it was a duplicate of the account listed in SOR ¶ 1.h, below, which he admitted. 
In his security clearance application (SCA), however, he listed both accounts as being 
delinquent. He indicated that he listed both accounts on his SCA because he was 
merely copying information from credit reports. His contention that he only had one 
account is supported by his credit reports. Each of the credit reports in the record listed 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 14-15, 26-27, 45-47, 53-57, 59-64; GE 1, 4, 7; AE Q, T.  
 
4 Tr. at 35-38, 42, 45; GE 2-4, 6, 7; AE A, H, K. 
 
5 Tr. at 29-30, 38-40, 43; GE 3, 4; AE H, M.  The account number in the collection agency’s letter 
does not match the account number for the alleged debt in GE 3. However, it is unknown whether this 
debt was transferred to another collection agency since that credit report and a new account number was 
assigned to it.  
 
6 Tr. at 38-42; GE 1-4, 6, 7; AE A, D.   
 
7 Tr. at 42-43; GE 2, 4, 6, 7; AE A, B, H, I. 
 
 
4 
 
only one credit card account from this creditor. Although the partial four-digit account 
number in GE 6 varies from the account numbers in the other credit reports, the date 
the account was opened (January 2008) and the date of last activity on the account 
(November 2009) is identical in all the credit reports. I find the account alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.h, below, is a duplicate of this debt. He provided no proof of payments towards this 
debt.8 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.f – collection account for $936. This was a credit card account with a 
date of last activity of February 2010. In his post-hearing submission, Applicant provided 
documentation showing this debt was settled and paid on September 10, 2010.9 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.g – charged-off account for $1,791. This was a credit card account that 
has a date of last activity of July 2009. Applicant stated that this creditor has been very 
hard to deal with. He stated that there has been no movement in settling this debt.10 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h – charged-off account for $9,041. This account was a duplicate of the 
one alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e, above. I find in favor of Applicant on this allegation.11 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.i – charged-off account for $11,700. This was a credit card account that 
has a date of last activity of October 2009. Applicant stated that he was attempting to 
negotiate monthly payments with the creditor. He provided no proof of payments.12 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.j – collection account for $5,759. This was a credit card account that 
was placed for collection in February 2011 and had a date of last activity of November 
2011. The original creditor charged off this account. No proof of payment was 
provided.13 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.k – charged-off account for $871. This was a credit card account with a 
date of last activity of October 2009. In his post-hearing submission, Applicant provided 
documentation showing this debt was settled and paid for $500 on September 14, 
2011.14 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant provided portions of credit reports reflecting he had 
three open revolving accounts that were current, that he had no collection accounts 
pending, that he had no public records on file, and that his credit score was “fair”, i.e., 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 14, 30-35, 43; GE 1-4, 6; AE A, H, O. 
 
9 Tr. at 42-43, 45; GE 1-4, 7; AE A, H, N. 
 
10 Tr. at 42-43; GE 1-4, 7; AE A. 
 
11 See note 8 and accompanying text.  
 
12 Tr. at 42-44, 69; GE 1-4, 6, 7; AE A. 
 
13 Tr. at 42-43; GE 2-4, 7; AE A. 
 
14 Tr. at 42-43, 45; GE 2-4, 6, 7; AE A, L. 
 
 
5 
 
609. He has indicated that he plans to pay his debts. He also stated that he contacted 
creditors in an attempt to settle particular debts and was informed the balance was 
zero.15 
 
 Applicant spoke to two attorneys about filing bankruptcy. At that time, he and his 
wife did not have enough money to file bankruptcy. After she became employed, they 
decided to try to settle the debts rather than file bankruptcy. In February 2012, he 
submitted a personal financial statement (PFS) that reflected his net monthly income 
was about $4,684, his total monthly expenses were $3,865, and his monthly debt 
payments were $690, which left him a net monthly remainder of $129. He testified that, 
since submitting the PFS, his wife’s salary increased about $500 per month and his 
monthly medical insurance payments decreased about $200. He and his wife have 
about $80,000 in student loans, some of which are in a deferment status. He also 
provided documentation showing he resolved a delinquent debt with the Department of 
Veteran’s Affairs that was not alleged in the SOR.16 
 
 Applicant and his wife took a Caribbean cruise in November 2006. He testified 
that his wife’s sister paid for that cruise. For his honeymoon, he and his wife took 
another Caribbean cruise in December 2008. He testified that they “probably paid a little 
more than [they] should have” for the honeymoon cruise. He and his family went on an 
out-of-state vacation to Florida this past year.17 
 
 Applicant provided two reference letters. One is from a co-worker and the other is 
from a work lead, which is a supervisor’s right-hand man. They describe him as reliable, 
hard-working, and conscientious. They noted that he is mission oriented and is an asset 
to the organization.18 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
                                                          
15 Tr. at 43-46, 53-57; AE C-F. 
 
16 Tr. at 45-53, 59; GE 4; AE J. 
 
17 Tr. at 53-55; GE 1. 
 
18 Tr. at 57-59; AE G.  
 
6 
 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
 
7 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated delinquent debts that he was unable or unwilling to satisfy 
for a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant graduated from college in 2007. At that time, he and his future wife 
planned to become teachers. They worked as substitute teachers for two years, but 
were unable to obtain permanent teaching jobs. As substitute teachers, their work was 
not steady and their income was low. They moved to different locations for better job 
opportunities. During this period, Applicant was unemployed from March to August 2007 
and from August to October 2009. His wife was unemployed from August 2009 to the 
fall of 2011. Applicant’s and his wife’s unemployment/underemployment were conditions 
beyond their control that contributed to the alleged financial problems. Applicant has not 
lived an extravagant lifestyle. Although he stated that he paid more than he should have 
for a honeymoon cruise in 2008, that expenditure was an exception and occurred before 
his financial difficulties became apparent. He consulted with attorneys about filing 
 
8 
 
bankruptcy, but decided against doing so. When his wife obtained a job in the fall of 
2011, his financial situation finally improved to the point at which he was able to start 
addressing his delinquent debts. With his modest net monthly remainder, he has been 
able to resolve five of the alleged debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.k). He entered 
into settlement agreements with the creditors for those debts and paid them. He has 
contacted the remaining creditors seeking to enter into payment arrangements, and a 
number of them informed him the debt no longer existed. His most recent credit report 
reflected that he had no collection accounts pending and no judgments or liens on file. 
While a debt falling off of credit reports may not establish good-faith resolution of it, 
such evidence supports a determination that an individual’s financial situation is being 
resolved or is under control. Applicant has acted responsibility in addressing his 
delinquent debts. He is living within his means and his financial problems are unlikely to 
recur. AG ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(c) apply. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(d) partially apply. AG ¶ 20(e) 
applies to the debt in SOR ¶ 1.h because it is a duplicate of the one in SOR ¶ 1.e.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant served in the Air Force for five years. He previously held a security 
clearance in the military without incident. By all accounts, he is a law-abiding citizen. His 
current co-workers describe him as reliable and hard working. Through no fault of his 
own, he encountered financial difficulties and has taken responsible steps to resolve 
those problems. He was candid and sincere at the hearing. He is current on his day-to-
day living expenses. His financial problems are not likely to recur. Both the applicable 
mitigating conditions and the whole-person analysis support a favorable clearance 
 
9 
 
decision. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns under the financial 
considerations guideline. 
  
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:  For Applicant  
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
   
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
