 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 11-07676 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie C. Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial 
Considerations). Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on January 5, 2011. 
On July 6, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) notified him that 
it was unable to find that it was clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
his eligibility for access to classified information, and it recommended that his case be 
submitted to an administrative judge for a determination whether to continue or revoke 
his clearance. DOHA set forth the basis for its action in a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
citing security concerns under Guidelines F. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on July 13, 2012; answered it on August 21, 2012; 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
August 24, 2012. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on September 18, 2012, 
and the case was assigned to me on September 21, 2012. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on September 28, 2012, scheduling it for October 23, 2012. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A and B, 
which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on November 
1, 2012. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the allegation in SOR ¶ 1.a and 
admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b through 1.j. His admissions in his answer and at 
the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old senior help-desk technician employed by a defense 
contractor since September 2010. He served on active duty in the U.S. Navy from 
January 1989 to January 2010 and retired as a chief petty officer (pay grade E-7). He 
has held a security clearance for about 25 years. (GX 2 at 190; Tr. 25.1)  
 
Applicant received an associate’s degree in electronics technology in June 1994, 
while on active duty. He is credentialed as a Microsoft Certified System Administrator, 
which is a requirement of his current job. (Tr. 27.) He is attending college part time, 
seeking a bachelor’s degree. He receives educational benefits of about $1,500 per 
month. (GX 2 at 185, 188, 212.) 
 
Applicant was unemployed for about four months after he retired from the Navy, 
and he worked as a subcontractor from April 2010 until he began his current job. He 
was underemployed as a subcontractor, earning only about $13 per hour. (Tr. 24.) 
 
 A co-worker for the past two years described Applicant as very knowledgeable, 
courteous, and dedicated. (AX B.) His area manager described him as a valuable 
employee who would not hesitate to work past his assigned hours to support a 
customer or an operational commitment. (AX A.)  
 
 Applicant married in July 1985. No children were born during the marriage. In 
2006, while deployed overseas, he realized that he had been unhappy in his marriage 
for the past ten years, because his wife attempted to control every aspect of his life. He 
filed for divorce in October 2006, and the divorce was granted in October 2009. (GX 1 at 
20; GX 2 at 187; Tr. 33.) 
 
 When Applicant divorced, he was ordered to pay alimony of $1,500 per month 
and $855 was deducted from his retired pay pursuant to the Former Spouse Protection 
                                                          
1 The page numbers on GX 2 begin with page 169.) 
 
3 
 
 
Act. (GX 2 at 206-11.) After he retired, he fell behind on his alimony payments due to 
his unemployment and underemployment. (GX 2 at 187.)  
 
 After Applicant’s divorce, he incurred expenses to establish a new home, but he 
admitted at the hearing that he “went too far” in enjoying his new-found freedom and 
spent too much on entertainment, a motorcycle, and other unnecessary expenses. (Tr. 
33-34.) 
 
Applicant began cohabiting with his fiancée, now his wife, in November 2006. 
They married in September 2011. (Tr. 38.) In late 2009, his fiancée became unable to 
work due to fibromyalgia, further reducing their household income. (GX 2 at 190; Tr. 
24.)  
 
Around March 2011, Applicant was ordered to begin paying an additional $300, 
to be applied to the alimony arrearage. (GX 2 at 196; Tr. 32.) The alimony arrearage is 
not reflected on Applicant’s credit reports. The only information regarding it was 
provided by Applicant in his SCA (GX 1 at 34), during personal subject interview in 
February 2011, and at the hearing. (GX 2 at 187-88, 196; Tr. 32.) 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant submitted a personal financial 
statement (PFS) in May 2012. It reflected net income of $6,649, expenses of $5,537, 
debt payments of $611, and a remainder of about $500. He indicated that he had been 
making small payments of $25 to $50 on the debts alleged in the SOR to demonstrate 
his good faith, but he stopped making the payments when other bills fell behind. (GX 2 
at 179-80.) He last made the small payments on his debts about six months before the 
hearing.  
 
Applicant testified that his intention is to resolve his financial problems by 
increasing his income. He hopes to earn pay increases, and has been able in the past 
to generate additional income from self-employed entrepreneurial activities. (GX 2 at 
188; Tr. 36, 41-42.) He has not sought financial counseling. He has no retirement 
accounts other than his military retirement, no savings accounts, and no emergency 
funds. His only tangible assets are his computer and a 13-year-old compact car. (Tr. 
37.) He has not disputed any of the debts, except for disagreeing with the amount of the 
alimony arrearage alleged in the SOR. (Tr. 35-38.) 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
4 
 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The SOR alleges ten delinquent debts totaling about $81,178. Applicant admitted 
owing about $76,000. The debts are an alimony arrearage alleged to be about $20,000 
(SOR ¶ 1.a), an unpaid $235 utility bill (SOR ¶ 1.b), and eight delinquent credit card 
accounts totaling about $60,942 (SOR ¶¶ 1.c-1.j). The concern under this guideline is 
set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 This concern is broader than the possibility that an applicant might knowingly 
compromise classified information in order to raise money. It encompasses concerns 
about an appellant’s self-control, judgment, and other qualities essential to protecting 
classified information. An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, or negligent in handling and safeguarding classified 
information. See ISCR Case No. 11-05365 at 3 (App. Bd. May 1, 2012). 
 
 The evidence establishes the following disqualifying conditions under this 
guideline:  
 
AG ¶ 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
AG ¶ 19(c): a history of not meeting financial obligations; and  
 
AG ¶ 19(e): consistent spending beyond one’s means, which may be 
indicated by excessive indebtedness, significant negative cash flow, high 
debt-to-income ratio, and/or other financial analysis. 
 
 The following mitigating conditions under this guideline are relevant: 
 
AG ¶ 20(a): the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 20(b): the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were 
largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
 
6 
 
 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
AG ¶ 20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) is not established. Applicant’s delinquent debts are numerous, recent, 
and did not occur under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. He admitted at 
the hearing that the credit card debts were due in part to irresponsible spending.  
 
 The first prong of AG ¶ 20(b) is established, because Applicant encountered 
several circumstances beyond his control, i.e., four months of unemployment after 
retiring from the Navy, five months of underemployment before finding his current job, 
and the expenses related to his divorce. However, the second prong of AG ¶ 20(b) is 
not fully established, because Applicant has not acted responsibly. He admitted that 
some of the credit card debt was due to irresponsible spending. He has been gainfully 
employed for more than two years, but he made only token payments on his credit card 
debts until about seven months ago, when he stopped them. He presented no evidence 
of efforts to compromise, settle, or otherwise resolve his debts. His PFS reflected that 
he had a net monthly remainder of at least $500, even with his token credit-card 
payments. He has done nothing to resolve the delinquent utility bill or credit card 
accounts for at least six months.  
 
 AG ¶ 20(d) is established for Applicant’s alimony arrearage, because the 
evidence reflects consistent effort to pay the court-ordered alimony and the arrearage. It 
is not established for the delinquent utility bill and credit card debts.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. In applying the whole-
person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all relevant 
circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative process 
factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 I have incorporated my comments under Guidelines F in my whole-person 
analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but 
some warrant additional comment. Applicant served honorably in the U.S. Navy for 
more than 20 years and held a security clearance for almost all his Navy service. He 
has a reputation for being a knowledgeable, courteous, conscientious employee. He 
was candid, sincere, and credible at the hearing.  
 
 A security clearance adjudication is aimed at evaluating an applicant’s judgment, 
reliability, and trustworthiness. It is not a debt-collection procedure. ISCR Case No. 09-
02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010.) An applicant is not required, as a matter of law, to 
establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only establish 
a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement the plan. 
There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent debts 
simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be paid 
first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). Applicant has no 
specific plan for resolving nine of the ten delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. He 
aspires to resolve them by increasing his income, but his aspirations have not evolved 
into a plan.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline F, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b-1.j:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to continue 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
