 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-04339 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric H. Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial 
considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 19, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG), effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 6, 2012, and elected to have his case 
decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s File of 
Relevant Material (FORM) on September 11, 2012. The FORM was mailed to Applicant 
 
2 
 
 
and he received it on September 24, 2012. Applicant was given an opportunity to file 
objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He provided an 
undated response (Response) to the FORM, which included several attachments. The 
case was assigned to me on November 14, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the SOR debts. Those 
admissions are adopted as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review of the 
pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old. He is separated from his wife. He has one child from 
that marriage for whom he pays child support. He also has another son who lives with 
him and his girlfriend. He has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, 
since February 2010. He also worked for a different defense contractor from September 
2009 to February 2010. He is a cable installer. He has taken some college courses. He 
served in the Army on active duty between 2002 and 2009. He achieved the rank of 
specialist (E-4) and received an honorable discharge.1  
  
 The debts listed in the SOR are supported by credit reports dated September 
2012, March 2012, December 2011, April 2011, and October 2010. Applicant claims the 
debts alleged in ¶¶ 1.a and 1.h. both arise from the same underlying debt. The debt 
alleged in ¶ 1.a is a judgment entered in January 2007 and is supported by a judgment 
and lien filing in the respective state for $2,891. The debt alleged in ¶ 1.h is to a 
different creditor than that named in ¶ 1.a and the amount is $2,861 as reflected in the 
September 2012 credit bureau report. This debt was charged off in 2006. Applicant 
entered into a payment plan arrangement to pay this debt in October 2012. He is to pay 
$300 each month on the first of the month. Applicant did not supply proof that he had 
made any payments under the plan. I find that there is insufficient evidence to show that 
the two debts are related. Both ¶¶ 1.a and 1.h. are unresolved.2  
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a consumer loan account in the 
amount of $6,838. This debt has been delinquent since December 2006. In September 
2012, Applicant entered into a debt relief plan to pay this debt. He did not supply 
evidence showing any payments under the plan. This debt is unresolved.3 
 
 Applicant provided documentation showing that the debts listed in ¶¶ 1.c through 
1.f and 1.j were paid. He also claims the debt listed in ¶ 1.e is a duplicate debt to the 
one listed in ¶ 1.i. Both debts are to the same underlying creditor. Applicant paid the ¶ 
                                                          
1 Item 3. 
 
2 Items 2-3, 7-11; Response. 
 
3 Items 2, 8; Response. 
 
 
3 
 
 
1.e debt in August 2012 and neither debt appears on his September 2012 credit bureau 
report. These debts are all resolved.4 
 
 The delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is a car loan account in the amount of 
$5,529. This debt has been delinquent since August 2007. In September 2012, 
Applicant entered into a debt relief plan to pay this debt. He did not supply evidence 
showing any payments under the plan. This debt is unresolved.5 
 
 Applicant stated part of the reason for his financial problems was that his 
estranged wife used his power of attorney while he was deployed to take out various 
loans. He was told by an attorney that he was ultimately responsible for those loans. His 
personal financial statement shows a net monthly remainder of $134 after he pays his 
expenses. This amount does not include money to pay the SOR-related debts.6 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
                                                          
4 Items 2, 7-11; Response. 
 
5 Item 2, 8; Response. 
 
6 Items 5-6. 
 
 
4 
 
 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and the following potentially apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and the following potentially apply: 
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
  
 Although Applicant paid many of the debts, the higher balance ones still remain 
unpaid. He did not provide sufficient evidence to show that the debts are unlikely to 
recur. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply because several of 
Applicant’s debts remain unresolved. Applicant provided evidence that his estranged 
wife’s misuse of his power of attorney contributed to his financial problems. However, in 
order for this mitigating condition to fully apply, Applicant must demonstrate responsible 
behavior in light of the circumstances. Although he showed some responsible behavior 
by paying some of the debts, he failed to produce evidence that he was making 
payments under an agreed payment plan. This demonstrates a lack of responsible 
behavior. I find AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies. Applicant failed to present evidence of 
financial counseling and while some debts were paid, there is no clear evidence that 
Applicant’s financial problems are being resolved or under control because the higher 
balance debts remain unpaid. There is some evidence that he has made a good-faith 
effort to pay or has attempted to resolve some of the debts. I find AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) 
partially apply. Applicant provided documented evidence showing that one debt was a 
duplicate (SOR ¶ 1.e and ¶ 1.i) I find for the Applicant on the duplicate debt. I find AG ¶ 
20(e) partially applies. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
6 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s service to 
his country and the impact his estranged wife had on his debt situation. However, he 
has not shown a track record of financial stability. The record lacks evidence that 
Applicant has made an overall good-faith effort to resolve his debts. Therefore, he failed 
to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1b:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.c – 1.f:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.g – 1.h:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.i – 1.j:    For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
