 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 REDACTED )  ISCR Case No. 11-07492 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MENDEZ, Francisco, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant did not falsify his security clearance application, as he fully disclosed 
his involvement with marijuana on his application and during the course of the ensuing 
background investigation. However, in light of his 12-year history of frequent marijuana 
use, which only ended in late 2010, the past two years of abstinence is insufficient to 
dispel the security concerns raised by his past drug use. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 15, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), setting out security concerns under Guideline 
H (Illegal Drug Involvement) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).1 On July 5, 2012, 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision based on the written record. 
                                                          
1
 DOHA took this action under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 On September 18, 2012, Department Counsel’s File of Relevant Material 
(FORM) was forwarded to Applicant.2 DOHA received Applicant’s Response on October 
15, 2012, and the file was forwarded to the Hearing Office on November 13, 2012.  
 
SOR Amendment 
 
 The SOR alleges in ¶ 1.a: “You have used marijuana, with varying frequency, 
from about September 1998 to at least November 2010. Upon completion of community 
service, this charge was dismissed in June 2002.” (emphasis added) The SOR further 
alleges in ¶ 1.c: “In about October 1999, you were charged with Possession of 
Marijuana in or near (z location).” Applicant admitted both allegations and neither side 
moved to amend the SOR to correct the allegations. Pursuant to Directive, Enclosure 3, 
¶ E3.1.17, the SOR is hereby amended by striking the last sentence in ¶ 1.a and adding 
said sentence to the end of ¶ 1.c.3  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. His wife recently gave birth to their first child. He is 
employed in the information technology field and has provided cyber security training to 
foreign law enforcement agencies and other entities around the globe. He is seeking a 
security clearance to help bolster the nation’s cyber security.4  
 
Applicant used marijuana on a frequent basis from about September 1998 to late 
2010. His illegal drug involvement led to his arrest and conviction in 1999 on a 
misdemeanor charge of marijuana possession. He was sentenced to community service 
and, after completing the community service, the charge was dismissed. Applicant 
stopped using marijuana because of health concerns and, with the arrival of his first 
child, his perspective on the use of marijuana changed.5 However, Applicant admits he 
would consider using marijuana in the future if he were diagnosed with a terminal 
illness. Applicant caveats this statement by noting that under no circumstances would 
he use marijuana if he were ever granted access to classified information.6 
 
Applicant disclosed his involvement with marijuana, including his 1999 marijuana 
conviction, on his security clearance application (SCA) that he submitted in January 
2011.7 During the ensuing background investigation, Applicant provided higher 
                                                          
2
 The FORM contains the Government’s argument and eight documentary exhibits. Government 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 are hereby admitted into the record. GE 7 and 8 are not admitted as they are 
cumulative with GE 6 and provide no additional, relevant information.  
 
3
 The alleged location has been omitted to further protect Applicant’s identity and privacy. 
 
4
 GE 3 at 5, 33-34; GE 4, Q. 6; Response. 
 
5
 GE 2 – GE 6. 
 
6
 GE 2; GE 4; Response. 
 
7
 GE 3 at 37-38. 
 
3 
 
 
estimates of the amount of marijuana he had used during that 12 year time frame than 
he had previously provided on his SCA.8 Applicant explained that the higher estimates 
he provided were simply estimates, and at no time did he attempt to hide from the 
Government his past marijuana use or the fact that he had used it on a frequent basis.9  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged in 
the SOR. Directive ¶ E3.1.14. On the other hand, an applicant is responsible for 
presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts 
admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
In resolving this ultimate question, an administrative judge must resolve “[a]ny doubt 
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information . . . in favor 
of national security.” AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. 
Decisions regarding an applicant’s suitability include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
                                                          
8
 Compare GE 3 at 38 [From approximately 9/98 to 11/10 “I have smoked marijuana on and off 
since college (up to a few times per month)]”, with, GE 4, Subject Interview (“From 9/98-11/10 the subject 
has used marijuana approximately 3-4 times per month”) and GE 4, Interrogatory Responses, Q. 1 (from 
approximately 9/98 to 11/10, used marijuana on average 3-4 times per week).  
 
9
 GE 2; Response. 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern regarding illegal drug involvement is set forth at AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
 Applicant’s illegal drug involvement from 1998 to late 2010 raises the above 
concern and the following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 25: 
 
 (a)  any drug abuse; and 
 
(b) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.  
 
 AG ¶ 26 sets forth a number of conditions that could mitigate the Guideline H 
concern. The following mitigating conditions were potentially raised by the evidence: 
 
(a)  the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b)  a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future . . . 
 
 Applicant no longer associates with those he was arrested with in 1999 and 
writes that he has matured greatly with the birth of his child. Although I do not question 
Applicant’s sincerity, his last use of marijuana occurred just two months before he 
submitted his SCA. At this point, only two years have passed since his last use of 
marijuana. In light of Applicant’s extensive use of marijuana over a 12-year time span, 
this recent period of abstinence and other favorable record evidence is insufficient to 
establish AG ¶ 25(a) or (b). Applicant’s past drug use remains a concern.  
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The personal conduct concern is set forth at AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
 
5 
 
 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his SCA when he estimated 
that he had used marijuana “up to few times a month from September 1998 to 
November 2010,” rather than his later estimate of three to four times weekly. This 
allegation raises the applicability of disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(a).10 
 
 The security clearance process is contingent upon the honesty of all applicants. It 
begins with the answers provided in the SCA. An applicant should disclose any potential 
derogatory information. However, the omission of material, adverse information 
standing alone is not enough to establish that an applicant intentionally falsified. 
Instead, an administrative judge must examine the facts and circumstances surrounding 
the omission to determine an applicant’s true intent.11 
 
 Applicant did not falsify his SCA. He not only voluntarily provided the adverse 
information about his drug use that forms the basis of the drug involvement concern, but 
also disclosed other relevant information on his SCA, to include providing detailed 
information about his cyber security work for foreign governments. Furthermore, 
Applicant has been fully upfront and cooperative throughout his background 
investigation. His estimates regarding the amount of marijuana he used during a 12-
year time span in his SCA, during his background interview, and then in response to 
DOHA interrogatories, were nothing more than estimates based on his own faulty 
memory and assumptions. The material, adverse information that placed the 
Government on notice of a potential concern was the fact that Applicant had frequently 
used marijuana from 2008 to late 2010, as disclosed in his SCA and alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.a; not the estimates of such use that Applicant tried to discern years later. Applicant’s 
estimates increased to provide the Government the high end, worst case scenario 
regarding the extent of his past drug use in order to allow the Government to make an 
informed decision as to his suitability. An individual who intends to hide or mislead the 
Government about his past drug involvement would not have been as forthcoming. 
Applicant’s sincerity did not falter even after he was made aware of the Government’s 
concern regarding his past drug use. He did not backtrack from his prior statements 
regarding his frequent marijuana use and freely admits he would consider using 
marijuana again if he were diagnosed with a terminal illness. Again, an individual who 
seeks to deceive or mislead would not be so candid. Accordingly, the personal conduct 
concern is decided in Applicant’s favor.  
 
                                                          
10
 Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
11
 See generally ISCR Case No. 02-12586 (App. Bd. Jan. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-15935 
(Appl. Bd. Oct. 15, 2003). 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a).12 I considered the favorable and extenuating factors in 
this case, including Applicant’s employment record, his honesty throughout the security 
clearance process, and how he has matured with the birth of his child. However, this 
favorable evidence does not fully mitigate the concerns raised by his past drug use. 
Hopefully, Applicant will continue to abstain from illegal drug use and be able to 
establish his suitability for a clearance in the near future. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings regarding the SOR allegations: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H (Drug Involvement)        AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a :         Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph   1.b:          For Applicant13 
  Subparagraphs 1.c & 1.d:         Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct)       FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph   1.a:          For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of the record evidence and for the foregoing reasons, it is not clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified information. 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________ 
Francisco Mendez 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
12
 The adjudicative factors are: (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and 
recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent 
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
13
 SOR ¶ 1.b alleges the purchase of marijuana that Applicant later used, which is duplicative of 
the disqualifying conduct alleged in ¶ 1.a. The allegations are merged and ¶ 1.b is decided for Applicant. 
