 
 
1 
               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 11-04513 
                       ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Raashid Williams, Esq., Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has not mitigated the concerns raised under the guidelines for outside 
activities and foreign influence. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On May 11, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) setting forth security concerns under 
Guidelines L (Outside Activities) and B (Foreign Influence) of the Adjudicative 
Guidelines (AG).1 Applicant submitted a notarized Answer to the SOR in which he 
denied the allegations under Guidelines L and B. Applicant also requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. 
 
                                                 
1 
Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on August 6, 2012, and the case 
was assigned to me on August 9, 2012. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on August 
31, 2012, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on September 20, 2012. 
Department Counsel offered two exhibits, which I admitted as Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 and 2. Applicant testified and submitted five exhibits, which I admitted as 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through E. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on September 
28, 2012. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 I take administrative notice of facts relating to the Philippines and Republic of 
Korea (ROK; South Korea), set forth in 22 documents submitted by Department 
Counsel. (Hearing Exhibit [HE] I) I also take administrative notice of a Department of 
State document related to the Philippines, submitted by Applicant. (HE II) The facts 
administratively noticed are limited to matters of general knowledge and not subject to 
reasonable dispute. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and 
the record evidence, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
Applicant, 57 years old, has been married for 30 years, and has two children, 23 
and 26 years old. He holds a bachelor’s degree in political science and a master’s 
degree in finance. Applicant, his wife, and his children are native-born U.S. citizens. He 
is currently president and chief executive officer (CEO) of his own company. Since 
March 2010, he has also been a consultant to a defense contractor. This is his first 
application for a security clearance. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 29-32) 
 
For the past 20 years, Applicant’s work has focused on building infrastructure in 
international markets for U.S.-based telecommunications carriers. From about the mid-
1990s to 2008, he worked for a number of U.S. telecommunications companies. In the 
1990’s, he worked in Russia, Poland, and Belarus. In 2004, a defense contracting 
company hired him to help solve issues related to secure mobile communications in the 
Gulf region. The same company is currently sponsoring his security clearance 
application. Since July 2008, he has operated his own company, which is incorporated 
in Singapore and functions as a consultant to other companies. Applicant testified that, 
“The majority of the business that I conduct is for U.S. entities, typically with a military 
communications network looking for services and conductivity for their networks to work 
in that part of the world.” Applicant testified that, to his knowledge, neither his 
employer’s facility security officer (FSO) nor any other authorized security official has 
evaluated his foreign work activities or contacts. (GE 1, 2; AE C; Tr. 21-23, 28, 30-31, 
83) 
 
 
 
3 
Applicant travels at least six times per year to the Philippines, and usually also 
visits Hong Kong and Singapore. Between 2003 and 2010, the date of his security 
investigation, he traveled to South Korea, Argentina, Germany, the Netherlands, 
Canada, the Philippines, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, Hong Kong, Tonga, Japan, 
India, and China. Between 2007 and 2010, he attended international conferences and 
trade shows in Thailand, South Korea, Singapore, and France. The conferences 
focused on establishing, improving, and financing mobile and satellite communications 
in Southeast Asian countries. In 2007, he also attended a broadband conference in 
Malaysia, which was sponsored by the Malaysia Ministry of Communications and 
Information. In mid-2010, Applicant attended a four-day electronics and 
telecommunications conference in Seoul, South Korea, where he gave a presentation. 
He was not compensated for his presentation. Since December 2010, Applicant has 
traveled to India, Nepal, and Bhutan. (GE 1, 2; Tr. 64-67) 
 
Over the past several years, Applicant has played a significant role in, or been 
involved with, the following entities. 
 
 Company S (allegation 1.a): Applicant is president and CEO of Company S. In 
2008, Applicant formed the company in part to acquire a license to operate in 
Southeast Asia. Company S is incorporated in Singapore, because it receives 
favorable tax treatment there. It also has an operating office in the Philippines, which it 
shares with Company TD. Applicant co-founded Company S with Mr. D, a citizen and 
resident of the Philippines, because operating the business required that a local 
partner hold the majority ownership. Mr. D is associated with company TD, which 
owned a communications license that Applicant wished to acquire so that he could 
operate in Southeast Asian countries. Mr. D is the chairman of the board of directors of 
Company S. Mr. M, a citizen and resident of the Philippines, is the general manager. 
Applicant owns 50 percent of Company S. Applicant estimated that approximately 
$120,000, or 40 percent of his annual income, comes from Company S. (GE 2; Tr. 23, 
33-37, 39, 42, 81) 
 
 Company EC (allegation 1.b): Company EC was a publicly traded Philippine 
company that was no longer operational. Company EC was owned by Mr. D, and it held 
a telecommunications franchise license in the Philippines. In 2008, Company S invested 
in Company EC in order to use Company EC’s license. Company S acquired 36 percent 
of the company for $2.7 million, with a $200,000 deposit and a note for the remainder. 
In about 2009 or 2010, Company S’s share was reduced to about 20 percent. Through 
Company EC, Company S provides uplink facilities to U.S. government agencies. 
Applicant testified that he does not receive income from Company EC, and the 
company does not work with foreign governments. (AE B; Tr. 24-25, 42-45, 81-82) 
 
 Institute ET (allegation 1.c): In 2010, several U.S. communications carriers 
sought to integrate a regional satellite system with a cellular telephone system so that 
communications could be maintained during a catastrophic natural event, such as a 
tsunami. Institute ET was working on the issue. During his security interview, Applicant 
 
 
4 
noted that this entity is owned by a South Korean citizen, and that it is funded by the 
government of South Korea. Applicant provided consulting service over a period of 
about eight weeks, working in collaboration with representatives from South Korea, 
Japan, and Taiwan. Applicant has not had contact since 2010 with the lead researcher 
or individuals with whom he worked on the project. (GE 2; Tr. 26-27, 45-48) 
 
 Organization A (allegation 1.d): Organization A is a foreign bank that provides 
loans and grants to Southeast Asian countries, with the goal of mitigating poverty in the 
region. It is located in the Philippines. The U.S. government supports its work. In 2010, 
Applicant contracted to serve as an advisor to Organization A, which is working to build 
a fiber-optic network among several Southeast Asian countries. Applicant negotiates the 
interconnection agreements between the countries and the communications carriers. 
Over the course of 18 months between 2010 and 2011, Applicant earned approximately 
$45,000 to $50,000 for his consulting, which comprised about 20 to 25 percent of his 
income at the time. Although he remains under contract, the project is complete and he 
is no longer actively working on it. (GE 2; AE D; Tr. 25-26, 48-52) 
 
 Company TD -  is a consortium of 30 companies located in countries around the 
world. Company TD is incorporated in the Philippines, Japan, Panama, and Singapore. 
Several employees of Company TD are also members of the board of Applicant's 
Company S. Company TD is not alleged in the SOR. (Tr. 36) 
 
 Company R - is a private equity group. The only relationship noted during the 
hearing between Applicant's Company S and Company R is that Company S uses 
Company R’s address for its corporate office. (Tr. 61) 
 
 Company AP - Applicant formed Company AP, a U.S. Company, to develop 
technology in Southeast Asia. He and other family members comprise the board of 
directors. Company AP includes Company S, discussed previously, and Company T, an 
investment group. The SOR does not allege Applicant's involvement in Company AP or 
Company T. (Tr. 23, 33) 
 
Applicant testified that all of his clients are U.S. companies, that Company S 
does not work with foreign governments, and it is not involved in technology transfer. He 
also testified that he does not have foreign real estate or foreign bank accounts, except 
for a small account of $300 that he maintains in the Philippines in order to have cash 
available. He provided a sample three-month contract between Company S and a U.S. 
company that would retain Company S to serve as a liaison to establish antiterrorism 
training facilities in the Philippines. The contract described Company S as “uniquely 
positioned in the Republic of the Philippines; having a physical presence with 
commercial operating entities, various proprietary industry relationships, and training 
facilities….” The contract also indicates that, as of July 2011, Company S maintained a 
bank account in Hong Kong where contract compensation was to be deposited. (AE C; 
Tr. 28, 44-45, 71) 
 
 
 
5 
Applicant is in contact with a number of business associates who are citizens and 
residents of other countries, and are employed by Company S or other companies with 
which he works. They include the following. (Tr. 55, 59-60) 
 
 Mr. D – As discussed previously, Mr. D is the co-founder of Company S and 
partner with Applicant, and is also chairman of the board of that company. He is a 
citizen-resident of the Philippines. Applicant has known him since 2008, and describes 
him as a “very good friend.” They are in touch about once per week. (GE 2; Tr. 34-35, 
58-59) 
 
 Ms. N – is the CFO of company TD, and also holds the position of CFO on the 
board of directors of Company S. Applicant has known her since 2008. She represented 
the company that sold shares of Company EC to Company S in 2008. She is a citizen of 
the Philippines. Applicant is in contact with her once per month. (GE 1, 2; AE B; Tr. 35-
36, 57-59) 
 
 Mr. K – is a citizen-resident of South Korea. Mr. K works for Institute ET, and 
Applicant worked with him on that telecommunications project. Applicant has had no 
contact with Mr. K since 2010. (GE 2; Tr. 53-54) 
 
 Mr. S – is an attorney who serves as general counsel on the board of directors of 
Company S. The evidence does not note Mr. S’s citizenship or residency. (Tr. 35) 
 
 Ms. B – is an administrative assistant at Company TD. She assisted him in 
assembling his travel schedule and arrangements. She is a citizen-resident of the 
Philippines. Applicant has known her since 2008. (GE 2; Tr. 57) 
 
 Mr. M – As discussed, Mr. M is a citizen-resident of the Philippines. He is the 
general manager of Company S, the general manager of Company EC2 and an 
employee of Company TD. Applicant has known Mr. M since 2008, and speaks with him 
about three times per week. (GE 2; Tr. 35-36) 
 
 Ms. L – is a resident of Hong Kong, China, but Applicant is uncertain of her 
citizenship. She is the project manager for organization A. Applicant has known her 
since 2010. Applicant works with Ms. L on funding for companies that wish to purchase 
technology through Company S. As of 2010, Applicant was in touch with her about 
monthly by email and telephone. (GE 1; Tr. 61-62) 
 
 Mr. C – is the founder and owner of Company R, a private equity group. He is a 
citizen-resident of Singapore. Applicant describes him as a colleague. He allowed 
Applicant to use Company R’s address in the corporate filings for Company S. As of the 
date of Applicant's security interview, he saw Mr. C two times per year to discuss 
possible business ventures for Company S. (GE 2; Tr. 62-64) 
                                                 
2
 Applicant testified that Mr. M is general manager of both Company EC and Company S. (Tr. 35-36) 
 
 
6 
 Ms. K – is also the director of Company S in Singapore. She is a citizen-resident 
of Singapore and also an employee of Company R. Applicant has known her since 
2008. As of the date of Applicant's 2010 security interview, he had contact with her four 
times per year. (GE1, 2; Tr. 60-61) 
 
 Mr. L – was the lead researcher at Institute ET and was Applicant’s point of 
contact when he worked with Institute ET. Applicant has not been in contact with Mr. L 
since 2010. Mr. L is a citizen-resident of South Korea. (GE 2; Tr. 47-48) 
 
 Ms. A – is an attorney at Company TD in the Philippines. She assists Applicant 
with documentation he files with the Philippines regulatory agency. She is a citizen-
resident of the Philippines. Applicant has known her since 2008, and is in touch with her 
about every other month. (GE 2; Tr. 56-57) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
The Philippines 
 
 The Republic of the Philippines (the Philippines) is a representative democracy 
modeled on the U.S. system. The Philippines and the United States are allies, with a 
history of ties dating back to 1898. Traditionally, the United States has been the 
country’s largest investor. The United States and the Philippines have agreed to a 
Partnership for Growth covering the years 2012 to 2016. It will use both countries’ 
resources to deal with the “most serious constraints to economic growth and 
development in the Philippines.” One goal is to create a transparent and predictable 
legal and regulatory regime that is “less encumbered by corruption.” (HE I; HE II) 
 
 The nation has experienced severe economic decline since the end of World 
War II, as has its infrastructure and ability to provide policy and regulatory stability. In 
addition, the government faces threats from terrorist groups, including some on the 
U.S. government’s foreign terrorist organization list, such as Abu Sayyyaf (ASG) and 
Jemaah Islamiya (JI). ASG has kidnapped foreign tourists, and both ASG and the 
Rajah Solaiman Movement (RSM) present major problems for the government. A 
Philippine offensive against terrorists resulted in the capture or death of more than 200 
terrorists since 2007. However, tensions existing between the government and the 
Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) have resulted in MILF-sponsored bombings, 
assassinations, and kidnappings. Human rights issues are also a serious destabilizing 
concern. Violence against women, child prostitution, trafficking in persons, and 
arbitrary arrests and detention were common. As of 2011, the Department of State 
reported that serious problems exist related to killings by security forces, and political 
killings, including killings of journalists, by state and non-state actors. (HE I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
The Republic of Korea (ROK; South Korea) 
 
 Following the Korean War from 1950 to 1953, South Korea experienced political 
turmoil that included autocratic leadership, restriction of political freedoms, military 
coups, declarations of martial law, and violent confrontations. Protests in the 1970s 
and 1980s against authoritarian rule led to political concessions in 1987, including 
restoration of direct presidential elections. The transition to democracy continued 
through the 1990s and 2000s. (HE I) 
 
 Currently, South Korea is a stable, democratic republic, which has been a close 
U.S. ally since 1950. Thousands of U.S. military personnel are stationed in South 
Korea, and the two countries frequently conduct joint military operations. However, 
South Korea has a history of intelligence-gathering efforts against the United States 
and collecting protected U.S. information. In the past, it has collected information on 
computer systems, aerospace technologies, and nuclear technologies. Although the 
United States restricts the export of sensitive, dual-use technologies, South Korea has 
been the unauthorized recipient of such technology. (HE I) 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be an impartial and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.3 Decisions 
also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). 
 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent policy 
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest4 for an applicant to receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the Government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the Government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.5 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
                                                 
3 
Directive § 6.3. 
4
See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
5 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
8 
trust and confidence. The Government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to safeguard 
classified information. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access to classified 
information in favor of the Government.6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline L, Outside Activities 
 
 AG ¶ 36 under Guideline L indicates that 
 
Involvement in certain types of outside employment or activities is of 
security concern if it poses a conflict of interest with an individual's security 
responsibilities and could create an increased risk of unauthorized 
disclosure of classified information. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 37, and find that the 
following subparagraph is relevant: 
 
(a) any employment or service, whether compensated or volunteer, with:  
 
(1) the government of a foreign country;  
 
(2) any foreign national, organization, or other entity;  
 
(3) a representative of any foreign interest;  
 
(4) any foreign, domestic, or international organization or person 
engaged in analysis, discussion, or publication of material on 
intelligence, defense, foreign affairs, or protected technology.  
 
Applicant’s work in foreign countries poses a risk of disclosure of classified 
information. He is the president and CEO of Company S, which is incorporated in 
Singapore. He receives 40 percent of his income from Company S. His partner in 
Company S, a foreign citizen and resident, is also the chairman of the board of 
directors of Company S. The general manager of Company S is also a foreign citizen 
and resident. Applicant's Company S invested in Company EC, which is incorporated 
in the Philippines. Although Applicant does not receive income from Company EC, he 
has a financial interest in it, because his Company S owns a 20 percent share of 
Company EC. Applicant also has had past and present relationships with other foreign 
entities. He had a business relationship with Institute ET when he provided consulting 
                                                 
6 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
9 
services to the institute in 2010. The institute is owned by a South Korean citizen and 
receives funds from the government of South Korea. During his employment at Institute 
ET, he worked with foreign citizens from Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. In 2010 and 
2011, Applicant was an advisor to organization A, a foreign financial entity, and earned 
20 to 25 percent of his income from that work. Although the work is complete, he is still 
under contract to the organization. AG ¶ 37 (a) (2) applies. 
 
I considered both of the conditions that could mitigate security concerns under 
AG ¶ 38: 
 
(a) evaluation of the outside employment or activity by the appropriate 
security or counterintelligence office indicates that it does not pose a 
conflict with an individual's security responsibilities or with the national 
security interests of the United States; and 
 
(b) the individual terminated the employment or discontinued the activity 
upon being notified that it was in conflict with his or her security 
responsibilities. 
 
Applicant testified that he is unaware that his FSO or any other security official 
vetted his foreign activities and employment. Applicant discontinued his relationship 
with Institute ET more than two years ago. However, he continues to be associated 
with the other entities discussed under the disqualifying conditions section. AG ¶¶ 38 
(a) and 38 (b) do not mitigate his relationships to those entities.  
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern under Guideline B: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 I have considered all the conditions under AG ¶ 7 that may be disqualifying, 
especially the following: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
 
 
10 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
 Applicant has numerous business contacts in Southeast Asia. He had contact 
with citizens of several foreign countries in 2010 when he consulted for an institute 
funded by the South Korean government. That relationship lasted only a few weeks, 
and he has not had contact with Institute ET or the foreign citizens for more than two 
years. However, Applicant works frequently in the Philippines, where he has an 
operating office for his Company S. He is close friends with Mr. D., a citizen-resident of 
the Philippines. They are partners in Company S, Applicant's primary source of 
income. Mr. M, also a citizen-resident of the Philippines, is the general manager of 
Applicant's Company S, and of Company EC, in which Applicant is a 20-percent 
shareholder. Numerous foreign citizens are involved with Applicant's company. 
Applicant’s ties to foreign citizens raise security concerns. Although the Philippines is a 
democracy, it is plagued by terrorist groups, including several on the official U.S. 
government list of terrorist organizations. Bombings, assassinations, and kidnappings 
have occurred. The presence of terrorists is a legitimate concern, because classified 
information is of value to them, either for their own use or to trade with enemies of the 
United States.7 Applicant's foreign contacts create a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation or coercion, and place him in a position where he might have to choose 
between his foreign interests and the interests of the United States. AG ¶¶ 7 (a) and (b) 
apply. 
  
 Applicant’s involvement with foreign companies and organizations raises 
security concerns under AG ¶ 7(e). He owns 50 percent of Company S, and currently 
receives approximately $120,000 or 40 percent of his annual income from that source. 
He owns a 20 percent share of Philippine Company EC, and Company S owes more 
than $2 million on the loan to acquire it. Applicant remains under contract to 
Organization A, a foreign bank, and received between $45,000 and $50,000 in income 
from this source between 2010 and 2011. Applicant’s livelihood, and his family’s 
financial welfare, are tied to his substantial foreign financial interests, which place him 
at heightened risk of foreign exploitation. AG ¶ 7(e) applies. 
 
                                                 
7
 ISCR Case No. 02-29403 at 3 (Ap. Bd. Dec 14, 2004)  
 
 
 
11 
 I have also considered the following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
 
Applicant frequently conducts business in the Philippines, and has an operating 
office there for his Company S. His company also owns a 20 percent share of 
Company EC, which is incorporated in the Philippines. Several terrorist groups operate 
in the Philippines, and the country has been plagued with bombings, assassinations, 
and kidnappings. I cannot confidently conclude that Applicant could not be placed in a 
position of having to choose between foreign and U.S. interests. Moreover, Applicant 
has frequent and ongoing contact with foreign citizens, several of whom are key 
personnel in his company. One is both a business partner and a close personal friend. 
Applicant's foreign business interests have substantial monetary value; moreover, they 
constitute the source of his livelihood. Threats to these critical interests could raise a 
conflict of interest with his obligations to the United States, and they could be used to 
influence or pressure him. AG ¶ 8(a), (b), (c), and (f) do not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
 
12 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Applicant’s loyalty to the United States is not in question. He does not have 
foreign family members: he, his wife of 30 years, and his children, are native-born U.S. 
citizens. He was born, educated, and currently has his home in the United States. 
Through Company S, he works with U.S. companies to assist in developing 
communications systems overseas. However, even people of integrity and good 
character can be involved in circumstances that raise security issues.8 Employment or 
involvement with foreign entities creates the risk of unauthorized disclosure of 
classified information. Here, Applicant is in such a situation, and is likely to continue to 
be so in the future. Applicant’s company is incorporated in a foreign country, he 
necessarily spends much of his time overseas, his partner is a foreign citizen, key 
players in his company are foreign citizens, and his company is intertwined with other 
foreign companies. All of these factors raise potential for coercion or exploitation. 
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information shows 
Applicant has not eliminated the doubts raised under the guidelines for outside 
activities and foreign influence. Such doubts must be resolved in favor of the national 
security.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline L:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.d   Against Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a   Against Applicant  
 
 
                                                 
8
 ISCR Case No. 01-26893 at 9-10 (Ap. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002) 
 
 
13 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
