 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-07000 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
November 29, 2012 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is alleged to be 
indebted to 3 creditors in the approximate amount of $234,703. Applicant mitigated the 
Financial Considerations security concerns because the debts were caused by 
unforeseen circumstances beyond his control and he acted responsibly by resolving the 
outstanding debts. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 12, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 15, 2012, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on September 12, 2012. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on October 3, 2012, scheduling the hearing for 
October 24, 2012. The hearing was convened as scheduled. The Government offered 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were admitted without objection. The Government also 
offered a copy of Bank of America v. Graves1, marked GE 10, for administrative notice. 
Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through J, which were admitted without objection. 
Applicant called two witnesses, and testified on his own behalf. The record was left 
open for Applicant to submit additional exhibits. On November 12, and November 16, 
2012, Applicant presented AE K through AE P. Department Counsel had no objections 
to AE K through AE P and they were admitted. DOHA received the transcript of the 
hearing (Tr.) on November 1, 2012.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations 1.a and 1.c. He denied allegation 1.b. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked in 
his current position with the defense contractor for 12 years. He served in the Marine 
Corps from 1989 to 1996 and achieved the rank of sergeant. He is married and 
possesses a bachelor’s of science degree. (AE A; Tr. 34, 45-48.) 
 
 In 2006, Applicant and his wife purchased a home (Property A). They purchased 
the property for $258,000. They financed the purchase with a 30-year fixed-interest rate 
mortgage for $206,400, and a second, 10-year ballooning-interest-rate loan, for 
$51,600. They put nothing down toward the purchase price, but did pay the closing 
costs themselves. At the time of the purchase, Applicant was not savvy in financial 
investments, having grown up in an economically challenged environment. (AE C; Tr. 
48-51.) 
 
 In 2008, Applicant found that the value of his property had declined sharply due 
to the economic downturn and real estate market crash in his area. At the same time, 
Applicant’s wife’s business suffered significant losses. They decided they could no 
longer afford to keep their property, from which Applicant had a long commute to his 
place of work. They purchased another residence (Property B), closer to Applicant’s 
work, and moved into it. They put Property A up for sale. They are current on their 
mortgage for Property B. (AE P; Tr. 51-57.) 
 
 Applicant and his wife contacted a realtor to place Property A on the real estate 
market. Property A was listed with a realtor from May 27, 2008, through its sale on April 
1, 2011. During that period, Applicant lowered the price of Property A several times, but 
                                                          
1 Bank of America v. Graves, 59 Cal.Rptr.2d 288 (California 1996). Notice of Graves was taken. However, 
because Applicant resolved his debts to the satisfaction of the lenders, I did not need to reach the 
applicability of this case law or California Rules of Civil Procedure introduced by the parties in the instant 
case. 
 
3 
 
it did not sell. Applicant continued making payments on Property A until October 2010. 
In October 2010, his realtor advised him to attempt a short-sale of Property A. He was 
advised by the realtor to stop making his mortgage payments on Property A to help him 
obtain the short-sale. Applicant followed his realtor’s advice and the lenders agreed to 
accept a short-sale on Property A. He notified his facility security officer of his 
delinquency and intended short-sale of Property A when he stopped making the 
mortgage payments. (AE C; Tr. 58-60.) 
 
 Property A was sold on April 1, 2011, for $130,000. The money that Applicant 
and his wife would have used for the mortgage payments on Property A from October 
2010 to April 2011 went to repay credit card debt incurred when a retaining wall on 
Property A caved in and required repairs costing approximately $25,000. (Tr. 58-60, 
72.) 
 
Of the $234,703 debt listed on the SOR, $194,837 was identified as owing for 
Applicant’s first mortgage (allegation 1.c), and $39,800 was owing for the second 
mortgage (allegation 1.b). The settlement statement from the April 1, 2011 sale shows 
both loans listed. Property A was resold on that date for $130,000. The first mortgage 
was paid-off for $119,033.97, and the second mortgage pay-off was for $6,000.03. 
Applicant’s credit reports of March 2011 and September 2012 reflected that the first 
mortgage was “closed or paid account/zero balance,” after the sale, but that the second 
mortgage was listed as a “charged off account.” On November 8, 2012, Applicant 
contested that entry with the credit reporting agency. The dispute was investigated by 
the credit reporting agency and the entry was updated on November 12, 2012. 
Applicant’s credit report of November 12, 2012, reflects that both of these loans were 
“paid in settlement,” per the closing settlement. There is no indication that Applicant still 
owes a deficiency on either of these mortgages. Applicant has satisfied the debts 
alleged in SOR paragraphs1.b and 1.c. (GE 4; GE 7; AE H; AE N; AE O; AE P; Tr. 51-
53, 60-64.) 
 
Applicant also was indebted on a third debt in the amount of $66 (allegation 1.a). 
Applicant satisfied this debt on August 6, 2012. He provided a copy of the canceled 
check as proof this debt was satisfied. The credit report of September 7, 2012, also 
reflects this debt as paid. (GE 7; AE F.) 
 
Applicant’s personal financial statement shows that he currently has a net 
remainder of $1,706.87 per month. He is current on all of his credit card accounts and 
other expenses. (AE C; AE P; Tr. 72-80.) 
 
Applicant is well respected by his supervisors and colleagues. Two managers 
who testified on Applicant’s behalf said that he is an outstanding and trustworthy 
employee who excels in his job. Others, who wrote letters of support on Applicant’s 
behalf, indicated that he is reliable, trustworthy, hardworking, and honest. His 
performance appraisals for 2005 through 2011 state that Applicant either met 
expectations, exceeded expectations, or far exceeded expectations in each of the areas 
of evaluation. From 2009 through 2011, Applicant ranked as a “highly effective” 
employee. He has received a number of professional awards through his company 
 
4 
 
including an August 2012 Employee of the Month and nine Certificates of Recognition. 
(AE B; AE D; AE E; AE G; Tr. 85-120.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance 
decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 From October 2010 through March 2011, Applicant and his wife were not 
financially solvent. They were delinquent on two home mortgages incurred for the 
purchase of Property A. In addition, Applicant had one other small debt that was 
delinquent. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
 Three Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems were directly attributable to the unforeseen 
economic decline in the housing market and the significant losses his wife’s business 
incurred due to the nationwide economic downturn. Applicant has acted responsibly 
with respect to his creditors despite his financial difficulties. When he found he could no 
 
6 
 
longer afford to pay his mortgage, he attempted to sell the home. He managed to pay 
the mortgage on Property A for two additional years, while trying to sell it. When it did 
not sell, he worked with his real estate agent to obtain an agreement to allow him to sell 
the property for less than what he owed on the two mortgages. This arrangement was 
approved and the home was sold. Applicant no longer owes any debts on either the first 
or second mortgage loans for Property A, and his credit report was updated to reflect 
the debts were settled for less than full payment. 
 
 Applicant made a good-faith effort to repay his overdue creditors. His most recent 
credit report shows that his consumer debt listed in 1.a. has been paid. Applicant has 
demonstrated he made a reasonable plan for resolving each of his delinquent accounts. 
He acted responsibly, given his resources, by enlisting the help of the real estate agent 
and by obtaining a short-sale agreement with the mortgage holders. When his credit 
report reflected he still was indebted to the second mortgage holder after the sale of 
Property A, he investigated the claim, contested it, and the credit reporting agency’s 
records were updated to show he no longer owes this debt. AG ¶¶ 20(b), 20(d), and 
20(e) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is well respected by his supervisor and colleagues. He honorably 
served in the Marine Corps. Those who know him best report that he has a high degree 
of integrity. His standards are reflected in the awards, honors, and certificates he 
received during his employment with the government contractor. His integrity, as 
 
7 
 
attested to by his management and colleagues, shows that his commitment to continue 
to satisfy his creditors is credible. His financial problems, largely caused by factors 
beyond his control, are unlikely to recur. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude that Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
