1 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,
as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-02698
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant and his ex-wife chose to abandon their marital residence and a luxury
motor home, and ignore other large debts, for which they were jointly responsible, when
they decided to divorce in 2008. Before and after the divorce they each had a gross annual
income well in excess of $100,000, and after the divorce they received combined monthly
pay-outs from Applicant’s retirement account of approximately $17,000. Clearance is
denied.
On July 16, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges a security concern under Guideline F (financial considerations). Applicant
submitted a response to the SOR, dated August 9, 2010 [sic]. It was unclear from
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
2
Applicant’s response if he intended to admit or deny any of the SOR allegations. Applicant
was questioned on the record about his responses to the SOR allegations (Tr. 13-15), at
which time he clarified that he admitted all SOR allegations except subparagraphs 1.f and
1.g.
It was also unclear from Applicant’s SOR response if he was requesting a hearing
or a determination of the case on the written record without a hearing. A conference call
was conducted with Applicant and Department Counsel about one week prior to the hearing
during which it was determined that Applicant requested a hearing. (Tr. 16-17) 
The case was assigned to me on September 6, 2012. A notice of hearing was issued
on September 14, 2012, scheduling the hearing for October 10, 2012. During the
conference call with Applicant and Department Counsel mentioned above, it was agreed
to reschedule the hearing to October 11, 2012. An amended notice of hearing was then
issued on October 3, 2012, rescheduling the hearing for October 11, 2012. The hearing
was conducted as rescheduled. The Government submitted six documentary exhibits that
were marked as Government Exhibits (GE) 1-6 and admitted into the record without
objection. Applicant testified and submitted six documentary exhibits that were marked as
Applicant Exhibits (AE) 1-6 and admitted into the record without objection. The transcript
was received on October 19, 2012. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In addition,
after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I make the following
findings of fact:
Applicant is a 59-year-old man who was employed as a senior principle engineer by
a defense contractor from December 1980 until he retired from that employment in about
August 2008. Applicant accepted employment as an engineer with a different defense
contractor in a different state in January 2009, He worked for that employer until he
relocated to yet another state to be near his son in September 2009, where he again
worked as an engineer from September 2009 until September 2010. Applicant moved back
to his second state of residence and was rehired by his defense contractor employer as an
engineer by whom he has been employed since September 2010.  
Applicant’s annual salary at the time he retired was approximately $120,000. He had
approximately $950,000 invested in a pension plan at the time of his retirement. Under the
terms of a separation agreement he entered into with his ex-wife, she received $130,000
from that pension. Applicant has been receiving monthly payments of approximately
$13,800 from that pension since his retirement. Those payments will continue until early-
to mid-2013. Applicant’s current annual salary is approximately $110,000.  
As of the date of the hearing, Applicant had approximately $15,000 in a savings
account and $1,600 in a checking account. He also had about $110,000 divided among
3
three individual retirement accounts, in addition to the balance remaining in his retirement
account which, according to the totality of his testimony, should be about $100,000.
Applicant could not fully explain what happened to the almost $700,000 in payments he has
received from his retirement account, other than to assert that it has been applied to paying
divorce expenses, $30,000 in past-due taxes, helping his children with school, and helping
his ex-wife pay off her debts.    
Applicant served as an enlisted member of the United States Air Force from January
1974 until January 1980. He served in the Air Force Reserve from 1981 until 1982. He was
honorably discharged. Applicant obtained a bachelor of science degree in business
administration in June 1985.
Applicant was married in June 1980. He and his wife separated in December 2008,
and they obtained a divorce in June 2010. Applicant has four adult children from this
marriage, none of whom are dependent upon Applicant for support. Applicant’s wife owns
an assisted living facility from which she reported an annual income of about $125,000 at
the time of their divorce. Applicant does not pay his ex-wife maintenance, and, other than
pension payments that are being made directly to her through a qualified domestic relation
order, he does not have any continuing financial responsibility toward her. 
Applicant and his ex-wife owned a marital residence at the time of their divorce
which had an outstanding mortgage owed in the amount of $380,000 (SOR subparagraph
1.g). They also had a home equity loan owed in the amount of $70,278 (SOR subparagraph
1.b). Additionally, they owed $107,000 for a luxury motor home they had purchased (SOR
subparagraph 1.e). Rather than attempting to liquidate these assets or otherwise satisfy
the debts, Applicant and his ex-wife chose to stop making payments on these debts and
allowed the house to be foreclosed on, the home equity loan to be charged off as a bad
debt, and the motor home to be repossessed. 
Applicant and his ex-wife entered into a separation agreement on June 9, 2010. (AE
4) Under the terms of that agreement, certain debts not alleged in the SOR were allocated
to each of the parties. The debts discussed above, and the debts listed in SOR
subparagraphs 1.a, 1.c, and 1.d, owed in the combined amount of $54,901, were jointly
and severally assigned to the parties. As to all these debts, Applicant and his ex-wife
agreed that neither of them would have any claim against the other party for any amount
they may individually be required to pay on any of the debts. Applicant explained in
response to an interrogatory that “it was agreed by both parties that when or if creditors
contacted either of us we would have to deal with the debt at our own end.” (GE 4) 
Applicant satisfied the debt alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.f that was owed in the
amount of $407. He has not received financial counseling, and he has not contacted any
of the creditors listed in the SOR in an effort to resolve his delinquent debts.  
Applicant submitted character letters from several people who know him well. They
vouch for his reputation as an honest, trustworthy, and dependable individual.
2 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at 2.
3 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 
4 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
5 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at 3 (citations omitted).
6 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at 2.
7 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.
8 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.
9 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.
10 Id. at 531.
11 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.
4
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying and
mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision must be a fair
and impartial decision based upon relevant and material facts and circumstances, the
whole-person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive.
Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against
clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed
whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Guideline F (financial
considerations) with its disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this case.
  The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.2 The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.3 The burden of
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,4
although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden of
proof.5 “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of the
evidence.”6 Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.7 Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable
clearance decision.8
No one has a right to a security clearance9 and “the clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”10  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to
classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.11    
5
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial
obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by
rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (Adjudicative
Guideline [AG] 18)
Applicant allowed his house to be foreclosed on, a motor home to be repossessed,
and a number of other large debts to become severely delinquent. With the exception of
one comparatively small debt, no payment has been made on any of Applicant’s delinquent
debts, and no other action has been taken in an attempt to resolve any of those debts.
Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 19(a): inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 19(c):
a history of not meeting financial obligations apply.
Applicant attributes his financial problems to his separation from his wife in 2008,
and their divorce in 2010. However, at the time they separated, Applicant and his ex-wife
had a combined annual income of about $230,000. Applicant retired shortly after he
separated from his wife, and he began receiving payments from his retirement fund of
approximately $13,800 a month. Those payments continue to this day. Applicant voluntarily
chose to retire and remain unemployed for about four months. When he decided to return
to work, he quickly found a job and he has maintained full-time employment since. His
current annual income is approximately $110,000, in addition to the monthly pension
payments he receives.
Despite having the financial resources to maintain their joint property until it could
be sold, Applicant and his wife freely chose to abandon their marital residence and motor
home when they separated. They ignored their home equity loan and other large debts.
Rather than act responsibly to liquidate assets and allocate and resolve debts, Applicant
and his wife knowingly decided financial burdens arising from their marital discord should
be borne by their creditors. Having done so, Applicant entered into a separation agreement
with his wife in which he undertook joint and several liability for the debts listed in the SOR,
with an understanding that he and his ex-wife would simply ignore those debts unless and
until a creditor might take action against either of them, in which case they would each have
to fend for themselves with no recourse against the other. 
While Applicant’s financial problems resulted from his separation and divorce, they
were not beyond his control. Rather, he knowingly allowed the debts to become delinquent
despite having avenues open to him and his ex-wife to resolve them. He did not act
responsibly in acquiring the delinquent debt, and he has not acted responsibly by doing
nothing to attempt to resolve those debts. Mitigating Condition MC 20(b): the conditions
that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss
6
of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances does not
apply.
Applicant’s delinquent debts remain unresolved. Despite having a large income from
his salary and pension plan payments since at least January 2009, he has done nothing
to resolve the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. It is apparent that Applicant has no
intention of resolving the delinquent debts listed in the SOR unless a creditor takes action
to force him into satisfying a debt. Applicant’s handling of the financial ramifications of his
divorce cast serious doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. MC 20(a):
the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment does not apply.
Applicant has not received financial counseling, he has only resolved one small debt
that is listed in the SOR, and he has no basis to dispute any of the debts. To the contrary,
he freely accepted joint and severable liability for the debts listed in the SOR with a
complete understanding that left him no recourse against his ex-wife should he pay any of
those debts. I have considered the following mitigating conditions and conclude they do
not apply: MC 20(c): the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; MC
20(d): the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise
resolve debts; and MC 20(e): the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the
issue.  
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive, the whole-person concept, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant failed to mitigate the
financial considerations security concern. Applicant has not overcome the case against him
nor satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion. It is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. Guideline F is decided against Applicant.
 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegation set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is denied.
_________________
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
