 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 11-12461  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant refuted handling protected information security concerns, and he 
mitigated foreign influence security concerns, but he has not mitigated personal conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 25, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines B (foreign influence), E (personal conduct), and K (handling protected 
information). The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 2, 2012, and requested an expedited 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 31, 
2012. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 1, 2012, scheduling the hearing 
 
2 
 
for November 7, 2012. The hearing was convened as scheduled. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 15, 2012.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Evidence 
 
The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. GE 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 were 
admitted without objection. Applicant objected to the admission of GE 4. I preliminarily 
admitted GE 4 over Applicant’s objection and noted that a final decision would be made 
when I issued the decision.  
 
Applicant testified and submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A-1 through A-11, B-1 
through B-4, C-1 through C-7, and D-1 through D-12. A-1 through A-4 and AE B-1 
through D-12 were admitted without objection. AE A-5 through A-11 were offered based 
upon the preliminary admission of GE 4. I informed Applicant that I would not consider 
AE A-5 through A-11 if I decided against the admission of GE 4. Applicant also offered a 
hearing brief that was marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant adopted any factual 
assertions contained in HE I as part of his testimony. The record was held open until 
November 15, 2012, for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant timely 
submitted a document that was marked AE E and admitted without objection.  
 
GE 4 contains two memorandums from a military investigative agency reporting 
results of the agency’s investigation of Applicant. Included was a discussion of a report 
by a reserve military member about an incident involving Applicant. The reserve military 
member is not named in the memorandums. AE A-1 through A-11 contained redacted 
portions of the agency’s investigation obtained by Applicant through the Freedom Of 
Information Act. The name of the reserve military member is redacted, but Applicant 
stated that he knew the identity of the reserve military member. Applicant was informed 
that he could request the reserve military member as a witness, and I would ask 
Department Counsel to locate her and seek her testimony. Applicant was given until 
November 15, 2012, to decide whether he wanted the reserve military member to testify 
as a witness. Applicant responded that he would be happy for the reserve military 
member to appear as a Government witness subject to cross-examination, but he did 
not desire to call the witness. 
 
Applicant requested to submit a brief objecting to the admission of GE 4. That 
request was approved. The request is marked HE II, and the brief is marked HE III. 
Additional e-mail correspondence is marked HE IV. 
 
After considering the appropriate precedents,1 the preliminary ruling regarding 
GE 4 stands and Applicant’s objection is overruled. GE 4 and AE A-5 through A-11 are 
admitted in evidence.  
 
                                                          
1 See e.g., ISCR Case No. 10-08390 (App. Bd. Mar.30, 2012); ISCR Case No. 08-06997 (App. Bd. Mar. 
1, 2011); ISCR Case No. 06-06496 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2009). 
 
 
3 
 
Motion to Amend SOR 
 
Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR by withdrawing SOR ¶ 1.c. The 
motion was granted without objection by Applicant. SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.e were 
renumbered as SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.d.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is 35 years old. He seeks to retain his security clearance, which has 
been administratively suspended pending the outcome of this decision. He has a 
bachelor’s degree. He has never married, and he has no children.2 
  
Applicant is a native-born U.S. citizen, as are his parents. He has worked 
extensively in the Middle East for government contractors. He also attended college for 
a semester in a Middle Eastern country. He traveled to a number of countries for work 
purposes and for vacations. He developed friendships and relationships with a number 
of individuals from foreign countries. In December 2009, he opened a bank account in 
the Middle Eastern country (Country A) where he worked. He maintains less than $300 
in the account.3 
 
 Applicant met an employee of the Syrian government while he was working for a 
government contactor in Country A. He met the Syrian national in about 2004 when 
Applicant went to the Syrian Embassy in Country A to obtain a visa to travel to Syria. He 
became friends with the Syrian national and the Syrian national’s girlfriend, who was 
also a Syrian national. He did not report his contacts with the Syrian nationals because 
he did not believe they fit the criteria of what his company briefed as reportable 
contacts.4 He was trained by his company to report: 
 
 Any attempt to solicit information: 1) Classified    2) Proprietary. 
 
 Efforts by an individual, regardless of nationality, to obtain illegal or unauthorized 
access to classified or sensitive unclassified information or to compromise a 
cleared employee. 
 
 Contacts with known or suspected intelligence officers. 
 
 Contact which suggests target of an attempted exploitation by the intelligence 
services of another country. 
 
 Suspected or actual incidents of espionage, sabotage, or subversive activities.5 
                                                          
2 Tr. at 119-120; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 57-62, 90-91, 113-114; GE 1-4, 6; AE A-1, A-2, C-1, C-2, C-4-C-7; HE I. 
 
4 Tr. at 37-41, 100; GE 3, 4, 6; AE 10, B-1-B-4; HE I. 
 
5 AE B-1. 
 
4 
 
 Applicant was friendly with a reserve member of the U.S. military. She was on 
temporary duty to Country A in June 2009. She held a clearance in the military and also 
in her civilian job. She went to dinner one evening with Applicant and several other 
individuals. Applicant told her that the two Syrian nationals would meet them at a café. 
She asked him what they did, and he told her that the male worked for the Syrian 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the female had an office job. Applicant asked her if she 
was going to report her meeting with the two Syrians, and she responded that she 
probably would. Applicant told her that she did not have to report the contact as it was 
only necessary to report “intimate” contacts. The Syrian nationals arrived a short time 
later. There was only small talk during the evening, and the reserve member was not 
asked any sensitive or personal questions. As she walked to the car, Applicant again 
asked her if she was going to report the contact with the Syrian nationals. She again 
told him that she probably would. He asked her if she could at least not mention his 
name when she made her report.6 
 
 The reserve military member reported her contact with the Syrian nationals and 
that Applicant had introduced them. An investigation was conducted. She identified the 
two Syrian nationals from pictures on Applicant’s Facebook page. U.S. Embassy 
personnel in Country A were able to identify the female as a low-level attaché with the 
Syrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and was not considered to be a known or suspected 
intelligence officer. Embassy personnel were not able to identify the male Syrian.7 
 
 Applicant admitted most of the above findings, but he denied that he told the 
reserve military member not to mention his name. He stated that she had a higher level 
clearance than he did and that her reporting requirements could have been stricter than 
his. He also stated that even if the comment was made, it is not relevant to his ability to 
hold and maintain a security clearance and to do his job.8 I did not find Applicant’s 
testimony credible. I find the conversation took place essentially as described by the 
reserve military member. 
 
 As part of the investigation, Applicant’s classified and unclassified computers 
were subjected to forensic examinations from November 2009 to March 2010. 
Classified information was not discovered on the unclassified computer. The 
investigating agency reported in August 2012 that the examination revealed the 
“discovery of classified documents on [Applicant’s classified] computer that were 
beyond the scope of his employment.” Applicant denied having classified documents on 
his computer that were beyond the scope of his employment. He submitted redacted 
portions of the original investigation that was conducted from November 2009 to March 
2010. The original report noted that Applicant’s unclassified computer “was a shared 
workstation accessed by numerous users, including [Applicant]. A significant amount of 
                                                          
6 GE 4; AE A-10, A-11. 
 
7 GE 4; AE A-10, A-11. 
 
8 Tr. at 33-51, 100-110; HE I. 
 
 
5 
 
the information contained on the computer is unattributable to a specific user.”9 The 
original report noted about the forensic examinations of Applicant’s classified and 
unclassified computers:  
 
No documents, messages, or files containing content blatantly outside the 
scope of [Applicant’s] assigned duties and responsibilities aboard [U.S. 
military installation in Country A] were identified. Several files of potential 
interest were recovered.10 
 
 Applicant submitted a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) in 
September 2008. Section 14/15 asked for information about relatives and associates. 
The instructions stated: “Associate – include only foreign national associates with whom 
you or your spouse are bound by affection, obligation, or close and continuing contact.” 
Applicant did not list any of his foreign friends. He did not believe he was required to list 
any of his foreign friends, as he did not think their relationships fit the criteria of the 
question.11 
 
 Applicant has not maintained contact with most of his foreign friends. The only 
foreign person he maintains significant contact with is a woman he dated off and on. 
She is an Egyptian citizen who works for a multi-national company in England. He sees 
her periodically in the Middle East, Europe, or the United States.12 
 
Applicant submitted a number of character letters. The authors praised his 
conscientious handling of classified information, excellent job performance, loyalty, 
trustworthiness, reliability, professionalism, and honesty. He is recommended for a 
security clearance.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 63-85; GE 4; AE A-5-A-10. 
 
10 AE A-7, A-8. 
 
11 Tr. at 51-54, 91-100, 111-119; GE 1, 3; HE I. 
 
12 Tr. at 58-62, 93-97, 117-118; GE 3; AE B-4; HE I. 
 
13 AE D-1-D-11. 
 
6 
 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for foreign influence is set out in AG ¶ 7 as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 
7 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
  Applicant connections to foreign girlfriends and to friends who work for foreign 
governments create a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, 
pressure, or coercion. It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) 
have been raised by the evidence.  
 
  The minimal amount of money in Applicant’s foreign bank account is insufficient 
to subject him to a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation. AG ¶ 7(d) is not 
established. SOR ¶ 2.j is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following is potentially applicable:  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
I find that Applicant has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
America that he can be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of 
the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
 
Guideline K, Handling Protected Information 
 
 The security concern for handling protected information is set out in AG ¶ 33: 
 
Deliberate or negligent failure to comply with rules and regulations for 
protecting classified or other sensitive information raises doubt about an 
 
8 
 
individual’s trustworthiness, judgment, reliability, or willingness and ability 
to safeguard such information, and is a serious security concern. 
 
 AG ¶ 34 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable: 
 
(b) collecting or storing classified or other protected information at home or 
in any other unauthorized location;  
 
(d) inappropriate efforts to obtain or view classified or other protected 
information outside one’s need to know; 
 
(e) copying classified or other protected information in a manner designed 
to conceal or remove classification or other document control markings;  
 
(f) viewing or downloading information from a secure system when the 
information is beyond the individual’s need to know; and 
 
(g) any failure to comply with rules for the protection of classified or other 
sensitive information.  
 
  The evidence has not established that there were classified documents on 
Applicant’s computer that were beyond the scope of his employment and need to know. 
There are no applicable disqualifying conditions. SOR ¶ 3.a is concluded for Applicant. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;  
 
 
9 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of: 
 
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of client 
confidentiality, release of propriety information, unauthorized 
release of sensitive corporate or other government protected 
information; 
 
      (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 Applicant may have felt that he was not required to report his contacts with 
foreign girlfriends and with employees of foreign governments. However, he had no 
right to attempt to convince the reserve military member not to report her contact with 
the Syrian nationals. His attempt to convince her to leave him out of her report 
amounted to a request for her to provide false information, or at a minimum, fail to 
completely fulfil what she believed was her duty to report the incident. Applicant showed 
questionable judgment, and his conduct created a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress. AG ¶¶ 16(d) and 16(e) are applicable to SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
 The evidence does not support a finding that Applicant intentionally provided 
false information on his SF 86. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) are not applicable. SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
and 1.c are concluded for Applicant.  
 
 SOR ¶ 1.d cross alleges SOR ¶ 3.a, which was not established. SOR ¶ 1.d is 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
 
10 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability.  
 
Applicant has not accepted responsibility for his conduct with the reserve military 
member. I found him evasive and less than completely forthcoming at the hearing. 
Without complete candor, I am unable to find that Applicant has learned from the 
experience and such behavior is unlikely to recur. No mitigating conditions apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
11 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines B, E, and K in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and his work record in the 
defense industry. However, Applicant has not accepted responsibility for his conduct 
with the reserve military member. I have significant unresolved doubts about his 
judgment, honesty, and trustworthiness. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant refuted 
handling protected information security concerns, and he mitigated foreign influence 
security concerns, but he has not mitigated personal conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.b-1d:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline B:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.j:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline K:   For Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 3.a:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
