 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
         
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-00910   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns raised by his falsification of an employment questionnaire and his 
security clearance application, as well as his drug use while working as a law 
enforcement officer. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on August 16, 
2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under the foreign preference and personal 
conduct guidelines. DOHA recommended the case be submitted to an administrative 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended; as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replace the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
 
2 
 
judge for a determination whether to revoke or deny Applicant’s access to classified 
information.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a decision without a hearing. 
Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on October 17, 2012. A 
complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant, who 
was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns. After receiving the FORM on October 30, 2012, 
Applicant submitted a response. He did not object to the items appended to the 
Government’s brief, which are admitted as identified in the FORM as Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 8. The Government did not object to Applicant’s FORM 
response, which is admitted to the record as Applicant’s Exhibit A. The case was 
assigned to me on November 14, 2012. 
  
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant, a native of Afghanistan, immigrated to the United States in 2006, 
becoming a naturalized citizen in April 2011. Upon obtaining U.S. citizenship, Applicant 
returned his Afghan passport, which was scheduled to expire in September 2012, to the 
Afghan Embassy.2 
 
 In 2010, Applicant was hired by a federal contractor to work as a translator. 
During the hiring process, he completed a ten-question pre-interview form that sought 
information about illegal conduct, dual citizenship, and possible foreign interests. One 
question read, “[h]ave you ever been involved in the illegal use, possession, or 
distribution of narcotics or other controlled substances?” Applicant answered “no.” 
During the Government counter-intelligence interview eight days later, Applicant 
admitted using marijuana on multiple occasions between 2004 and 2008, with the most 
recent use occurring while he was employed as a corrections officer at a state prison. In 
addition to the drug use, Applicant disclosed that he received mental health counseling 
for adjustment issues after he immigrated to the United States.3 The screener noted that 
Applicant failed to disclose the drug use on his Standard Form (SF) 85, Questionnaire 
for Non-Sensitive Positions.4   
  
 Applicant completed a security clearance application in August 2011. He did not 
disclose his mental health counseling in response to 21: Mental and Emotional Health5 
                                                          
2 GE 3, 5, 7. 
  
3 GE 5, 6, 8. 
 
4 The SF 85 mentioned in the GE 8 is not part of the record in this case nor is the falsification of that 
document alleged in the SOR.  
 
5 In the last 7 years, have you consulted with a health care professional regarding an emotional or mental 
health condition or were you hospitalized for such a condition? 
 
 
3 
 
or his prior drug use in response to Section 23: Illegal Use of Drugs or Drug Activity.6 In 
his answer to the SOR, Applicant admits the allegations, explaining he did not 
understand the questions, which lead him to answer them incorrectly. In response to the 
FORM, Applicant admits to using drugs only once in 2008, which he classifies as a 
mistake he will not repeat in the future. He blames his failure to disclose the drug use 
and the counseling on the security clearance application on the limited amount of time 
he was given to complete the form. Because he was working overseas, Applicant had 
computer access for only 30 minutes. The time pressure affected his ability to 
understand the questions causing him to select incorrect answers. He asserts that after 
completing the application he realized his mistake and was told he would have a chance 
to explain it later.7 
 
Policies 
 
The adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the 
guidelines in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
6 In relevant part, Section 23(a) asks the following:  In the last 7 years, have you illegally used any 
controlled substance, narcotics, stimulants, depressants, steroids, inhalants, or prescription drugs?  (b) 
Have you EVER illegally used a controlled substance while possessing a security clearance; while 
employed as a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; or while in a position directly and 
immediately affecting the public safety? 
 
7 GE 3; AE A. 
 
4 
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Preference 
 
 Applicant’s possession of an active Afghan passport is moot. Although Applicant 
claims to have mailed the passport to the Afghan embassy after obtaining U.S. 
citizenship in April 2011, he did not provide documentation to support that statement. 
However, a copy of the passport included in the record shows that document expired in 
September 2012, before the Government submitted the FORM, and there is no 
evidence that Applicant has renewed his Afghan passport.  
 
Personal Conduct 
 
An applicant’s personal conduct, on and off-duty, is relevant to a determination of 
his security worthiness when it shows “questionable judgment, lack of candor, 
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations” which may “raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information.8 The Government is particularly concerned, as it is here, when an applicant 
“[fails] to provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process.”9 
Applicant used illegal drugs on multiple occasions between 2004 and 2008 and at least 
once while employed as a law enforcement officer. He failed to disclose this information 
on an employment form and on his April 2011 security clearance application. Applicant 
also failed to disclose his mental health treatment on his security clearance application.  
 
Applicant admits the falsification allegations with qualification, claiming that his 
omissions were not deliberate, but the result of his failure to understand the questions 
on the forms. Although Applicant’s claim is plausible, but given the record in this case it 
is not likely. Generally, evidence of omission alone is not sufficient to establish 
intentional falsification.  In such cases, circumstantial evidence may be used as proof 
regarding an applicant’s state of mind. Here, the record reveals Applicant’s pattern of 
withholding potentially negative information on forms used to determine his employment 
qualifications or to vet his eligibility for sensitive positions. In addition to the two forms 
alleged in the SOR, Applicant also omitted negative information on an SF 85 he 
completed sometime before his counter-intelligence interview. Although this falsification 
is not alleged, it indicates a pattern of behavior and undercuts Applicant’s argument that 
the falsifications alleged in the SOR were mere mistakes.10 Applicant’s credibility is 
further damaged by the inconsistent statements he has made about his drug use during 
the adjudication process. Furthermore, there is no evidence to support Applicant’s 
statement that he tried to correct his security clearance application at any point in the 
adjudication process. In addition to concerns about Applicant’s trustworthiness, his use 
                                                          
8 AG ¶ 15. 
 
9 AG ¶ 15. 
 
10 See ISCR Case No. 00-633 (App. Bd. Oct. 24, 2003) (facts not alleged in an SOR can still be relevant 
and material to a broad range of procedural and evidentiary matters, specifically an applicant’s credibility 
and to evaluate any mitigating evidence.) 
 
 
5 
 
of illegal drugs while working as a corrections officer at a prison indicates poor judgment 
and unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. Accordingly, AG ¶¶ 16(a)11 and 
(c)12 apply without mitigation.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
I have significant reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, 
I considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2(a). A person who seeks access to 
classified information enters into a fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated 
upon trust and confidence. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and 
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Applicant 
has not demonstrated the requisite honesty, good judgment, and reliability of those 
given access to classified information. Clearance is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline C:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.    For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
   
  Subparagraphs 2.a. – 2.e.   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
                                                
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
                                                          
11 Deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security 
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar for used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibility. 
 
12 Credible adverse information in several adjudicative areas that is not sufficient for an adverse 
determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a 
whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may 
not safeguard protected information. 
