 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                                      )         ISCR Case No. 12-07681                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                    Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on July 7, 2010. On August 3, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 On August 22, 2012, Applicant provided a written, notarized response to the 
SOR and elected to have a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
assigned to me on September 20, 2012. I convened a hearing on October 24, 2012, to 
 
2 
 
 
consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a 
security clearance for Applicant. The Government called no witnesses and introduced 
three exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 through 3 and entered in the record without 
objection. Applicant testified and called one witness. He introduced 15 exhibits, which 
were identified and marked as Applicant’s Ex. A through Ex. O and entered in the 
record without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open until 
close of business October 31, 2012, so that Applicant could, if he wished, provide 
additional information for the record. Applicant timely filed a 22-page document, which I 
marked as Applicant’s Ex. P. Department Counsel did not object to the admission of 
Applicant’s post-hearing submission.1 DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
November 2, 2012. 
                                                      
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains nine allegations of financial conduct that raise security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.i.). In his 
Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted eight of the allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 
1.h.). He neither admitted nor denied the SOR allegation at ¶ 1.i.; instead, he provided 
additional information that the debt was being satisfied by another. Applicant’s 
admissions are entered as findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 55 years old, married, and employed as a painter by a federal 
contractor. He has worked for the government contractor since 2010, and he seeks a 
security clearance for the first time.  (Ex. 1; Tr. 63-64.) 
 
 Since 1998, Applicant has also owned his own painting business. In this 
capacity, he has, at different times, employed between two and eight individuals, who 
worked as independent contractors. After purchasing his supplies and paying his 
helpers, Applicant often found he had no funds remaining to set aside to pay his federal 
income taxes. Applicant also explained that he did not keep business records or books; 
instead, he “kept [his business information] in [his] head.” (Ex. 1; Tr. 56-57, 63-64, 71-
72, 75-76, 80-81.) 
    
 Although he is married, Applicant and his wife file separate federal income tax 
returns. For several years, Applicant has retained the services of an accountant in the 
preparation of his tax returns. (Tr. 35, 38.) 
 
 The SOR alleges eight federal income tax delinquencies which total $59,308 
(SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h.). The delinquencies arose when Applicant failed to pay his 
federal income taxes for tax years 2000, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, and 
2009. Applicant admitted these delinquencies and stated that they arose when he 
lacked funds to pay federal income taxes that resulted from his painting business. He 
explained that, in his painting business, he was sometimes not paid promptly for his 
                                            
1 Department Counsel’s memorandum stating that she had no objection to the admission of Applicant’s 
post-hearing submission is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1. 
 
3 
 
 
work. Nevertheless, he had to pay his suppliers and his helpers in a timely manner. He 
stated that he had trouble maintaining an adequate cash flow, and was “robbing Peter 
to pay Paul.” He never had enough money at the end of the year to set aside to pay his 
federal income taxes. He also did not make periodic estimated payments. 
Consequently, when he filed his returns, he lacked the resources to pay the taxes. (Ex. 
B; Tr. 61-62, 76-77.) 
 
 As an attachment to his answer to the SOR, Applicant provided documentation 
showing he had an installment plan in place with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to  
pay his federal income tax for tax year 2000. Applicant’s documentation shows that he 
entered into an installment plan with the IRS in March 2009 to make monthly payments 
of $400 to satisfy his delinquent 2000 federal income taxes. The documentation shows 
that Applicant made regular monthly payments through April 2012. (Ex. A.) 
 
 In June 2012, Applicant retained the services of an attorney, who provided 
information for the record stating that he was negotiating with the IRS on Applicant’s 
behalf to arrange an installment plan for the remaining federal income tax 
delinquencies. However, Applicant’s delinquent federal tax debts for tax years 2003 
through 2009 remain unresolved. (Ex. O.) 
 
 The SOR also alleged that Applicant was responsible for a judgment debt of 
$6,765, entered against him in 2006. The debt arose in 2003 or 2004 when he cosigned 
a loan agreement with his stepdaughter for the purchase of an automobile. The 
stepdaughter did not repay the loan, and the automobile was repossessed. While 
Applicant acknowledged that he cosigned the loan, he emphasized that it was his 
stepdaughter’s obligation to pay the debt. In 2006, a judgment was entered against 
Applicant for the debt. The debt was not addressed until Applicant’s stepdaughter made 
$100 payments in September and October 2012. Applicant stated that if his 
stepdaughter failed to make timely monthly payments, the creditor intended to garnish 
her wages. (Answer to SOR; Ex. 3; Tr. 41-42, 74-75.) 
 
 Applicant provided a financial statement for the record. He reported only his 
individual expenses and not those shared with or attributable to his wife. Applicant’s net 
monthly pay from his employment is $3,924. His food, personal care, and miscellaneous 
expenses each month total $750. His transportation expenses total $946; his housing 
and utility expenses total $1,313; and his medical expenses total $326. Additionally, 
Applicant’s monthly expenses include $196 paid each month to satisfy a state tax debt 
and $400 paid each month for legal representation on his federal tax delinquency 
matter.2 Applicant’s monthly expenses total $3,931. His expenses exceed his income 
each month by approximately seven dollars. (Ex. P at 5.) 
 
                                            
2 It is unclear from the record whether this represents Applicant’s $400 monthly installment payment to 
the IRS in satisfaction of his tax year 2000 federal tax delinquency, or if represents a $400 retainer paid 
monthly to his tax attorney for representation. If the payment is a retainer to his attorney, Applicant still 
must pay the $400 monthly payment to the IRS for his 2000 tax delinquency, thus increasing his total 
monthly deficit to $407. (Ex. P.)   
 
4 
 
 
 Applicant’s wife testified on his behalf. She stated that Applicant intended to pay 
his federal income taxes, but experienced cash flow problems when he was not paid 
timely for his work and nevertheless believed he should pay his workers on time.   
Applicant provided 13 letters of character reference from coworkers and associates who 
had worked with him, some for many years. The letters all reflected respect for 
Applicant as a positive, pleasant, reliable, and trustworthy worker. (Ex. C through Ex. O; 
Tr. 47-50.) 
 
 Applicant does not have a savings account. He has four checking accounts with 
assets totaling $1,092.75. He also has a money market account totaling $267 and a 
401(k) plan totaling $597. He has not had financial credit counseling. (Ex. P at 5; Tr. 92-
95.)           
  
                                                 Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has 
the authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information.” Id. at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
5 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable 
or unwilling to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
6 
 
 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
 Applicant admitted a history of federal income tax delinquencies associated with 
his painting business. Additionally, he co-signed a note with his stepdaughter in 2003 or 
2004 in which he promised to pay her automobile debt if she did not. When the 
stepdaughter failed to pay the debt, a judgment was entered against Applicant in 2006. 
Applicant did not address this debt, even though he had a legal responsibility as a co-
debtor to do so. In September and October 2012, the stepdaughter made two $100 
payments on the $6,765 debt. 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent federal income tax debts total approximately $59,308. To 
his credit, he has entered into an agreement with the IRS to make monthly payments of 
$400 on the federal income tax debt for tax year 2000. He provided documentation to 
corroborate monthly payments on this debt since 2009. However, Applicant has not yet 
made payments on his federal income tax delinquencies for tax years 2003, 2004, 
2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, and 2009. While he has hired an attorney to represent him and 
negotiate a payment plan for these federal tax delinquencies, no payment determination 
had been made at the time the record in this case closed. Additionally, since Applicant’s 
current living expenses surpass his current income, it is not clear that he has the 
financial resources to carry out a payment plan if the IRS were to suggest one. The 
record reflects that seven of the eight federal tax delinquencies alleged on the SOR 
remain unpaid and have occurred under circumstances that are likely to recur. Applicant 
has not had financial counseling, and he lacks a clear and timely strategy for resolving 
his delinquent debts.   
 
 I conclude that AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the delinquent federal income tax debt 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. However, I also conclude that none of the other Guideline F 
mitigating factors applies to the remaining debts alleged in the SOR. 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 55 
years. He failed for several years to pay federal income taxes he owed as a result of his 
painting business. While he has recently sought legal help to resolve this indebtedness, 
it is not clear that he will have the financial resources to resolve these debts. 
 
Applicant also failed for several years to act upon a debt that arose when he co-
signed a loan payment agreement with his stepdaughter. Applicant’s financial problems 
began several years ago and are ongoing. Despite a steady and reliable income as an 
employee for at least two years, Applicant has failed to budget his income to satisfy his 
debts, and his financial statement indicates that each month he spends more than he 
earns. Despite this, he has not sought credit counseling. This raises concerns about his 
judgment and reliability. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s judgment as well as his eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from 
his financial delinquencies.  
 
                                                     Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:            For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.b. - 1.i.: Against Applicant 
         
                                          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
