 
1 
                                      
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 12-00720 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Robert J. Kilmartin, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns regarding financial considerations 
and foreign preference. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified 
information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 28, 2011, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing version of a Security Clearance 
Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued her a set of interrogatories. She responded to the 
interrogatories on March 23, 2012.2 On May 2, 2012, DOHA issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) to her, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department 
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative 
                                                          
1
 GE 2 (SF 86), dated July 28, 2011. 
 
2
 GE 6 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated March 23, 2012). 
 
2 
                                      
 
Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (December 
29, 2005) (AG) applicable to all adjudications and other determinations made under the 
Directive, effective September 1, 2006. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guideline F (financial considerations), and detailed reasons why DOHA was unable to 
find that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 15, 2012. In a sworn 
statement, dated May 29, 2012, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. On August 3, 2012, pursuant to & 
E.3.1.13 of the Directive, DOHA issued her an amendment to the SOR. The SOR 
amendment added alleged security concerns under Guideline C (foreign preference). 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR amendment on August 14, 2012. On that 
same date, she responded to the SOR amendment. Department Counsel had indicated 
the Government was prepared to proceed on August 6, 2012. The case was assigned 
to me, along with the companion case of Applicant’s husband, on August 9, 2012. A 
Notice of Hearing was issued on September 5, 2012, and I convened the joint hearing, 
as scheduled, on September 26, 2012. 
 
 During the hearing, ten Government exhibits (GE 1 through GE 10) and four 
Applicant exhibits (AE A through AE D) were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant and her husband testified. The transcript (Tr.) was received on October 4, 
2012. I kept the record open to enable Applicant to supplement it. Applicant took 
advantage of that opportunity, and her husband submitted a substantial number of 
additional exhibits (AE E through AE AK) that were admitted into evidence without 
objection. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all 13 of the factual allegations 
pertaining to financial considerations (¶¶ 1.a. through 1.m. of the SOR). In her Answer 
to the SOR amendment, Applicant admitted both of the factual allegations pertaining to 
foreign preference (¶¶ 2.a. and 2.b.). Those admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and 
upon due consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 51-year-old principal co-owner of a defense contractor that her 
husband established in the United States in 1993. She has also been a licensed 
massage therapist on a part-time basis since August 1998. Applicant was born in the 
United Kingdom (UK) to British citizen-residents, and was raised and educated in the 
UK. She was married in 1983, and has two sons (born in 1985 and 1987).3  
 
                                                          
 
3
 GE 2, supra note 1, at 14, 16-17.  
 
3 
                                      
 
Applicant’s husband first arrived in the United States in 1993 in response to an 
invitation by a state economic development commission conducting an assessment of 
his technology capabilities. He established the company in the United States and 
staffed it, but continued to operate both the U.S. entity and a UK entity, spending 
several weeks at a time at each location. In 1997, he relocated his family, including 
Applicant and their two young sons, to the United States.4 Her husband became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in May 2001,5 and Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
in May 2004.6 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
While Applicant is identified as a principal co-owner of the company, she has not 
been involved in decisions regarding business or investments. Instead, she left all such 
decisions to her husband and merely signed documents presented to her for signature 
by her husband.7 She was essentially a full-time wife and mother, and a part-time 
massage therapist.  
 
It is unclear when Applicant’s financial problems first started to develop. During 
the four-year period that her husband was commuting between the United States and 
the UK, he had an employee serving as the senior administrator who was looking after 
the company finances, running the business in his absence, and producing monthly 
reports. Eventually, however, Applicant’s husband discovered that aside from being 
very nice and very clever, the employee had a propensity to steal. She had embezzled 
and fraudulently obtained monies and credit in the names of both the company and 
Applicant’s husband. The employee also obtained a false Social Security number. 
There were balances on credit cards that neither Applicant nor her husband was aware 
of, forged signatures, and unpaid taxes. Applicant’s husband estimated his company 
lost substantially over $300,000. The employee was successfully prosecuted by the 
authorities. She was placed on house arrest, given 15 years’ probation, and required to 
pay restitution to the extent she could do so over the period of 15 years. The employee 
actually repaid only about $2,000.8 Because of those illegal activities, Applicant, her 
husband, and their company were in substantial debt. Nevertheless, while Applicant and 
her husband were legally absolved from any responsibility for those debts, they felt a 
moral obligation to do so, and her husband embarked on an effort to pay their creditors 
in full.9 Applicant’s husband got the business back on track in 1998-1999.10 
                                                          
 
4
 Tr. at 42-43. 
 
5
 GE 7 (Applicant’s Husband’s Personal Subject Interview, dated August 29, 2011), at 1. 
 
6
 GE 2, supra note 1, at 6-7. 
 
7
 AE C (Joint Statement by Applicant and her husband, dated September 24, 2012), at 1. 
 
8
 Tr. at 43-46; Applicant’s Husband’s Response to his SOR, dated June 27, 2012), at 2. 
 
9
 Applicant’s Husband’s Response to his SOR, supra note 8, at 2. 
 
10
 Tr. at 69; AE C, supra note 7, at 1. 
 
4 
                                      
 
During a period of financial prosperity, both nationally and personally, Applicant’s 
husband invested in ten rental properties. He paid cash for some of the properties and 
obtained several small home mortgages for others.11 He also purchased a residence 
around 2004 or 2005 for $2.4 million, and he obtained several lines of credit. The rents 
from the rental properties easily covered the mortgages. Applicant’s husband felt that 
some of the properties could be leveraged if he needed to generate additional income 
for research and development.12 
 
Several additional circumstances created Applicant’s present financial difficulties. 
In 2004 and 2005, there were expenses and development costs of certain technology 
that Applicant’s husband expected to play “a significant role” in a high profile national 
activity that has been hotly debated over the past four years. Because of his enthusiasm 
with his project, Applicant’s husband allowed his core business – product design – to 
drift as he put all of his focus on software.  
 
In 2008, because of the national economic downturn, major corporations across 
the nation that had been working with Applicant and her husband’s company suddenly 
ceased substantial involvement in several areas of the company’s core technology 
design services. They lost over 50 percent of their anticipated revenue. Applicant’s 
husband was confident that he was close to a breakthrough, and had to make a choice 
of either shutting down his project and losing what he had already put into it, or 
continuing with his efforts. He needed more time and more money to accomplish his 
goals, so he chose the latter option, and to generate the necessary funds to do so, he 
started mortgaging his properties.13 Unfortunately, the bottom fell out of the housing 
market and the properties, now all with substantial mortgages, were all “under water.”14 
Some renters bailed out of the properties. In 2009, without any forewarning, a major 
investor withdrew from further investment activity.15  
 
Finally, as a result of poor decisions by Applicant’s husband, various state payroll 
taxes were not properly withheld in locations where the company had performed 
services. In 2009, accounts started to become delinquent. Liens were placed against 
them, and some delinquent accounts were sent to collection or charged off. Despite 
mounting financial difficulties, Applicant and her husband maintained a good lifestyle: in 
August 2009, Applicant vacationed in the UK for ten days; in January 2011, she and her 
husband vacationed in Central America for five days; in April 2011, Applicant 
                                                          
 
11
 Tr. at 69. 
 
12
 Tr. at 71. 
 
13
 Tr. at 71, 75-76; AE C, supra note 7, at 2. 
 
14
 Tr. at 76; AE C, supra note 7, at 2. 
 
15
 Applicant’s Husband’s Response to his SOR, supra note 8, at 2-3. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
vacationed in the Caribbean for one week; and they both vacationed in the UK for an 
unspecified period in July 2012.16 
 
Attorneys and friends advised her husband to declare bankruptcy, but he refused 
to consider such an option.17 Instead, he turned to a realtor and an accountant to seek 
professional guidance and assistance. In an effort to resolve their delinquent accounts, 
Applicant’s husband opened discussions with all of their creditors, intending to resolve 
some accounts and engage in resolution efforts on other accounts. Applicant and her 
husband put their rental properties up for sale. Hoping to rely on an emergency backup 
plan – Applicant’s mother’s reserve of $375,000 – they could not do so for she had 
become the victim of a multi-million dollar Ponzi scheme, leaving her unable to assist 
them financially. 
  
In March 2012, Applicant submitted a personal financial statement, and in May 
2012, Applicant’s husband did also. They reflected Applicant’s husband’s net monthly 
income as $3,517.98,18 and Applicant’s net monthly income as $4,800.19 The monthly 
combined net income for them would be $8,317.98. He claimed $2,735 in monthly 
expenses and $45 in debt payments, leaving a monthly net remainder of $782.98 
available for discretionary spending or saving.20 She claimed $2,835 in monthly 
expenses and $2,310.59 in debt payments, leaving a monthly net remainder of minus 
$345.59 available for discretionary spending or saving.21 They both included nearly the 
same monthly expenses. Therefore, it appears that they may have approximately a 
combined $3,227 available for discretionary spending or saving. Circumstances have 
changed, and Applicant’s husband now earns approximately $2,000 per month from his 
company, in addition to a pension of $1,600.22 Neither Applicant nor her husband ever 
received financial counseling.23 
 
 Applicant’s husband’s SOR essentially identified 22 purportedly continuing 
delinquencies, totaling approximately $1,250,812. Of those 22 accounts, her husband 
has resolved or is in the process of resolving 10 of the accounts, and has not yet 
resolved the remaining 12 accounts. Applicant’s SOR identified 13 purportedly 
continuing delinquencies (including two accounts that were also listed in her husband’s 
SOR), totaling approximately $636,929.19. Of those 13 accounts, Applicant and her 
                                                          
16
 GE 1 (SF 86, dated July 28, 2011), at 27; GE 2, supra note 1, at 25-26; GE 9 (Letter from Company 
Security Officer, dated July 12, 2012). 
 
17
 AE C, supra note 7, at 3. 
 
18
 GE 5 (Personal Financial Statement, undated), attached to Applicant’s Husband’s Answers to 
Interrogatories. 
 
19
 GE 6 (Applicant’s Personal Financial Statement, undated), attached to her Answers to Interrogatories. 
 
20
 GE 5 (Personal Financial Statement), supra note 18. 
 
21
 GE 5 (Personal Financial Statement), supra note 18. 
 
22
 Tr. at 61-62, 64-65. 
 
23
 Tr. at 137-138. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
husband have resolved or are in the process of resolving none of the accounts. Each 
account listed in her SOR is described below, reflecting both the original and present 
status, as follows: 
 
(SOR & 1.a.): This is a federal tax lien in the amount of $124,090.68 that was 
filed separately against Applicant and her husband in February 2011, covering unpaid 
payroll taxes for the last three quarters of 2009.24 Applicant’s husband made 
garnishment payments on the balance when possible, and the balance was purportedly 
reduced accordingly. It was subsequently declared “uncollectable.”25 Applicant’s 
husband intends to satisfy the lien as soon as he can sell the houses associated with it, 
neither of which has a mortgage.26 The account, which is also listed in her husband’s 
SOR, is currently in deferment as uncollectable.  
 
(SOR & 1.b.): This is a bank credit card with a high credit and unpaid balance of 
$17,772, and a past-due balance of $3,201, that was sent to collection and charged 
off.27 Applicant acknowledged the debt during her interview with an investigator from the 
U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in September 2011.28 She admitted the 
allegation in her Answer to the SOR, but during the hearing, she claimed to have no 
knowledge of the account.29 Her husband subsequently claimed that he had called the 
creditor, but they had no information regarding the account.30 He stated he was 
disputing the account with the credit reporting agencies and asking that the negative 
listing be removed from his credit report.31 Neither Applicant nor her husband offered 
any documentary evidence to support the creditor’s purported position or Applicant’s 
husband’s dispute. The account remains unresolved. 
 
(SOR & 1.c.): This is a $150,000 line of credit not associated with any property 
that became $149,359 past due, and the account was subsequently charged off.32 
Applicant’s husband claimed he has been in contact with the creditor, and they are 
willing to accept an offer in compromise, but since Applicant’s husband is not yet in a 
                                                          
24
 AE G (Notice of Federal Tax Lien, dated February 3, 2011). 
 
25
 Tr. at 58, 60. 
 
26
 Applicant’s Husband’s Response to the SOR, supra note 8, at 1. 
 
27
 GE 4 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated August 17, 2011), at 7. 
 
28
 GE 8 (Applicant’s Personal Subject Interview, dated September 7, 2011), at 9-10. 
 
29
 Tr. at 118-119. 
 
30
 AE W (E-mail, dated October 5, 2012), at 1. 
 
31
 AE W, supra note 30, at 1. 
 
32
 GE 3 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, and Equifax Credit Report, dated August 13, 2011), at 25; GE 4, 
supra note 27, at 14; Tr. at 81-82; GE 6 (Account Statement, undated), attached to Applicant’s Answers to 
Interrogatories. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
position to make a significant payment, no documentation has been exchanged.33  The 
account, which is also listed in her husband’s SOR, remains unresolved. 
 
(SOR & 1.m.): This is the mortgage for an office building which served as both 
the company headquarters and as a rental property that was purchased in 2000 for 
about $1,000,000, of which all but about $200,000 was financed. As the property 
increased in value, Applicant and her husband obtained additional financing.34 At one 
point, the loan balance was up to $1,470,000.35 With the downturn of the economy, 
renters bailed out of the building, and Applicant and her husband were unable to keep 
up with the monthly payments. Applicant contended the property was sold in a short 
sale in 2011, and the account was settled for $1,100,000,36 but that assertion is false. 
The property was foreclosed and sold at a public sale for $68,300.37 Applicant and her 
husband had previously signed a deficiency promissory note for $300,000, requiring 60 
monthly payments of $3,255.79.38 Applicant has submitted no documentation to indicate 
payments have been made. Applicant’s husband acknowledged that the full amount is 
still owed, but contends the creditor is verbally willing to accept an offer in 
compromise.39 There is no documentation to support his contention. The account has 
not been resolved. 
 
(SOR && 1.d. through 1.l.): These are purportedly unpaid tax balances owed to 
various states for failure to file the required forms or make timely payments, along with 
interest and penalties. In 2012, Applicant’s husband engaged the professional services 
of an accountant to resolve the accounts as there were supposedly some questions as 
to whether the accounts were accurate.40 The accountant stated:41 
 
It appears that either payment has been made and need re-allocations so 
taxes are paid in full and/or filing of missing forms. On the omitted filings 
the various States have estimated a tax liability and invoiced for the 
estimates adding accumulated penalties and interest. 
 
                                                          
33
 Tr. at 81; AE W (E-mail, dated October 5, 2012), at 1. 
 
34
 Tr. at 127-128. 
 
35
 GE 8, supra note 28, at 10. 
 
36
 GE 8, supra note 28, at 10. 
 
37
 AE AF (Certificate of Sale, dated July 27, 2012). 
 
38
 GE 6 (Joint Stipulation for Entry of Agreed Final Judgment of Foreclosure, dated February 13, 2012), 
attached to her Answers to Interrogatories. 
 
39
 Tr. at 129; AE W, supra note 30, at 1. 
 
40
 AE AK (Letter from Accountant, undated); Tr. at 85-86, 120-126; AE W, supra note 30, at 1-2. 
 
41
 AE AK, supra note 40. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
The delinquencies, at the time the SOR was issued, totaling approximately $45,708, go 
back, in some instances, to 2003.42 Despite Applicant’s husband’s relatively recent 
engagement of an accountant to resolve the accounts, there is no documentary or 
testimonial evidence that either Applicant or her husband made any previous efforts to 
address and resolve the delinquent tax accounts. The accounts have not been resolved. 
 
Foreign Preference 
  
In July 2004, shortly after she became a naturalized U.S. citizen, Applicant 
obtained a U.S. passport.43 She apparently retained her UK passport. Applicant used 
her UK passport instead of her US passport for convenience to avoid the longer lines for 
non-UK citizens entering the UK.44 Although she had previously surrendered her UK 
passport to her facility security officer, she retrieved it in July 2012 to use it while 
traveling in the UK that same month.45 Applicant and her husband travelled to the UK to 
see his hospitalized sister and to attend a friend’s wedding.46 Friends warned them 
about “foreigners” going to England to see the Olympic Games and the long lines 
associated with such travel, so they decided to use their UK passports.47 Applicant’s 
husband “justified” the use of the UK passports for “easy access only due to Olympic 
traffic.”48 Both Applicant and her husband pledged their allegiance to the United States 
upon becoming naturalized citizens, and denied that their actions were associated with 
any preference for the UK.49 Her husband stated: “I am American through and 
through.”50 The UK passports of both Applicant and her husband were returned to the 
facility security officer upon their return from the UK.51 Applicant is willing to renounce 
her UK citizenship.52 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
                                                          
42
 GE 6 (Various Statements of Accounts, Notices of Overdue Tax, and Collection Notices, various dates). 
 
43
 GE 2, supra note 1, at 6-7. 
 
44
 GE 8, supra note 28, at 4. See also, GE 7, supra note 5, at 2. 
 
45
 GE 9, supra note 16. 
 
46
 Tr. at 52-53. 
 
47
 Tr. at 53. 
 
48
 Applicant’s Husband’s Response to the Amendment to the SOR, dated August 14, 2012, at 1. 
 
49
 Tr. at 54-57. 
 
50
 Tr. at 56. 
 
51
 GE 10 (Letter from Company Security Officer, dated August 1, 2012). 
 
52
 GE 8, supra note 28, at 1. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”53 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”54   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”55 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.56  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
                                                          
53
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
54
 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
55
 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4
th
 Cir. 1994). 
 
56
 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”57 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”58 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance.  In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), a history of not meeting financial obligations may raise 
security concerns. The seeds of Applicant’s financial problems commenced sometime 
between 2004 and 2008 when a variety of conditions occurred. During the earlier 
portion of the period, her husband allowed his core business to drift when his focus was 
elsewhere. Later, economic conditions worsened, and the consequences were such 
that he was unable to continue making his monthly payments on mortgages, credit card 
accounts, lines of credit, and taxes. Accounts became delinquent and were placed for 
collection, charged off, gone to foreclosure, or had liens filed. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and19(c) 
apply.    
 
                                                          
57
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
58
 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where the conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances. When the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control, AG ¶ 20(c) may apply. 
Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows the individual initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.59  
AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) partially apply. Applicant’s financial problems commenced 
between 2004 and 2008 when a variety of conditions occurred. Her husband allowed 
his core business to drift when his focus was elsewhere; economic conditions worsened 
and their company lost over 50 percent of the anticipated revenue when other 
companies with which her husband had been working suddenly curtailed their activities; 
the value of their rental properties plummeted; renters bailed out; a major investor 
withdrew from further investment activity; and Applicant’s husband made some poor 
decisions. While the business downturn and the devastation of the national and local 
economies were largely beyond Applicant’s husband’s control, some decisions made by 
him were clearly within his sole control. All the financial activities of Applicant’s husband 
were seemingly beyond Applicant’s control, for while Applicant is identified as a 
principal co-owner of the company, she has not been involved in decisions regarding 
business or investments. Instead, she left all such decisions to her husband and merely 
signed documents presented to her for signature by her husband. 
Applicant’s husband kept his eye on the “brass ring” but failed to understand the 
full dynamics of the situation. Focusing on his big technology project – to the detriment 
of his core business – Applicant’s husband incurred substantial development expenses 
and costs. He gambled on success, and leveraged their rental properties to generate 
additional funds. He chased his losses hoping to cash in with eventual success. 
Applicant’s husband was confident that he was close to a breakthrough and had to 
                                                          
59
 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that she or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
make a business decision of either shutting down his project and losing what he had 
already put into it, or continuing with his efforts. He needed more time and more money 
to accomplish his goals, so he chose the latter option. While her husband remains 
enthusiastic about his potential achievement, there is little evidence of actual success. 
Instead, Applicant’s husband has delivered hype, hope, and positive expectations, with 
few specifics. Applicant has merely deferred to her husband. 
While their financial difficulties commenced between 2004 and 2008, they have 
continued and deteriorated to the point where they cannot be considered infrequent. 
Whether they occurred under such circumstances that are unlikely to recur is a matter 
of opinion. The current economic climate was unanticipated and is akin to a hundred 
year storm or the economic recession of the 1930s. Applicant’s husband was either a 
technology visionary or a poor businessman, or both. His actions and decisions 
contributed to their financial problems, but did not cause them. However, while some of 
his decisions may, in retrospect, cast some doubt on his good judgment, they do not 
cast doubt on her current reliability or trustworthiness. After what appears to be a slow 
start in attempting to resolve their financial problems, Applicant’s husband eventually 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. Applicant remained merely a signatory to 
his actions. 
AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply because neither Applicant nor her husband ever 
received financial counseling. Applicant’s husband engaged the services of attorneys, 
accountants, and realtors to assist them in mitigating their financial losses, and there 
are indications that some accounts listed in his SOR have been resolved or are in the 
process of being resolved. There is no such evidence that the accounts listed in 
Applicant’s SOR have been addressed, except for the relatively recent accountant 
activity related to the state tax delinquencies. Nevertheless, it remains unclear if either 
Applicant or her husband has more than a rudimentary understanding of the financial 
issues. 
AG ¶ 20(d) partially applies. At the outset, Applicant’s husband is credited with 
laudable efforts in resolving the financial mess their former senior administrator left 
them with due to her embezzlement activities. Although not legally required to do so, 
Applicant and her husband accepted the moral obligation and paid their creditors in full. 
The more recent financial problems have provided them with another opportunity to 
resolve their financial problems. Applicant’s husband contacted some of their creditors 
and eventually concluded that they should extricate themselves from their burdensome 
mortgages. During this horrible housing market, he put certain jointly-owned properties 
on the market and sought approval for short sales from their mortgage lenders. Some 
properties have been successfully sold, and they were absolved from any deficiency 
balances. Other properties are apparently awaiting short sale approval or actual 
closings, but since Applicant’s husband failed to furnish the necessary documentation to 
me, I am unable to conclude that those remaining accounts listed in his SOR have been 
resolved. One lien has been placed into a period of deferment and they are, or at least 
were, making some monthly payments on it. Other delinquent accounts are in line, 
awaiting their attention. Nearly all of the accounts in Applicant’s SOR are also in that 
line awaiting their attention. 
 
13 
                                      
 
There is some concern that Applicant and her husband have not given their 
delinquent accounts the timely attention due them, and have instead wasted valuable 
time and money on other endeavors. It is unclear if they are putting their monthly net 
remainder towards delinquent debts or using it for other purposes. They were 
apparently unable to make more substantial debt payments, but able to take foreign 
vacations while debts remained delinquent. Nevertheless, while Applicant’s husband is 
finally acting responsibly under the circumstances,60 and showing reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation, Applicant, on the other hand, is 
at the financial mercy of her husband, unable to take any further action. 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Preference is set out in 
AG ¶ 9:       
When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a 
foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to 
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of 
the United States. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 10(a), exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after 
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member is 
potentially disqualifying. This includes but is not limited to possession of a current 
foreign passport under AG ¶ 10(a)(1). In July 2004, Applicant became a naturalized 
U.S. citizen, and obtained a U.S. passport. She apparently retained her UK passport. 
Applicant used her UK passport instead of her US passport for convenience to avoid the 
longer lines for non-UK citizens entering the UK. Although she had previously 
surrendered her UK passport to her facility security officer, she retrieved it in July 2012 
to use it while traveling in the UK that same month. Applicant and her husband travelled 
to the UK to see his hospitalized sister and to attend a friend’s wedding. Friends warned 
them about “foreigners” going to England to see the Olympic Games and the long lines 
associated with such travel, so they decided to use their UK passports. Applicant’s 
husband “justified” the use of the UK passports for “easy access only due to Olympic 
traffic.” By her actions, Applicant exercised the rights and privileges of foreign 
citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen. AG ¶¶ 10(a)(1) has been established. 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign preference.  Under AG ¶ 11(b), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual 
citizenship. Similarly, AG ¶ 11(e) may apply where the passport has been destroyed, 
surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated. 
Dual citizenship, by itself, is not an automatic bar to a security clearance. It is 
only a security concern if the individual has actively exercised the rights and privileges 
                                                          
60
 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
 
14 
                                      
 
of the foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen. Applicant, a naturalized U.S. 
citizen, stated unequivocally that she is willing to renounce her UK citizenship. Her only 
motivation for using her UK passport was not an indication of a preference for the UK 
over the United States, but rather solely for her personal convenience in entering the 
UK. Applicant pledged her allegiance to the United States upon becoming a naturalized 
citizen, and denied that her actions were associated with any preference for the UK. 
The UK passport was returned to the facility security officer upon her return from the 
UK. Applicant is willing to renounce her UK citizenship. Such actions have security 
significance. Thus, as to Applicant’s dual citizenship, and her possession and use of the 
UK passport, considering Applicant’s explanations, and her subsequent actions, I find 
¶¶ 11(b) and 11(e) apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:61 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “. . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
                                                          
61
 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
 
15 
                                      
 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶ E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
There is some evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. She actively 
exercised the rights and privileges of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen. 
Also, her husband’s handling of the family, investment, and company finances permitted 
numerous accounts to become delinquent. As a result, accounts were placed for 
collection, charged off, gone to foreclosure, or became tax liens. She and her husband 
took foreign vacations while debts remained delinquent. 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. As 
noted above, due to a combination of events, both beyond their control and within 
Applicant’s husband’s control, the family and business financial situations deteriorated. 
Promising investments were leveraged to generate funds sufficient for their business to 
survive. With the devastated economy, those investment properties became 
albatrosses. Applicant’s husband contacted their creditors in an effort to resolve their 
financial problems. Their combined SORs identified 33 purportedly continuing 
delinquencies. Of those 33 accounts, Applicant’s husband has resolved or is in the 
process of resolving 10 of the accounts, and has not yet resolved the remaining 23 
accounts. They turned to an attorney, an accountant, and a realtor for guidance, and 
attempted to disengage themselves from their delinquent mortgages by seeking 
mortgage lender approval of short sales. Some were successful, and others may have 
been. Applicant’s husband acted honorably after he and their company were victims of 
employee embezzlement, and Applicant’s husband is acting honorably by choosing to 
repay their debts and not seeking discharge under bankruptcy. Applicant is a good wife 
and mother, assisting her husband who has exceptional expertise in certain technology 
capabilities. Until the national economy was devastated, her husband was a successful 
investor.  
 I have evaluated the various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the 
record evidence and have not merely performed a piecemeal analysis.62 Applicant’s 
husband has demonstrated a meaningful track record of debt reduction and elimination 
of their joint debts. Overall, the evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns arising from her financial 
considerations and her foreign preference.63 See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
                                                          
62
 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
63
 Although I have concluded that Applicant has mitigated the security concerns cited in the SOR and 
Amendment to the SOR, this decision should also be considered by Applicant to be a warning that any failure to 
 
16 
                                      
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For  Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For  Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    For  Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For  Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For  Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For  Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For  Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    For  Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.j:    For  Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:    For  Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.l:    For  Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.m:    For  Applicant 
   
Paragraph 2, Guideline C:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:    For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
continue her debt resolution efforts, creating additional delinquent debt, or using her foreign passport in the future, will 
adversely affect her future eligibility for access to classified information. 
