 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                            )         ISCR Case No. 12-04934                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                    Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on January 19, 2012. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant an undated Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR on August 14, 2012, and elected to have a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On September 4, 2012, he submitted a second 
notarized answer to the SOR. The case was assigned to me on September 27, 2012. I 
 
2 
 
 
convened a hearing on November 7, 2012, to consider whether it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
Government called no witnesses and introduced four exhibits, which were marked Ex. 1 
through 4 and entered in the record without objection. Applicant testified, called no 
witnesses, and introduced three exhibits, which were identified and marked as 
Applicant’s Ex. A through C and entered in the record without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on November 15, 2012. 
 
                                                     Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains eight allegations of financial conduct that raise security 
concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h.) In his 
August 14, 2012, Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied each of the allegations and 
added the following statement: “Chapter 7 bankruptcy was started on July 24, and will 
be officially filed with the [name of state omitted] courts on August 17th. I am no longer 
liable for this debt.” In his September 4, 2012, Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted 
each of the eight allegations, and he added that his bankruptcy filing was changed to 
September 18. I conclude that Applicant’s statement of September 4, 2012, is his final 
answer to the SOR, and his admissions are entered as findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He was married for the first time in 1992. He and his 
first wife divorced in 1995. In 1999, Applicant married for the second time. His second 
wife was foreign-born and a naturalized U.S. citizen. Applicant and his second wife 
divorced after 12 years of marriage. No children were born to either of Applicant’s 
marriages. (Ex. 1; Ex. B; Tr. 49-50.) 
 
 Applicant has held a security clearance in the past, but he was not sure when the 
clearance was granted. When he filed his e-QIP on January 12, 2012, he was seeking a 
security clearance for a consultant position he hoped to acquire with a government 
contractor. (Ex. 1; Tr. 21-22.) 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is responsible for eight delinquent debts totaling 
$109,000. One of the debts alleged by the SOR is a past-due amount of $13,253 on a 
mortgage debt of $326,000 (SOR ¶ 1.f.). 
 
 Applicant’s gross annual income in September 2011 was between $136,000 and 
$148,000. His wife’s gross annual income was approximately $60,000. Together 
Applicant and his wife had a combined annual gross income of approximately $200,000. 
During their 12 years of marriage, both Applicant and his wife were fully employed.  (Tr. 
24-25, 35.)    
 
 Applicant delegated bill-paying, tax-paying, and financial management 
responsibilities to his wife. He provided two reasons for the delegation: “The main 
reason was . . .  so that I could excel because of my area of expertise, computers. And I 
was very good at it so that I could make more and more money. The other area was I’m 
 
3 
 
 
kind of partially dyslexic, so it’s hard, numbers and - - simple numbers and stuff like that 
are not exactly my fame. I’m not good at it.”1 (Tr. 35-36.) 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant reported that, in September 2011, his motorcycle was 
repossessed, and he learned that his wife was not paying their creditors.2  After many 
conversations with his wife, Applicant was unable to determine why their bills had not 
been paid. She was unable to tell him how their finances had fallen into disarray. 
Applicant separated from his wife. He also stopped working. He explained: “My 
reasoning was to take off September up until January so I could get the house in order, 
figure out what I owed through the separation agreement and then start paying it back.” 
He supported himself during this time by selling investments he had in the stock market. 
(Tr. 34-39.) 
 
 In September 2011, when he decided to stop working, Applicant’s employer 
offered him full-time work. Applicant declined the position. At his hearing, Applicant 
acknowledged that he was unemployed and had not had gainful employment since 
September 2011. Since March 2012, he has received support from his parents, his 
brother, and his former wife. (Tr. 32-34, 42, 53-55.) 
 
 In July 2012, Applicant began proceedings to declare Chapter 7 bankruptcy. He 
provided documentation at his hearing establishing that his Chapter 7 bankruptcy 
petition was filed in September 2012. On his bankruptcy petition, Applicant listed assets 
totaling $258,622 and liabilities totaling $433,588. All of the delinquent debts listed on 
the SOR are listed on his bankruptcy petition. (Answer to SOR; Ex. A.) 
 
 Applicant’s delinquent debts include the following: a $551 account in collection 
status (SOR ¶ 1.a.); a payment of $724 that is 90 days or more past due on an account 
with a balance of $5,566 (SOR ¶ 1.b.); an account totaling $12,396 in charged-off status 
(SOR ¶ 1.c.); an account totaling $15,881 in collection status (SOR ¶ 1.d.); a $274 
account in collection status (SOR ¶ 1.e.); an account with a balance of $326,000 that is 
$13,253 past due (SOR ¶ 1.f.); an account totaling $55,473 that is in charged-off status 
(SOR ¶ 1.g.); and an account totaling $5,638 in charged-off status (SOR ¶ 1.h.) (SOR.) 
 
 In response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant provided a June 2011 settlement 
offer from the creditor identified at SOR ¶ 1.c. The creditor agreed to settle the debt for 
$11,510, to be paid by one check of $1,920 in June 2011 and five checks of $1,918 paid 
between July and November 2011. Applicant provided documentation corroborating the 
June 2011 payment. He also remitted a check for $1,918 in July 2011, but it was 
                                            
1 Later in his hearing, Applicant stated that he paid all of his financial obligations himself before he 
married his second wife. He also asserted that he had no disability that prevented him from carrying out 
financial responsibilities. (Tr. 50-52, 57.) 
 
2 In his March 2012 interview with an authorized investigator, Applicant stated that he learned of his 
financial delinquencies when his motorcycle was repossessed in June 2011. He also stated that he had 
paid the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.c. and 1.d. (Ex. 2.) 
 
4 
 
 
returned to his bank because he had insufficient funds to pay the amount indicated on 
the check. (Item 2.) 
 
 Applicant’s second wife provided a letter of character reference for him. She 
stated that Applicant was a hard worker and a trustworthy employee. She also stated: 
“He is totally immersed in his career and takes his job very seriously, that during our 
marriage he left everything in the household, including budget and finances, under my 
care even to the point that most of the time I [had] to make a decision by myself.” (Ex. 
B.) 
 
 Applicant’s brother also provided a letter of character reference for him. 
Applicant’s brother stated that he was honest, trustworthy, and capable. (Ex. C.) 
 
 Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator in February 2012. He 
told the investigator that he had not had consumer credit counseling. At his hearing he 
stated that he felt responsible for his debts, but his circumstances prevented him from 
paying them. (Ex. 2; Tr. 55-57.)   
 
                                               Policies 
 
 The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider and apply the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). 
In addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
5 
 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
 
6 
 
 
security concerns. Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt and was unable 
or unwilling to pay his creditors. This evidence is sufficient to raise these potentially 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)) Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” (AG ¶ 20(b)) Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
be applicable include evidence that “the person has received or is receiving counseling 
for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or 
is under control” (AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20(d))  Finally, if “the individual has 
a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of 
the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or 
provides evidence of options to resolve the issue,” then AG ¶ 20(e) might apply.  
 
 Applicant admitted a history of financial difficulties and inattention to his financial 
responsibilities. He and his former wife had steady employment for their 12 years of 
marriage, and they had a combined annual income of approximately $200,000. When 
he learned that his wife had not paid their debts and they had financial delinquencies, 
Applicant declined an offer of full-time employment and elected not to take gainful 
employment for almost 14 months. While Applicant’s financial problems may have been 
a circumstance initially beyond his control, he did not act responsibly under the 
circumstances. 
 
 Applicant’s unresolved delinquent debts total approximately $109,000. Three of 
the debts alleged on the SOR are for less than $750. One of those debts is for $274.  
The record reflects that the eight delinquencies alleged on the SOR remain unsatisfied 
and have occurred under circumstances that are likely to recur.    
 
Applicant sought protection from his creditors in September 2012 by declaring 
Chapter 7 bankruptcy. While bankruptcy is a legitimate legal tool in the resolution of 
debt, it does not erase concerns about an individual’s good-faith efforts to satisfy his 
creditors and his current and future financial stability.  
 
 DOHA’s Appeal Board has explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to 
repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
 
7 
 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], 
an applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to 
repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at 
resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term 
“good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-
faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she 
relied on a legally available option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim 
the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition.] 
 
(ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. April 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case No. 99-
9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
 Applicant was inattentive to his financial responsibilities. He delegated all 
financial matters and bill-paying to his wife. When his wife’s actions caused the couple 
to have financial difficulties, he failed to address them and to demonstrate that he had 
made good-faith efforts to satisfy his delinquent debts.  Moreover, Applicant has not had 
financial counseling, and there is no evidence that his financial situation is under 
control. He remains unemployed and continues to accept support from family members. 
I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) do not apply in mitigation in 
Applicant’s case.3 
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
                                            
3 AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature person of 45 
years. He has had a successful career, and he has earned a high income. His financial 
problems began several years ago and are ongoing. Despite these financial problems, 
he has failed to take an interest in and carry out his financial obligations. He has relied 
on bankruptcy to resolve his delinquent debts. While Applicant has a legal right to 
pursue resolution of his debts through bankruptcy, his failure to act in good faith to carry 
out his financial obligations continues to raise security concerns about his judgment and 
reliability.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
delinquencies.  
                                                   Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:  AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.h.:            Against Applicant 
   
                                            Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
