 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 12-03923 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline H (Drug 
Involvement). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 4, 2012, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline H. 
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within 
Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
implemented on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue Applicant’s security clearance. On September 19, 2012, DOHA received 
Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. On October 4, 2012, Applicant elected to have his case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On October 4, 2012, Department 
 
2 
 
 
Counsel compiled her File of Relevant Material (FORM) that contained documents 
identified as Items 1 through 6.  
 
On October 4, 2012, DOHA forwarded to Applicant a copy of the FORM with 
instructions to submit any additional information and objections within 30 days of its 
receipt. On November 2, 2012, Applicant submitted his response to the FORM. 
Department Counsel had no objection to his response. The case was assigned to me 
on November 20, 2012. Items 1 through 6 and Applicant’s response to the FORM are 
entered into the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 27-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since November 2011. He graduated from high school in 2004. He 
earned a bachelor’s degree in 2009 and a master’s degree in 2011. He is applying to 
become a graduate student in a doctorate degree program for a very specific scientific 
field. He has never been married and has no children. This is the first time he has 
applied for a security clearance.1 
 
The SOR alleged that Applicant used marijuana from about January 2005 to 
August 2011, and that he purchased marijuana. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted both allegations and indicated that he last purchased marijuana in June 2011. 
His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.2 
 
 Applicant submitted a security clearance application on December 6, 2011. In 
that application, he disclosed that he used marijuana from January 2005 to August 
2011. He described this conduct as “Recreational Use Only, Infrequent Use (weekend 
or during school breaks), ~ 60 uses over 6 years.” He also stated,  
 
I will not use controlled substances in the future because I do not want to 
limit my future career opportunities . . . and security clearance possibilities. 
Therefore I have discontinued all drug use in order to fulfill my 
responsibilities as a law abiding U.S. citizen. Finally, I am well aware that 
the risks of drug use (unlawfulness, health, financial) far outweigh the 
perceived recreational benefits. 
 
He also disclosed that he purchased drugs from July 2005 to January 2011, and that he 
never sought counseling or treatment as a result of his use of marijuana. He has no 
criminal record.3 
                                                          
1 Item 6. 
2 Items 1 and 4. 
3 Item 1. 
 
3 
 
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant again admitted to the allegations in the 
SOR and indicated that his use of marijuana occurred while he was attending 
undergraduate and graduate school. Those schools are located in a state that is far 
away from where he currently lives and works. He also stated: 
 
Continued usage of marijuana would only absolutely hinder my plans for a 
bright future or career. Since ceasing to use marijuana I have distanced 
and disassociated myself from drug-using associates (moved away from 
[the state where those schools are located]), I have changed and avoided 
the environment where drugs are abused . . . and I have abstained from 
marijuana for >14 months. Drug abuse is in my past and I want to keep it 
that way. I will not abuse drugs again because I have reached a new 
turning point which has opened up exciting new opportunities and 
possibilities in my life. I am sorry that I had used drugs in the past and 
understand how naïve, foolish, and irresponsible I was. I am embarrassed 
and ashamed of the conduct and regret it fully. I will sign this letter at the 
bottom to formalize my intent to never abuse drugs in the future.4  
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
                                                          
4 Response to FORM. In the response, Applicant indicated that he provided a curriculum vitae 
(CV), but it was not attached to that document. 
 
4 
 
 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under AG ¶ 25 and find the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
 
5 
 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.  
 
Applicant admitted that he used marijuana from January 2005 to August 2011, 
and that he purchased marijuana from July 2005 to June 2011. This evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
The following mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 26 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant admitted that he used marijuana recreationally approximately 60 times 
over a six year period. During that period, he was 19 to 25 years old. His drug use 
occurred while he was attending undergraduate and graduate school. He has not used 
marijuana in over 14 months. 
 
Applicant completed graduate school in 2011. He has moved far away from the 
state in which his undergraduate and graduate schools were located. He stated that he 
has disassociated himself from drug-using individuals. He obtained his current job in 
November 2011 and submitted his security clearance application in December 2011. 
This is his first job since he finished graduate school. He signed a letter formalizing his 
intent to never abuse drugs in the future. Although that letter may not formally constitute 
a “Statement of Intent” because it does not acknowledge that any future illegal drug use 
would result in an automatic revocation of his security clearance, it is, as a practical 
matter, the equivalent of such as a statement. He acknowledged that future illegal drug 
use would derail his career aspirations.  
 
Applicant’s use of marijuana was a youthful indiscretion. He is now well aware of 
its negative consequences. He has made lifestyle changes that have taken him away 
from the college drug scene. A sufficient period of abstinence has elapsed that 
demonstrates he put the illegal use of marijuana behind him. His abuse of illegal drugs 
occurred under circumstances that are unlikely to recur. I find that AG ¶ 26(a) and 26(b) 
apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is a young man who is starting his professional career. His disclosure 
of his illegal drug use on the security clearance application is a good indicator that he is 
a man of character. He acknowledged that he made mistakes by using marijuana while 
in school and regrets that conduct. He has matured and put his illegal drug use behind 
him. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Drug Involvement security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of 
Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
_______________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
