                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:                                           )
                                                                    )
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-08160
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Braden Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
W ESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, Applicant failed to
mitigate security concerns over the state of his finances.  Clearance is denied. 
Statement of the Case
On November 15, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
DOHA recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information (AGs) that were implemented by the Department of Defense on
September 1, 2006.
. 
Applicant responded to the SOR on April 15, 2011. The case was assigned to me
on June 2, 2011, and was scheduled for hearing on June 23, 2011. A hearing was held
2
on the scheduled date. At the hearing, the Government's case consisted of seven
exhibits (GEs 1-7). Applicant relied on one witness (himself) and one exhibit (AE  A). The
transcript (Tr.) was received on July 6, 2011. 
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated four delinquent debts
exceeding $25,000. In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the debts as alleged
without explanation. 
Procedural Issues
Before the close of the hearing, Applicant requested the record be kept open to
afford him the opportunity to supplement the record with a signed endorsement, an
updated security clearance application, evidence of steps to address his debts, sources
of income and assets, and service awards.  For good cause shown, Applicant was
granted 18 days to supplement the record. Department Counsel was afforded seven
days to respond.  Within the time permitted, Applicant supplemented the record with a
signed copy of an endorsement letter, a list of his military awards and commendations,
and evidence of his assets.  Applicant’s submissions were admitted as AE A revised and
AEs B and C.  
      Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 43-year-old technical supervisor for a defense contractor, who
seeks to retain his security clearance while he applies for an upgraded clearance. (Tr.
42-47) The allegations covered in the SOR and admitted by Applicant are adopted as
relevant and material findings.  Additional findings follow.
Background
Applicant is single and has never been married. (GE 1)  He has no children.
Applicant has three years of college credits but no degree or diploma. (GE 1; Tr. 39)
Following a two and a half-month period of unemployment in 2007, Applicant joined his
current employer. (GE 1; Tr. 40-41. 50-51) Since joining his current employer, he has
served in Iraq in a civilian capacity. (Tr. 52)
Applicant enlisted in the Marine Corps in April 1989 and served five years of
active duty. (GE 1; Tr. 40, 52-53) While in the Marines, he was deployed to the Middle
East for service in the first Gulf war. (Tr. 53) He was discharged honorably and has
remained in the active reserves. (GE 1)
Finances
Applicant first encountered financial difficulties in 2001. (Tr. 56) He attributed his
difficulties to living beyond his means and becoming overextended. (Tr. 56) Once in
2001 he had eight credit cards. (Tr. 56) Now he has no personal credit cards. (Tr. 65) In
3
July 2006, creditor 1.a obtained a judgment against Applicant in the amount of $4,766.
(GEs 2-6; Tr. 60)) This judgment remains unsatisfied. (Tr. 60-61, 73-75)
Between 2001 and 2008, Applicant accrued three other delinquent debts: an
$11,388 debt with creditor 1.b on an account opened in April 2006; a $9,030 debt with
creditor 1.c on an account opened in April 2008; and a $1,829 debt with creditor 1.d on
an account opened in May 1997. (GEs 2 through 4) None of these debts have been
satisfied to date. Applicant has not received any correspondence from any of these
creditors since 2006.  (Tr. 62, 78-79)  Applicant cannot state with certainty when he last
made a payment to any of these identified creditors. He believes he last made a
payment to creditor 1.d in 2002. (Tr. 76)  When he later returned to this creditor in 2002
or 2003 to discuss payment options, he was told by the creditor that it did not have the
account anymore. (Tr. 78-79) 
Contacting the retailer and bank covered by creditors 1.b and 1.c, respectively, in
2003 to explore payment options, he was informed by automated voice messages that
each creditor had transferred its individual  account to collection agencies. (Tr. 78-79)
Once these debts became delinquent, Applicant made no manifest efforts to contact
these creditors to make payment arrangements. (GE 5; Tr. 79-80) Applicant has not
received credit counseling and has no documented plans to address his delinquent
debts. (Tr. 63-64) Afforded an opportunity to develop a plan for repaying his debts,
Applicant did not provide any evidence of payments or payment plans to address his
listed debts.
Applicant nets approximately $5,000 monthly with overtime. He maintains an
average daily balance of $7,154 in his checking account and reports a current balance of
$2,380.  (AE C). His monthly expenses include a mortgage ($873) and utilities ($200).
He reports $3,000 in his savings account and $14,172 in a money market account he
retains. (AE C; Tr. 65-66)  
Endorsements
Applicant is highly regarded by his coworkers. (AE A) A senior electronics
installation manager who has known him for eight years and worked with him in two
companies described him as a dedicated and trusted supervisor who has earned the
respect of all who work with him. (AE A) Applicant documented numerous awards and
commendations for his military service, which included service in the first Gulf war.  (AE
B; Tr. 53-54)  
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. 
4
These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a security concern and may
be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many of the "[c]onditions that
could mitigate security concerns.” They must be considered before deciding whether or
not a security clearance should be granted, continued, or denied. The guidelines do not
require administrative judges to place exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying
and mitigating conditions in the guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the
guidelines is to be evaluated in the context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶
2(c) 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following adjudication
policy concerns are pertinent herein:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information. An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.  AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
Under the Directive, a decision to grant or continue an applicant's request for
security clearance may be made only upon a threshold finding that to do so is clearly
5
consistent with the national interest. Because the Directive requires administrative
judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the evidence accumulated in the record,
the ultimate determination of an applicant's eligibility for a security clearance depends, in
large part, on the relevance and materiality of that evidence. As with all adversarial
proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences which have a reasonable and
logical basis from the evidence of record. 
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) It must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR; and (2) it must demonstrate that the
facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or maintain a
security clearance.  The required showing of material bearing, however, does not require
the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually mishandled
or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security clearance.
Rather, consideration must take account of cognizable risks that an applicant may
deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted or
controverted facts, the burden of proof shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or his security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation or
mitigation of the Government's case. Because Executive Order 10865 requires that all
security clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, “security-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).
Analysis  
Applicant is a respected supervisor of a defense contractor who accumulated a
number of delinquent debts over the last ten years. Applicant’s debt delinquencies
warrant the application of two of the disqualifying conditions (DC) of the financial
consideration guideline: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and DC
¶19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.” They have been in delinquent
status for some time.
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s duties
and access to classified information necessarily impose important duties of trust and
candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those typically imposed
on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of government
business. See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980). Failure of the
applicant to make concerted efforts to pay or resolve his debts when able to do so raises
security-significant concerns about the sufficiency of the applicant’s demonstrated trust
and judgment necessary to safeguard classified information.
Without more historical explanations for the four major debt delinquencies
Applicant has accrued since 2003 (including a judgment taken against him in July 2006),
it is difficult to find either extenuating circumstances or concrete repayment steps
sufficient to mitigate security risks associated with his delinquent debt accruals. To his
6
credit, he has obtained some financial counseling, but not enough documented efforts to
credit him with the benefits of MC ¶ 20(c), “the person has received or is receiving
counseling for the problem and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being
resolved or is under control.”  Nor is there enough repayment evidence in the record to
credit Applicant with the mitigation benefits of MC ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.” 
For the most part, Applicant’s accumulated debt delinquencies have not been
substantively addressed in a number of years. Several of his debts may even be barred
by his state’s statute of limitations. His state’s statute of limitations bars claims on written
contracts that have been in delinquent status for more than four years.  See  V. Code
Ann. § 8.01-228, et seq. (five years). Were he to initiate active steps to reaffirm the
debts, he would risk validating the claims and tolling the statute’s potential bar to
collection. Standing pat and letting the statute of limitations run on the three claims
(creditors 1.a through 1.d) that exceed $20,000 in overall debt makes some economic
sense. But reliance on such an enforcement bar, while quite likely available to Applicant,
is not a substitute for good-faith efforts to address outstanding debts.  
Statutes of limitation, while considered important policy tools for discouraging
plaintiffs from pursuing stale claims and promoting finality in litigation, have never been
equated by the Appeal Board with good-faith efforts to repay overdue creditors. See, V.
Code Ann. § 8.01-228, et seq. (five years). See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3
(App. Bd. April 2004)(quoting ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 2001)).
What constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue creditors requires a showing that
“a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence
to duty or obligation.” See id.  Summarized, an applicant must establish some kind of
concrete plan for repaying the debt in issue besides relying on a legally permissible
option like filing for Chapter 7 bankruptcy or taking advantage of a statute of limitations.
When addressing repayment efforts generally, the Appeal Board has not required
an applicant to establish “that he has paid off each and every debt listed in the SOR.”
See ISCR Case no. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008)(internal citations omitted).
All that the Board has required is that the “applicant demonstrate he has a plan to
resolve his financial problems and has taken significant actions to implement that plan.”
See id. In Applicant’s case, it was incumbent upon him to demonstrate some tangible
steps to satisfy his four delinquent debts with the monthly resources available to him
from his checking, savings, and money market accounts. This he has not done to date,
and, as a result, he is not able to satisfy any of the pertinent mitigating conditions.   
Based on a whole-person assessment, Applicant fails to surmount the judgment
questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent debts over an extended period of
time while he was for the most part fully employed. His military awards and
commendations, while impressive, are not enough to overcome judgment risks
associated with his unresolved finances. On balance, Applicant has not shown sufficient
tangible effort in addressing his debts to mitigate security concerns over his substantial
debt accruals and demonstrate renewed control over his finances. 
7
Taking into account all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Applicant’s
debt accumulations, his military credits and his meritorious endorsement, it is still too
soon to make safe predictive judgments about Applicant’s ability and intentions to repay
his accrued debts and restore his finances to stable levels commensurate with his
holding a security clearance. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the
allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d.    
Formal Findings 
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following separate
formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS):       AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.d :           Against Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant's security
clearance.   Clearance is denied.
                                  
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge
                                          
8
                                        
