 
1 
 
 
                                                             DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-05052 
                                                            )                                                                       
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O’Neil, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under the 
personal conduct adjudicative guideline. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                                      Statement of Case 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
June 4, 2007. On January 13, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On February 22, 2011, DOHA received Applicant’s written answer to the SOR. 
He requested that his case be determined on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On 
April 15, 2011, the Government compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM). The 
FORM contained documents identified as Items 1 through 7. By letter dated April 15, 
2011, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit 
any additional information or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the 
FORM on May 3, 2011. His response was due on June 2, 2011. Applicant filed 
additional information within the required time period. On June 24, 2011, DOHA 
assigned the case to me for a decision. I marked Applicant’s submission as Item A and 
admitted it, without objection, to the record.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains eight allegations of disqualifying conduct under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.h.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted seven of the eight allegations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a., 1.b., 1.d., 1.e., 1.f., 1.g., and 1.h.). 
He denied the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.c. Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings 
of fact. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant is 41 years old and employed by a government contractor. He has 
been married twice. He is the father of two children. Applicant pays child support to his 
first wife for his older child, who resides with his mother in another state. Applicant’s 
second wife, his younger child, and a stepchild reside in his household. (Item 5.) 
 
 Applicant earned a Bachelor of Science degree in May 2001. He has worked for 
his present employer since August 2007. (Item 5; Item 6.) 
 
 In November 1989, Applicant enlisted in the United States military and was 
trained as a patient administration specialist. The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.h. that in 1990, 
when he was about 20 years old, Applicant was charged with vandalism. The SOR 
further alleges that when Applicant failed to appear in court, authorities in the county 
where he was charged issued a warrant for his arrest. The warrant was later purged 
and the case was dismissed. Applicant admitted that allegation and reported that his 
grandmother ordered him out of her house when she learned of the vandalism charge. 
He provided additional information about dismissal of the case. (Item 1; Item 4; Item 7.) 
 
 In 1993, Applicant and his wife had a serious argument which resulted in 
Applicant assaulting his wife. He was charged with assault, pursuant to Article 128 of 
the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). He was subjected to administrative 
discipline, given a written reprimand, and referred to social work services by his 
command. This personal conduct is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.g. (Item 1; Item 4; Item 7.)   
 
 Applicant’s military records show that in November 1995, he was disrespectful to 
an appointed leader, his floor sergeant, and he was also disrespectful toward a 
commissioned officer. His military records also show that in December 1995, Applicant 
 
3 
 
 
failed to report for duty on time, and he showed disrespect toward a noncommissioned 
officer. This personal conduct is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.f. (Item 1; Item 4; Item 7 at 2.) 
 
 The SOR alleges at ¶ 1.e. that, in May 1996, Applicant violated unit policy by 
taking a Government vehicle, without authorization, and driving it to another military 
installation for the purpose of visiting his friends there. He was charged with 
misappropriation of a Government vehicle. His security clearance was suspended. 
Under Article 15, UCMJ, Applicant was reduced in rank to private first class and 
discharged under Other Than Honorable Conditions. He was barred from reenlistment. 
(Item 4; Item 6 at 9; Item 7.) 
 
 In November 1998, Applicant was terminated from a position when he failed to 
perform according to standards. This personal conduct is alleged at SOR ¶ 1.d. (Item 1; 
Item 4; Item 5 at 8.) 
 
 Applicant returned to military service in June 2001 and served on active duty as 
an officer. He was deployed to war zones from January through July 2004 and from 
January to October 2005. In September 2005, one of Applicant’s subordinates filed a 
written complaint against him alleging sexual harassment. In October 2005, a general 
officer memorandum of record of sexual harassment was issued against Applicant. In 
November 2005, Applicant resigned from military service. This personal conduct was 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b. (Item 1; Item 4; Item 6 at 6-7, 10, 12-13.) 
 
 In September 2006, Applicant was terminated from a civilian job following a 
sexual harassment complaint from a female coworker. This personal conduct was 
alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. (Item 1; Item 4; Item 5 at 8; Item 6 at 5-6.) 
 
 At ¶ 1.c., the SOR alleged that, in about January 1999, Applicant was charged 
with Peace Disturbance at a military installation. Applicant denied the allegation. I could 
find nothing in the record to corroborate the allegation. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 In his response to the FORM, Applicant acknowledged the personal conduct that 
raised security concerns. He denied that this conduct was related to any compromise of 
classified information, and he asserted that he always gave national security top priority. 
He opined that those who were serious security risks were not investigated as 
thoroughly as he was. He did not discuss how he would prevent recurrence of the 
personal conduct in the future. (Item A.) 
 
 Nothing in the record establishes that Applicant received counseling to change 
the behavior that raised security concerns. He did not provide information indicating that 
he had otherwise attempted to alleviate the stressors that had caused the behavior, 
thereby making the behavior less likely to recur. 
 
 
  
 
 
4 
 
 
           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, 
emphasizing that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy 
v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicants eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
    
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
5 
 
 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
  
 AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant is responsible for eight specific acts that raise 
security concerns under the personal conduct adjudicative guideline. Applicant admitted 
seven of the eight allegations. He denied the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.c. I was unable to 
find record evidence in the FORM establishing the controverted facts in allegation 1.c. 
(See Directive ¶ E3.1.14.) Accordingly, I conclude allegation 1.c. for Applicant. 
 
 However, the record does establish that between 1990 and 2006, Applicant’s 
personal conduct, on at least seven occasions, demonstrated questionable judgment 
and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. This personal conduct 
created in Applicant a vulnerability to exploitation and, if known, could affect his 
personal and professional standing. Applicant’s personal conduct raises security 
concerns under AG ¶¶16(d)(2), 16(d)(3), and 16(e). AG ¶ 16(d) reads, in pertinent part, 
as follows: 
 
Credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, 
but which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information.  This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of . . . (2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate 
 
6 
 
 
behavior in the workplace [and] (3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule 
violations. . .  .  
 
 AG ¶ 16(e) reads, in pertinent part: “personal conduct, or concealment of 
information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect 
the person’s personal, professional or community standing . . .  .” 
 
 AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) provide conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns in this case. AG ¶ 17(c) reads: “the offense is so minor, or so much time has 
passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 17(d) reads: “the individual has 
acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken 
positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused 
untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely 
to recur.” AG ¶ 17(e) reads: “the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or 
eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.”  
 
The record establishes that the personal conduct that raised security concerns 
began in about 1989 and continued until at least 2006, one year before Applicant 
completed his SF 86. The alleged actions, which Applicant admitted, were serious and 
included allegations of sexual harassment in the workplace, a job termination for failure 
to perform according to standards, misappropriation of Government property, disrespect 
directed at individuals in his military chain of command, reporting late for military duty, 
spousal assault, and vandalism.   
 
 Nothing in the record establishes that Applicant obtained counseling or took 
positive steps to alleviate the stressors that led to his inappropriate behavior in the 
workplace and his pattern of rule violations that spanned a period of at least 16 years. 
Additionally, Applicant failed to demonstrate that he had taken positive steps to reduce 
or eliminate the vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress that his personal 
conduct could generate. Accordingly, I conclude that AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) do 
not apply in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case.   
  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
The SOR alleged personal conduct over a period of 16 years that raised security 
concerns. In his response to the FORM, Applicant acknowledged the personal conduct 
but did not address its ongoing seriousness or discuss how he intended to ensure that it 
would not recur. Applicant requested a decision on the written record. The written 
record in this case is sparse. Moreover, without an opportunity to assess Applicant’s 
credibility at a hearing, I am unable to conclude that he met his burden of persuasion in 
mitigating the Government’s allegations under the Personal Conduct adjudicative 
guideline.         
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising from his personal 
conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.b.:            Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.d. - 1.h.:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information.  Applicant’s request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
                                            
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
