 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992,1
as amended (Directive), and adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of Defense
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                              
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-03690
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant was charged with murdering his brother-in-law in 1982. He was convicted
of voluntary manslaughter in October 1983, and he was sentenced to serve 15 years
confinement. He was released from confinement in 1990. He had an illustrious career as
an Air Force fighter pilot before his conviction. He earned his doctoral degree while
confined in a work release setting, and he has been employed in highly responsible public
service positions since he was released from confinement. Applicant mitigated the security
concern that arises from his criminal conduct. Clearance is granted.
On October 29, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.1
The SOR alleges security concerns under Guideline J (criminal conduct) and Guideline E
(personal conduct). Applicant submitted a response to the SOR that was received by
DOHA on December 20, 2010. He admitted all SOR allegations and requested a hearing.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
 Applicant was traveling away from home and requested through Department Counsel that the2
hearing be held in the state where he was temporarily staying. The notice of hearing was sent to the address
he provided and, on May 27, 2011, Department Counsel sent Applicant an e-mail informing him of the date,
time, and location of the hearing (Appellate Exhibit I). After being fully informed of his right to a 15-day notice
of the date, time, and place of the hearing, Applicant waived that right on the record. (Tr. 16-18) 
 To be “dropped from the roles” is an administrative action that terminates an officer’s military status,3
in this case, based on Applicant’s conviction and confinement in a civilian work release center.
2
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on April 20, 2011, and
reassigned to me on May 12, 2011, due to Applicant’s request that the hearing be held in
a region other than where he resided. A notice of hearing was issued on May 26, 2011,
scheduling the hearing for June 6, 2011.  The hearing was conducted as scheduled. The2
government submitted three documentary exhibits that were marked as Government
Exhibits (GE) 1-3 and admitted into the record without objection. Applicant testified, called
his wife to testify, and submitted four documents that were marked as Applicant Exhibits
(AE) 1-4 and admitted into the record without objection. The transcript was received on
June 22, 2010.     
 Procedural Matters
Department Counsel moved to withdraw SOR allegations 1.b, 2.a, and 2.b. That
motion was granted without objection.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admission to the remaining SOR allegation is incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings, testimony and exhibits, I make the
following findings of fact:
Applicant is 68 years old. He was first married in February 1974, and that marriage
ended in divorce in about November 1983. He has two adult daughters from this marriage
whom he has not seen or heard from since 1984. Applicant has been remarried since
December 2010.
Applicant received a bachelor of science degree in management and economics in
June 1966. He participated in the Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps while in
college, and he was commissioned as a 2  lieutenant in the Air Force in October 1966. Hend
served continuously on active duty in the Air Force until he was dropped from the Air Force
rolls sometime following his conviction in October 1983.  Applicant was awarded a master3
of science degree in engineering systems in June 1976. He was awarded a doctoral
degree in educational administration in June 1986.
Applicant completed Air Force flight training in or about May 1968, and was
assigned to fly the F-4D fighter aircraft. His first assignment was as a forward air controller
in Viet Nam in 1969-70, during which he flew 160 combat missions. Following non-combat
assignments, Applicant was once again assigned to fly combat missions in Viet Nam in
3
1973, during which he flew 240 combat missions. Applicant accumulated approximately
900 hours of combat flying time during his two deployments to Viet Nam. His aircraft was
shot down on one mission as he flew close air support for American and Vietnamese
forces who were engaged in combat, literally, at the end of the runway at the base to which
Applicant was assigned. He received various awards and decorations for his combat flying,
including the Distinguished Flying Cross, Air Medal, and Purple Heart.
Applicant obtained the rank of major in the Air Force. He was selected for promotion
to lieutenant colonel when he was dropped from the rolls. He possessed a security
clearance during his entire time on active duty, including at levels that provided him access
to nuclear weapons and plans for the deployment and use of those weapons. No allegation
was ever made that he compromised or risked the compromise of classified information,
and no prior action was ever taken to revoke or downgrade his clearance for adverse
reasons other than being dropped from the Air Force rolls.
Applicant was involved in a divorce and custody dispute with his then wife in 1982.
He had been awarded temporary custody of his two daughters and, in May 1982, a final
court hearing was scheduled to resolve the custody issue. Applicant’s wife attended the
court hearing accompanied by her brother. Following the hearing, Applicant, his wife, and
her brother went to Applicant’s residence to provide his wife a chance to visit with their
daughters. Applicant contends that while at the residence, his brother-in-law attacked him
with a knife, and he shot and killed the brother-in-law in self-defense. Applicant was
charged with murder, but, after a contested trial, he was convicted of voluntary
manslaughter. Applicant was sentenced to serve 15 years in confinement.
Applicant served his sentence of confinement in a work release center. He was
confined at all times except when released to work of pursue his doctoral degree. He was
employed at a variety of jobs while in confinement that ranged from working in a gas
station to working in the admissions and finance offices at the university from which he
received his doctoral degree. Applicant served seven and one-half years in confinement
before he was released in 1990. He did not have parole or other continuing conditions
placed on him once he was released from confinement.
Following his release from confinement, Applicant worked as a senior transportation
planner for a municipality, and as a traffic engineer for another municipality.  In June 2002,
he was hired as an interim airport manager for a municipal airport. From June 2002 until
July 2008, Applicant was employed as an airport director or airfield manager by several
municipalities, interrupted by brief periods of unemployment. Applicant’s last such
employment ended when he was abruptly terminated after his manslaughter conviction
became a political issue despite the fact that he had disclosed it when he was initially hired.
Applicant was hired to serve as a consultant to a defense contractor in September 2008,
contingent upon him obtaining a security clearance. 
Applicant’s employments as airport director or airfield manager required him to be
responsible for airport security. In that capacity he was required to pass the stringent
security clearance requirements imposed by the Transportation Security Administration
(TSA). One of the airports he managed became one of only three airports nationwide to
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at 2.4
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 5
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).6
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at 3 (citations omitted).7
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at 2.8
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.9
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.10
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.11
 Id. at 531.12
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.13
4
obtain a satisfactory rating during a TSA transition in security systems. Applicant was also
responsible for writing security manuals for the airports he supervised.           
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying and
mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision must be a fair
and impartial decision based upon the relevant and material facts and circumstances, the
whole-person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive.
Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or factor for or against
clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines should be followed
whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance. Guideline J (criminal
conduct) with its disqualifying and mitigating conditions is most relevant in this case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden of4 5
proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of evidence,6
although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet its burden
of proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a preponderance of7
the evidence.”  Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant8
to present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable9
clearance decision.10
No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the clearly consistent standard11
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access12
to classified information must be resolved in favor of protecting national security.      13
 To be “dropped from the rolls” is an administrative termination of m ilitary status and is not the14
equivalent of a dismissal under dishonorable conditions. Accordingly, DC 31(b): discharge or dismissal from
the Armed Forces under dishonorable conditions does not apply.
5
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability or willingness to
comply with laws, rules and regulations. (AG 30)
Applicant was charged with the murder of his brother-in-law in 1982. He was
convicted of voluntary manslaughter in October 1983, and he was sentenced to serve 15
years confinement. He actually served seven and one-half years in confinement in a work
release facility. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 31(a): a single serious crime or multiple
lesser offenses applies.14
Applicant had a stellar 16-year-long military career at the time he was charged with
the murder of his brother-in-law. That career included two distinguished combat tours as
a fighter pilot during which he earned the Distinguished Flying Cross, Air Medal, and Purple
Heart. While incarcerated in a work release center, Applicant maintained steady
employment and earned a doctoral degree. During the more than 20 years since his
release from confinement, Applicant has been employed in a variety of highly responsible
jobs by a number of municipalities. 
Applicant held extremely high level security clearances while he was in the Air
Force, including clearances that provided him access to nuclear weapons and plans for the
employment of those weapons. No allegation was ever made that he compromised or
risked the compromise of classified information. His work as a municipal airport director or
airfield manager provided him access to TSA security regulations and required him to
comply with those regulations. There is no suggestion that he compromised, risked the
compromise, or failed to comply with those regulations.
Applicant’s manslaughter conviction arose from what was obviously a contentious
divorce and child custody battle in which his brother-in-law somehow became involved.
While extremely serious, Applicant’s voluntary manslaughter conviction was and is an
aberration in what has been an otherwise honorable, trustworthy, and commendable life.
The following Mitigating Conditions (MC) apply: MC 32(a): so much time has
elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and MC 32(c): there is evidence of successful
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal
activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record,
or constructive community involvement.
6
Considering all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in this case,
the whole-person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive, and
the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions, I find Applicant mitigated the criminal
conduct security concern. He has overcome the case against him and satisfied his ultimate
burden of persuasion. It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a
security clearance. Guideline J is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: For APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Withdrawn
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: WITHDRAWN
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b: Withdrawn
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant.
Clearance is granted.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge

