1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
           DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ADP Case No. 09-07254
)
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant incurred more than $19,000 in delinquent debt over the past seven
years. She did not demonstrate either changed circumstances or sufficient income to
resolve those debts or remain solvent in the future. Financial security concerns were not
mitigated. Based upon a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for
access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied. 
On April 9, 1993, the Composite Health Care Systems Program Office
(CHCSPO), the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), and the Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Command, Control, Communications and Intelligence (ASD
C3I), entered into a memorandum of agreement for DOHA to provide trustworthiness
determinations for contractor personnel employed in Sensitive Information Systems
Positions (ADP I/II/III), as defined in Department of Defense (DoD) Regulation 5200.2-
R, Personnel Security Program (January 1987), as amended (Regulation).
Item 5.
1
Item 1.
2
Item 3.
3
Items 2 and 4.
4
The Government submitted 12 Items in support of the SOR allegations. 5
Items 5 and 11.
6
Item 4.
7
2
Applicant submitted her Public Trust Position Application (SF 85P), on August 22,
2008.  On November 4, 2010, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to1
Applicant detailing trustworthiness concerns under Guideline F (Financial
Considerations).  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding2
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); the Regulation (supra); and the
Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 22, 2010.  She3
answered the SOR in writing on November 23, 2010, and requested that her case be
decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a hearing.  Department4
Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on January 10, 2011. A complete
copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM)  was provided to Applicant, and she was5
afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation within 30 days of her receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of her copy of the FORM
on February 15, 2011, and returned it to DOHA. She provided no further response to
the FORM within the 30-day period, did not request additional time to respond, and
expressed no objection to my consideration of the evidence submitted by Department
Counsel. I received the case assignment on April 4, 2011.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 52-year-old employee of a federal contractor, where she has
worked since late 2009 as a shipping and receiving clerk. She is divorced, and has
three adult sons.  In her answer, Applicant admitted four of the allegations in the SOR,6
and denied three of them.  Those admissions and her affidavit provided to an7
investigator from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) are incorporated in the
following findings.
Items 4, 8, 9, and 10.
8
Item 6.
9
Item 9.
10
Item 7.
11
Item 7.
12
Items 4 and 7.
13
Items 4 and 5.
14
3
Applicant admitted owing the four delinquent credit card debts alleged in SOR ¶¶
1.a, 1.c, 1.d, and 1.e, totaling $18,975. These accounts all became delinquent between
April and November 2004.  In her OPM affidavit, she said that after she fell behind on8
payments she contacted each creditor, but they refused to negotiate lower payments
and asked her to pay the full amount owed. She could not afford to pay the full amounts,
so she stopped paying them altogether.  She offered no evidence of any payment9
toward these debts, or of any other attempts to resolve them. 
Applicant’s home state filed a $2,255 tax lien against her in September 2008. In
her April 2010 OPM affidavit, she said that she had been making monthly payments of
$102 to repay this debt, and would make the final payment the following day. She
denied that the debt remained unpaid in her November 2010 answer to the SOR, and
said that it had been paid off in March 2010. Her credit bureau report (CBR) dated
February 2, 2010, showed this lien reported by all three major credit bureaus.  It was10
no longer reported on her CBR dated January 3, 2011.  Although Applicant did not11
offer corroborating documentation that this debt was satisfied, its removal from her most
recent CBR supports her contention that she paid it.
Applicant also denied that the $65 medical debt, alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f, remained
unpaid. Her January 2011 CBR reported that, effective December 2010, the debt was
paid with a zero balance due.  However, it showed the $395 medical debt, alleged in12
SOR ¶ 1.g, remained unpaid since March 2007. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant
denied owing that debt and said her insurance should have paid it. She provided no
evidence of communication with either the creditor or her insurance company to attempt
to clarify responsibility for the debt, and the weight of evidence in the case file indicates
that she still owes it.13
Applicant explained that she was paying her bills on time until 2004, when she
lost her job that paid $41,000 per year. She was unemployed from either July or August
2004 until January 2005, then got another job that paid her $30,000 per year. She was
unemployed again from February 2008 to June 2008, when she obtained her current
position.  However, both periods of unemployment began when she was fired by her14
Items 5 and 6. 
15
4
employers over disputes with, and poor service to, customers.  Applicant provided no15
evidence concerning her budget, or her actions to curb spending in response to her
brief periods of unemployment and reduced income. Nor did she demonstrate either the
ability or willingness to attempt resolution of her admittedly delinquent debts.
Applicant provided no information concerning the quality of her professional
performance, the level of responsibility her duties entail, or her track record with respect
to handling sensitive information and observation of security procedures. She submitted
no character references or other evidence tending to establish good judgment,
trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate her credibility, demeanor, or
character in person since she elected to have her case decided without a hearing. 
 
Policies
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”
(Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3.) “The standard that must be met for . . .
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” (Regulation ¶
C6.1.1.1.) The Deputy Under Secretary of Defense (Counterintelligence and Security)
Memorandum, dated November 19, 2004, indicates trustworthiness adjudications will
apply to cases forwarded to DOHA by the Defense Security Service and Office of
Personnel Management. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the
right to the procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access
determination may be made. (Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.)  
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair,
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
5
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable [trustworthiness] decision.”
A person who applies for access to sensitive information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
sensitive information. 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that “Any determination under this
order adverse to an applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified
or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern pertaining to financial considerations:
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.
Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts.
AG ¶ 19 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Department Counsel argued persuasively that the evidence raised two of
these potentially disqualifying conditions: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;”
and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” (Throughout this analysis, the
terms “security” and “trustworthiness” are used interchangeably.) 
6
Applicant admitted owing four SOR-listed delinquent credit card debts totaling
almost $19,000. The record shows a seven-year history during which Applicant was
regularly unable to satisfy these debts, and a $395 medical debt that has been
delinquent for more than four years. Having evaluated the nature, quantity, and
amounts involved in Applicant’s debts, I find no evidence of irresponsible or frivolous
spending. There were neither allegations nor proof of compulsive, addictive, or problem
gambling. Nor was there any evidence of drug abuse, alcoholism, or deceptive financial
practices. Accordingly, no other Guideline F disqualifying condition was established.
The evidence supporting application of AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) shifts the burden of proof
to Applicant to establish mitigation of the resulting trustworthiness concerns.  
AG ¶ 20 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising from a
history of unpaid debt, and a present unwillingness or inability to meet financial
obligations:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts; and
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.
Applicant’s delinquencies arose and continued over the past seven years and
most of them remain unpaid at present. She did not demonstrate that any of the
circumstances giving rise to those debts is unlikely to recur, or that her reliability,
trustworthiness, and judgment are not implicated by the ongoing situation. Accordingly,
she did not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(a). 
I find minimal, if any, mitigation under AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant’s two periods of
unemployment were not lengthy, compared to the time she has been employed, and
both resulted from her being fired for cause. Two of her debts were for medical
7
expenses, but they were not shown to have resulted from unexpected emergencies.
Applicant has not incurred substantial new delinquent debt since 2004, and made
minimal payments toward a few debts, but did not demonstrate that her financial
circumstances have a foreseeable probability of changing for the better. 
Applicant gave no indication that she received any financial counseling, or that
she had either a plan or the means to address over $19,000 in delinquent debt. She did
not demonstrate solvency going forward, or otherwise indicate that her financial
situation is under control. Given the record evidence, repayment or other resolution of
her substantial delinquent debt is unlikely. Financial trustworthiness concerns are
therefor not mitigated under AG ¶¶ 20(c) or (d). 
Applicant’s claim that her insurance should have paid the debt alleged in SOR ¶
1.g could fall under AG ¶ 20(e), but she provided no documented proof to substantiate
the basis of the dispute or evidence of actions to resolve the issue. Accordingly,
mitigation under that provision was not established. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a public
trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s conduct of concern
involves the substantial amount of delinquent debt that remained unpaid over the past
seven years. The concerns are exacerbated by the absence of evidence that the
circumstances leading to her inability or unwillingness to repay these debts have
changed, or will change, for the better. She has not sought financial counseling, and
there is no evidence suggesting any reduction in the potential for pressure, coercion,
exploitation, or duress that could tempt Applicant to abuse her public trust position. 
8
On balance, Applicant presented insufficient evidence to mitigate the reliability
and trustworthiness concerns arising from her financial considerations, including her
failure to pay substantial delinquent debts over the past seven years and her apparent
inability to do so going forward. Overall, the record evidence leaves significant doubt as
to Applicant’s present eligibility and suitability for a public trust position.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a
public trust position. Eligibility for access to ADP I/II/III sensitive information is denied.    
 
 
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
