                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06295 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark Zaid, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement, and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 4, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guidelines 
H and E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 9, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on April 5, 2011. DOHA issued a 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
leeplessness.   
at helped him deal with his learning 
isability, but he always felt inferior because of it.4  
questions, 
specially those that asked him for information within the last seven years.5  
                                                          
Notice of Hearing on April 18, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled on May 23, 
2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6. Applicant did not object and 
they were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified and three witnesses testified on his 
behalf. He offered exhibits (AE) A through I, which were admitted into evidence without 
objections. The record was held open to allow Applicant to submit additional 
documents, which he did and it was marked as AE J, and admitted without objection. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 2, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b, and denied the remaining allegations. 
After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 33 years old. He graduated from high school in 1996. He needs 18 
credits to complete his bachelor’s degree. He has never been married and has no 
children. He has worked for a federal contractor since about 2009.1 
 
 Applicant has been diagnosed with obsessive compulsive disorder, attention 
deficit disorder, and complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS)2 that was caused by 
nerve damage, associated with an injury and is manifested by chronic pain. He takes 
four types of prescribed drugs daily that help him with anxiety, pain, and 
3s
 
 Applicant’s mother testified and explained that her son had a difficult road in life. 
He had learning disabilities throughout school, but was not a behavioral problem. His 
disabilities involved an inability to comprehend the written word. He is capable of 
reading, but his comprehension is limited when he reads the material himself. If 
something is read to him, he is better able to comprehend the information. She 
explained that he attended classes in high school th
d
 
 Applicant’s mother explained that he was slow to mature. However, since he 
moved to his present residence and has worked for his current employer, she has seen 
him grow immensely. She is in contact with him regularly. When he was completing his 
security clearance application (SCA), he contacted her by telephone and read her the 
questions being asked. They were both somewhat confused by certain 
e
1 Tr. 150-151. 
 
2 The condition is also referred to as reflex sympathetic dystrophy. 
 
3 Tr. 102-105. 
 
4 Tr. 66-73. 
 
5 Tr. 73-78, 92-95. 
 
3 
 
 
ibed him as an honest person. He 
ves his job and is proud of his accomplishments.6 
cant 
elieved he did not have to disclose the arrest because of what he had been told.7  
 it. Applicant no longer associates with 
is girlfriend or with any known drug abusers.8  
bout 
003. He used it infrequently after high school and used it to ameliorate his pain.9  
                                                          
 
 Applicant experienced physical and sexual abuse by a couple of teachers when 
he was in grammar school and in middle school. His mother explained that in March 
2007, he was in therapy once or twice a week with a psychiatrist. Around the same 
time, he saw the teachers who had abused him and he became extremely anxious. He 
was also experiencing severe pain due to his CRPS. The doctors were trying to 
determine the right type of drugs to administer to him. At that time, he was unable to 
stay home alone, unable to feed himself, or walk. It took a long time for the doctors to 
determine a proper pain management plan. She also described his medical issues that 
involved countless surgeries, epidurals, chemical meningitis, and an infection. He now 
has a doctor who understands how to manage his medications and regulate his chronic 
pain. She did not believe he could have purchased heroin in his tumultuous physical 
and mental state. She stated he crushed his prescribed medications, presumably for 
digestive purposes, and kept the crushed pills in a little bag. Since that low point in 
Applicant’s life, his mother has observed him develop into a different person. He has 
matured and is an adult. Applicant’s mother descr
lo
 
 Applicant admitted he was arrested in 1997 and charged with attempted 
possession of a controlled substance, marijuana, a misdemeanor. He admitted he 
attempted to purchase marijuana from a street dealer, who was an undercover 
policeman. He was arrested and given a ticket to appear in court. He stated he was told 
by the judge that the charge would be dismissed and expunged at a later date, and 
nothing would appear on his record, if he did not get in any further trouble. Appli
b
 
 Applicant admitted he was arrested in July 2003 and charged with possession of 
a controlled substance. He spent the night in jail. He was pulled over by the police when 
he was driving with his girlfriend who had marijuana in the car. Applicant stated the 
marijuana did not belong to him. He went to court and the case was dropped due to an 
illegal search. He was told by the judge and his attorney that the charge was not on his 
record, and therefore he did not have to disclose
th
 
 Applicant admitted he used marijuana in the past, but ceased using it a
2
 
 Applicant denied he illegally used street heroin in 2007. He was prescribed and 
told by one of his doctor’s that a medication he was given was as powerful as heroin. 
6 Tr. 81-92. 
 
7 Tr. 105-109, 113-119. 
 
8 Tr. 119-123. 
 
9 Tr. 111-112. 
 
4 
 
 
he drug since 2007. There is no indication that he is addicted to any 
legal drugs.10 
berately 
nd intentionally conceal his arrests or illegal drug use from the government.11  
vided a letter stating Applicant has been his patient since 
arch 20, 2007. He stated:  
 
ional pain syndrome sometimes called sympathetic 
reflex dystrophy.12  
the condition, its extent and duration of the 
pairment and treatment as follows:  
 
                                                          
He remembered when he was being sedated that the doctor told him he was being 
given a pharmaceutical heroin. The name of the actual drug is Dilaudid, which he 
believed was on the same chemical level as heroin. He was suffering from meningitis at 
the time. When Applicant was transferring hospitals he took the medication without 
authorization. He admitted he was distraught and it was a gesture for attention. This is 
the one time use of heroin that he disclosed to the government investigator. Applicant 
has not used t
il
 
 Applicant explained that he did not disclose on his SCA his prior arrests for 
marijuana possession because he was confused and had difficulty completing and 
understanding the questions and paperwork. He completed the SCA in a hotel room. He 
has difficulty focusing on things if they are not laid out in an orderly way. He has to 
follow a pattern to complete tasks. He is compelled, when he receives a task, to 
complete it as fast as possible. He explained when he received his SCA he wanted to 
complete it as quickly as possible. Applicant credibly testified that he did not deli
a
 
 Applicant’s doctor pro
M
Applicant does not currently have a condition which will impair his 
judgment or reliability. He has an attentional deficit disorder, obsessive 
compulsive traits which frequently accompany an attentional deficit 
disorder, and a reg
 
His doctor described the nature of 
im
Attentional deficit disorder, sometimes called “hyperactivity” is 
characterized by physical hyperactivity, fidgeting, difficulty in concentration 
or finishing work and tendency to be distracted. It occurs in about 10% of 
American males. However, I believe [Applicant] has acquired many of the 
available coping mechanisms. The extent to which [Applicant] may be at 
risk for error in judgment is best estimated by his work performance. He is 
currently taking clonidine 2 TTS (patch) to assist him in control of the 
symptoms. I suspect at this point he could do well even without it because 
of his enthusiasm and pride in his position and performance. The 
obsessive compulsive traits do not reach the level of a diagnosis in that 
there is no functional impairment. It may cause him to take certain routes 
10 Tr. 109-112, 132-136. 
 
11 Tr. 105-109, 133-142-150. 
 
12 GE 5. 
 
5 
 
 
d for its long half life which leads to 
smoother, more even pain control.  
 
 
time but it is not perfectly predictable.13  
if Applicant was confused he would just 
rite something down to complete the task.14  
                                                          
every day or do things in a particular sequence but does not lead to 
impairment and may even lead to a higher striving to do perfectly in his 
work. The sympathetic reflex dystrophy is secondary to an injury to his left 
foot he incurred in the late 1990s. It is characterized by high propensity to 
pain from relatively minor physical contact only in specific areas, in his 
case the left foot and part of the left leg. At the current level of severity, it 
is treated with methadone 10 mg three times per day. The dose was 
originally 50 mg/day but has been reduced as above without any 
indication of addictive behavior or drug seeking. The methadone rather 
than codeine or oxycodone is use
The prognosis for the attentional deficit disorder is excellent in that those 
with it develop individual strategies to prevent it from interfering. It does 
not become worse in time. If [Applicant] were to have difficulty from it in 
either judgment or reliability, I believe you would have observed those 
difficulties by now. The obsessive compulsive traits are stable and do not 
require treatment. The reflex sympathetic dystrophy tends to decline over
 
 Applicant’s coworker testified on his behalf. The coworker has known him since 
September 2009. Applicant was the witness’s liaison with Applicant’s employer, and 
they interacted daily from September 2009 to December 2010. He described Applicant 
as very methodical and task-oriented. Applicant would sometimes become 
overwhelmed if he did not understand a task and start to stammer and lose his thought 
process until he understood the task. He provided outstanding support to senior staff, 
who would ask for him by name. He would complete a job from start to finish. He 
excelled in the technical aspects of the job because he was able to break the task 
down. If he was confused, his performance would be affected. He could be trusted with 
any project and exhibited a high degree of integrity. When asked his opinion about the 
falsification allegations, the witness believed 
w
 
 Applicant’s former roommate, an E-9 in the Air Force, with 25 years on active 
duty, testified on his behalf. She has held a top secret clearance with access to 
sensitive compartmented information since 1986. She has known Applicant since 
November 2009. The witness had bought a house and was looking for a roommate. 
Applicant moved in and they were roommates for six or seven months and also had 
interactions professionally. She referred to him as a “misfit toy”. He is a good person, 
tries hard to make things work, is an introvert, and a workaholic. He is very focused. 
She has noticed a change in him since he began working at his present job and 
described him as “blossoming” and maturing. Based on his personality and “foibles”, 
she does not believe he intentionally falsified his SCA, but rather that he just wanted to 
13 GE 5. 
 
14 Tr. 23-41. 
 
6 
 
 
as youthful indiscretion. She recommended he be granted a security 
learance. 15  
no 
esitation recommending Applicant for a position of trust and a security clearance.16 
 the security clearance process and the 
portance of completing the SCA correctly.17  
 
g to automatic revocation of a security clearance if 
he should use illegal drugs again.18  
Policies 
                                                          
get through it and get it done. She explained he has a routine that he follows and when 
it is disrupted he has issues. He is more successful when he has someone to help him 
prioritize things. She has never known him to deviate from his routine. She asked him to 
vacate the house they shared after an incident where he burned a pizza box in the 
oven. This obviously broke his routine and he was a little agitated until he found a new 
place to live. He has adapted well in his new apartment. She believes his drug 
involvement w
c
 
 Letters provided by coworkers and others who know him and interacted with him 
daily, describe Applicant as a highly technically-sound engineer. Many of the customers 
personally request his services due to his attention to detail, willingness to provide a 
permanent solution, and his tenacity to go above the call of customer service. If the 
problem is of a critical nature, the employer always sends Applicant to resolve it. He is a 
solid team member, who is loyal and understands the customer’s mission. He is the 
person the company relies on when there is difficulty in solving a problem, because he 
will work until a resolution is found. He is passionate about his job and is excited when 
he can solve a customer’s problem and make the customer happy. There is 
h
 
 Applicant explained that because of his obsessive compulsive disorder he follows 
certain patterns. If he has a computer problem he can understand it totally and 
completely. If he has to comprehend paperwork he has difficulties. He stated that if 
everything is laid out for him he will not have a problem. He explained that when given a 
task he can prioritize it, but when given something he is not familiar with, he needs time 
to organize it. He now has an appreciation for
im
Applicant admitted he made some bad choices in his past by using drugs. He 
believes his former girlfriend was a bad influence. He no longer associates with anyone 
who uses illegal drugs. He credibly testified that his failure to disclose information on his 
SCA was not intentional and he was not trying to hide information from the government. 
Applicant signed a statement agreein
 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
15 Tr. 41-66. 
 
16 AE A, B, C, J.  
 
17 Tr. 126-128. 
 
18 Tr. 128-130. 
 
7 
 
 
ch are used in evaluating an 
pplicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
wise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
sel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
n 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Anal sis 
 
uideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
G ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:  
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, whi
a
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Like
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Coun
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Sectio
 
y
G
A
 
8 
 
 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
edical direction. 
ditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 25 
and conclude the following have been raised: 
) any drug abuse; and 
cture, 
urchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 was some form of synthetic heroin. I find the 
above disqualifying conditions apply.  
ditions under drug involvement AG ¶ 
26. The following three are potentially applicable: 
st doubt on 
e individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;  
ment of intent with automatic revocation of 
learance for any violation; and 
uring which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since 
ended.  
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. Drugs are 
defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include: (1) 
Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances; Drug abuse is the illegal use of a 
drug or use of a 
m
 
I have considered the disqualifying con
 
(a
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufa
p
 
Applicant used marijuana in his past and ceased using it around 2003. He was 
arrested for possession of a controlled substance in July 2003 and attempted 
possession of marijuana in 1997. Applicant improperly used a substance that was 
prescribed to him, which he believed
 
I have considered all of the mitigating con
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent or happened 
under circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not ca
th
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs are used; (3) an appropriate period 
of abstinence; (4) a signed state
c
 
(c) abuse of the prescription drugs was after a severe and prolonged 
illness d
 
 Applicant credibly testified that he stopped using marijuana in 2003. He 
explained the marijuana that was seized in his car in 2003 belonged to his girlfriend. He 
 
9 
 
 
s passed, and future 
se is unlikely to recur. I find AG ¶¶ 26(a), 26(b), and 26(c) apply.  
uideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
G ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct: 
ess or any other 
o cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 
uld raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered:  
 clearance 
ibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 past drug offenses. I find none of the personal conduct 
disqualifying conditions apply.  
hole-Person Concept 
no longer sees this woman and he no longer associates with anyone who uses illegal 
drugs. Applicant told investigators that he used heroin. Regardless of what the actual 
substance was, he used it contrary to his physician’s direction. He has abstained from 
all illegal or inappropriate drug use since 2007. He is in a stable and productive 
environment and appears to be thriving. He signed a statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance if he uses illegal drugs in the future. I am convinced that illegal 
drug use is in Applicant’s past. I find a sufficient period of time ha
u
 
G
A
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance proc
failure t
 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that co
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security
elig
 
Applicant was arrested and charged in 2003 for possession of a controlled 
substance. He was also arrested in 1997 and charged with attempted possession of a 
controlled substance. He was told the charges would be expunged and would not be on 
his record. He believed he did not have to report them. Applicant was confused when 
completing the SCA. There was substantial evidence that Applicant has some learning 
disabilities and had difficulty understanding the questions. He sought help from his 
mother, but they both were confused. There was also evidence from those who know 
him that when he receives a task, he is compelled to finish it immediately. I have 
considered all of the facts and conclude that Applicant did not intentionally or 
deliberately omit or conceal his
 
W
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
10 
 
 
conduc nine 
adjudic
the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
er to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense onsideration 
of the 
 my comments 
under Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addres
 For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant 
successfully mitigated the security concer s arising under the guidelines for Drug 
Involvement and Personal Conduct
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
 Subparagraph 1.a-1.b:   For Applicant 
 
t and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
ative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of wheth
 judgment based upon careful c
guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated
sed under that guideline, but others warrant additional comment. 
 
Applicant has had many struggles during his life. It appears he has overcome 
many obstacles through perseverance and support from his family and others. He has 
found his niche. He receives high praise from his coworkers and excels in his 
performance at work. Applicant had some past transgressions when he used marijuana 
and a drug illegally. He has matured in his job and no longer has those negative 
influences in his life. I find Applicant has met his burden of persuasion. Overall, the 
record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance.
n
.  
Formal Findings 
 
 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
y the record in this case, it is 
learly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
ligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                   
______ _____ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented b
c
E
 
                  
__________________
