 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07060 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns arising under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on September 17, 2009. On October 2, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. Applicant answered the SOR on February 3, 2011, and requested a 
hearing. The case was assigned to me on May 18, 2011. DOHA issued the Notice of 
Hearing on June 2, 2011. The hearing was held as scheduled on June 21, 2011. 
Department Counsel offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5 that were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through D that were 
admitted without objection. The record was left open until July 22, 2011, for the 
Appellant to submit additional matters. He submitted no additional matters. The 
transcript (Tr.) of the hearing was received on July 6, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 34-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
that contractor since July 2007. He graduated from high school in 1996. He is married 
and has four children, ages 11, 12, 17, and 19. He served in the U.S. Marine Corps 
from September 1996 to July 2007, when he was placed on the Temporary Disability 
Retired List (TDRL). He held a security clearance while on active duty without any 
security violations. He has been awarded the Navy-Marine Corps Achievement Medal 
and Good Conduct Medals.1 
 
The SOR lists 19 delinquent debts totaling $105,566. In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted 11 of the delinquent debts totaling $71,334 and denied 8 delinquent 
debts totaling $34,232. Credit reports admitted into evidence provide substantial 
evidence of the denied debts. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he had 
been living beyond his means. He indicated that he started struggling with debts in the 
winter of 2004 and made the “bad decision” of ignoring his debts. At the hearing, he 
also testified that his financial problems were due to his irresponsibility. He stated that 
he has now cutback on his lifestyle so that he is able to meet his current financial 
obligations.2  
 
In January 2006, Applicant suffered a stroke while serving on active duty in the 
Marine Corps. At that time, he was serving in the grade of staff sergeant. He received 
military medical treatment while on active duty until being placed on the TDRL. Since 
being placed on the TDRL, he receives disability retirement pay and has had periodic 
medical evaluations. During an interview with an Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) investigator, he indicated that he had difficulty remembering things because of 
the stroke and participated in physical therapy to regain his mobility. At the hearing, he 
                                                          
1 Tr. 5, 38-39, 71-73; GE 1.  
2 Tr. 40-42, 81; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, GE 2-5. See also GE 2 at 248. In his Answer to 
the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.e, 1.h, 1.i, 1.j, 1.k, 1.m, 1.o, and 
1.q, and denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.f, 1.g, 1.l, 1.n, 1.p, 1.r, and 1.s. 
 
3 
 
 
testified that he has been medically cleared to return to active duty and is seeking to do 
so.3 
 
Soon after being placed on the TDRL, Applicant began working for his current 
employer. He deployed to Kuwait and Iraq from December 2007 to June 2008. In 
approximately November 2007, he provided his wife a general power of attorney that he 
revoked in July 2008. While deployed, he sent home most of his earnings so that his 
wife could pay the bills. However, he stated she was unable to pay all the bills because 
his children keep getting sick and money was going towards medical bills and other 
expenses. From July to November 2009, he was laid off and collected unemployment 
compensation.4 
 
In March 2007, he was charged with criminal domestic violence arising from an 
incident involving his wife, but that charge was later dismissed. Following that incident, 
they were required to stay away from each other for approximately three months. In 
early 2010, he separated from his wife. In April 2010, he began renting an apartment by 
himself and getting his finances in order. SOR ¶ 1.l is a delinquent mortgage on the 
home in which his wife and children reside. He testified that he had not made mortgage 
payments in the last 13 months, but he is working with the creditor to obtain a mortgage 
modification. He is paying child support.5 
 
Applicant provided a photocopy of a cancelled check showing he made a $109 
payment to the collection agency servicing the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k. Besides that 
payment, Applicant did not offer any documents showing that he made any other 
payments on the alleged debts, that he made any arrangements for repayment plans, or 
that he contacted any creditors in an effort to resolve the debts. In responding to 
interrogatories, he stated, “I did not make payment arrangements with any of the 
financial agencies because I did not want to make promises I couldn’t keep at the time.” 
He denied certain debts because he has no knowledge of them. He did not, however, 
provide any documentation establishing that he has a reasonable basis to dispute their 
legitimacy. He has not disputed the denied debts with the credit reporting agencies.6 
 
Applicant attended general military training on financial matters and indicated he 
is learning about bankruptcy. On June 14, 2011, he contacted an attorney about filing 
bankruptcy. The attorney submitted a letter indicating that they anticipate Applicant will 
                                                          
3 Tr. 38-39, 70-71, 74; GE 2 at 248. 
4 Tr. 33-37, 76-78; GE 1 at 37-38, GE 2 at 246, 249. 
5 Tr. 33-37, 40-41, 52-55; GE 1 at 39, GE 2 at 246-247; AE A, C. 
6 Tr. 43-62; GE 2 at 244; AE D. Applicant indicated he made another payment of $219 on the 
debt in SOR ¶ 1.k, but provided no proof of that payment. See Tr. 52. He also indicated the debt in SOR ¶ 
1.n was being paid through the garnishment of his disability retirement pay, but provided no proof of that 
garnishment. See Tr. 55-57. 
 
4 
 
 
file Chapter 7 bankruptcy within the next month or two and that the debts should be 
discharged by the fall of this year.7 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavourable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
                                                          
7 Tr. 36, 65, 68-70; AE D. 
 
5 
 
 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to satisfy his financial obligations for a number of years. This evidence is sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
6 
 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant has 19 delinquent debts totaling over $100,000 that remain unresolved. 
His financial problems are significant and cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
In 2006, Applicant suffered a stroke. He was treated for that condition in the 
military and eventually placed on the TDRL in July 2007. Soon after being placed on the 
TDRL, he was hired by his current employer, but was laid off from July to November 
2009. In early 2010, he separated from his wife. These three events – his stroke, period 
of unemployment, and marital difficulties – were conditions beyond his control. 
Nevertheless, some of his financial problems predate those conditions. He admitted he 
was living beyond his means and was financially irresponsible. Moreover, despite 
having steady employment since November 2009, he has done little to resolve his 
financial problems. While AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies here, it does not mitigate the 
security concerns arising from his financial problems.  
 
 Applicant provided a receipt showing a payment of $109 on one alleged debt. In 
June 2011, he consulted with an attorney about filing Chapter 7 bankruptcy. The 
attorney anticipates that Applicant will file bankruptcy in the next month or two. While in 
the military, Applicant received training on financial matters. As a precursor to filing 
bankruptcy, he will also receive financial counseling. Based on the evidence presented, 
he failed to establish that he initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
that his debts are being resolved or are under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not 
applicable.  
 
 
7 
 
 
 Applicant denied eight delinquent debts because he had no knowledge of them. 
He has not disputed them on his credit reports. He presented no documentation to show 
he had a legitimate basis for disputing them. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
whole-person concept analysis. I have considered Applicant’s service in the Marine 
Corps and his subsequent employment that included deployments to Kuwait and Iraq. 
Nevertheless, his financial problems are ongoing and significant. He is contemplating, 
but has not filed for, Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. At this juncture, it would be mere 
speculation to conclude his delinquent debts will be resolved in the bankruptcy 
proceeding. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts 
and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person concept, I conclude he has not 
mitigated security concerns pertaining to financial considerations.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 
8 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.s:  Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
