1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-05531
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen A, Administrative Judge:
On February 9, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns arising under Guideline
F (Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992),
as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), implemented in
September 2006. 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. DOHA assigned
the case to me on April 19, 2011. A notice of hearing was issued on April 20, 2011, and
the case was heard on May 20, 2011. Department Counsel offered seven exhibits (GE)
1-7, which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted seven
exhibits (AE) A-G at the hearing, which were admitted without objection. DOHA
received the hearing transcript on May 27, 2011. Based on a review of the pleadings,
submissions, and exhibits, I find Applicant failed to meet his burden regarding the
security concerns raised. Security clearance is denied.
Applicant’s employment offer is contingent on a security clearance. His new position will pay approximately      1
$99,000 per annum.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted some debts and denied others with
explanation under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). He admitted the three
allegations under Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Applicant is 27 years old. He is sponsored for a security clearance by a defense
contractor who recently offered him a position.  He graduated from high school in May1
2001, and attended college from 2001 until 2002. He did not obtain a degree. Applicant
is single with no children. (GE 1)
Applicant worked as a system analyst for a defense contractor from August 2004
until March 2010. Prior to that, he held various full-time positions. In March 2010,
Applicant became unemployed due to lack of a security clearance. (Tr. 30) He receives
monthly unemployment benefits of approximately $1,500 a month. (AE F) At the time of
the hearing, he was still unemployed. He has no credit cards. Applicant has no savings
account. (Tr. 43).
Prior to his unemployment in March 2010, Applicant’s net monthly income was
approximately $3,400. After monthly expenses and a student loan payment of $145, he
had a net remainder of $1,320. At that time, he also had some accounts in collection.
(GE 5) His student loans are now in deferment due to unemployment. (Tr. 35)
The SOR lists seven delinquent accounts, including a 2007 judgment, totaling in
excess of $12,000. Applicant admitted the debts after learning that the credit reports
confirm them. (GE 3-6) He noted that he originally denied some of the debts because
he did not know they were on his credit report. 
Applicant disputes the accounts listed in SOR ¶ 1a. ($1,533) and ¶ 1.b. ($1,152)
Although, he did not contest the accounts when he answered DOHA interrogatories, he
now disputes them. He has not presented any documentation that indicated he formally
disputed these debts. (Tr. 46) 
Applicant has a settlement arrangement for the debt of $723 in SOR ¶ 1.c. He
claims he made the first payment of $145 in January 2011. (AE A) However, he made a
partial payment in February due to his continued unemployment. (Tr. 38) Applicant also
has a settlement agreement for the debt in SOR ¶ 1.d. He claims he made an initial
payment of $358. (AE B) Applicant did not provide documentation to show the
payments were made. 
Applicant presented a letter concerning the judgment of $7,545, claiming identity
theft. (AE C) He later stated that he believes he paid the judgment in SOR 1.e, but did
not provide proof. Finally, he disputed the 2007 judgment (SOR 1.e) in the amount of
3
$7,545. He provided documentation of the dispute, but after an investigation, the debt
remains on his credit report. (Tr. 47)
The debt of $185 for a collection account listed in SOR ¶ 1.f is not paid.
Applicant does not believe the account is his, or in the alternative, that it has been paid
because it is not listed on his latest credit report. He also denies the account for $266
listed in SOR ¶ 1.g. for the same reasons. (Tr. 50) 
Applicant has not obtained financial counseling or obtained a debt consolidation
plan. He is consulting with his sister, who is a realtor. She is helping him understand his
credit reports. (Tr. 61) Applicant now relies on the fact that some of the accounts are
not listed on his credit report as a basis for not owing the debt.
At the hearing, Applicant noted that he has other accounts in collection. He
noted them on his latest security clearance application. He also acknowledged that he
has not filed his taxes for 2009 and 2010. (Tr. 53) He offered no explanation for his
delinquent debts.
When Applicant completed his security clearance application in March 2009, he
did not disclose his July 2007 Driving While Impaired/ Driving While under the Influence
arrest and charge in response to section 22:Police Record. (GE 7) He also omitted his
use of marijuana from 2002 until 2004 in response to section 23. Applicant answered
“No” to section 26(e): Financial Record concerning any judgments entered against him.
He admitted that he deliberately falsified his application. (Answer to SOR)
At the hearing, Applicant acknowledged his July 2007 DWI. (AE G) He stated
that the reason he did not list the charge was due to advice from his Security Officer.
Applicant claimed that his security officer told him to put down the same information
that Applicant had from his 2005 security clearance application.(Tr. 63) Applicant also
stated that he was told his “fingerprints were lost” and that he had to fill out his 2009
SF86 the exact same way as his 2005 SF86. (Tr. 64). In response to the OPM
interviewer, Applicant stated that he did not list the July 2007 DWI because his lawyer
said it would be expunged. (Tr. 65; GE 2)
Applicant did not disclose his marijuana use on his March 2009 SF86, but during
an April interview with OPM, he noted that he had used marijuana from 2002 until 2004.
(GE 2) At the hearing, Applicant stated that he knew he did not list the marijuana use
and also did not disclose it in the 2005 application. His reasoning was that he was not
clear on the actual dates. When he completed his August 2010 SF86, he again omitted
any information about illegal use of drugs (marijuana) in response to section 23. (AE E)
Applicant answered “No” to section 26 concerning judgments on his March 2009
security clearance application. At the hearing, when questioned about this response, he
explained that he did not list it because he did not know about it. (Tr. 73) This is not
credible in light of his answer to the SOR that he had an account with the creditor which
obtained an eventual judgment.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      2
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      3
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      4
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      5
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The United States Government must present evidence to establish controverted
facts alleged in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and
other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or
proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a2
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  3 4
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance5
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      6
 Id.      7
5
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt6
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a7
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:
Failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to
protect classified information.” It also states that “an individual who is
financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to
generate funds.
Applicant has delinquent debts, including a 2007 judgment, that are unresolved
in an amount of approximately $12,000. Consequently, Financial Considerations
Disqualifying Condition (FC DC) AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts),
and FC DC AG ¶ 19(c) (a history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such
conditions raised, it is left to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate
security concerns.  
Applicant’s debts are recent and ongoing. He has a 2007 judgment that has not
been resolved. Consequently, Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FCMC)
AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment) does not apply.
Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition (FC MC) AG ¶ 20(b) (the
conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g.,
loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death,
divorce or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances)
does not apply. As noted, Applicant has been unemployed since March 2010. His only
income is unemployment benefits of $1,500 a month. The unemployment may have
exacerbated Applicant’s ability to meet his obligations during this period. However, he
had some collection accounts prior to his unemployment. There is no evidence that he
acted reasonably under the circumstances. He allowed the delinquent debts to remain
6
unpaid. There is no record of any attempts to resolve his debt until after he received the
SOR.  He receives partial credit under this mitigating condition.
FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts) does not apply. Applicant has not provided
evidence of any consistent payment plans. He asserts that he has a settlement
arrangement for two accounts. He has not submitted proof that he has made any
payments. He claims he does not owe several accounts, but he did not present any
documentation to confirm this assertion. His failure to provide information about
financial counseling obviates the applicability of FC MC AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has
received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that
the problem is being resolved or is under control).
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. Under AG ¶ 16(a), a disqualifying conditions exists when there is
“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel
questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct
investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or status,
determine security eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.”
Under AG ¶ 16(b) a disqualifying condition exists when “deliberately providing false or
misleading information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security
official, competent medical authority, or other official government representative.”
Applicant’s admissions are sufficient to raise the disqualifying conditions. He
deliberately misled the government by not including any information about his July 2007
arrest and charge for DUI on his March 2009 security clearance application. He also did
not disclose his marijuana use from 2002 until 2004 on that application or on the 2005
security clearance application. However, he discussed the marijuana use in his
interview with OPM in 2009. He also did not list his 2007 judgment. His behavior and
personal conduct are disqualifying as they raise questions about his judgment,
reliability, truthfulness, and willingness to comply with the law.
After considering the mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17, I conclude that
none of them apply. Applicant did not make prompt or good-faith efforts to correct his
falsification or concealment. The intentional omissions occurred in 2009, and are too
recent and serious to be mitigated by the passage of time. I have serious doubts about
his good judgment and reliability. He has not provided information in this record to show
that he has met his burden of proof to mitigate the personal conduct concern.
7
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is 27 years old. He was employed with a defense contractor for many years.
He is now unemployed and unable to pay his debts. However, he had prior delinquent
debts and sufficient income to pay his debts, but he did not. 
Applicant has been on notice since the SOR, yet he is just starting to address his
delinquent debts. He has a history of behavior that involves dishonesty. Applicant
shows a lack of candor and questionable judgment. I have doubts about his reliability. 
Applicant failed to submit sufficient information or evidence to mitigate the
security concerns raised in his case. He failed to offer evidence of financial counseling.
He failed to provide documentation regarding a consistent payment plan for all his
debts. He admitted that he intentionally falsified his March 2009 security clearance
application. I have doubts given the record. Accordingly, Applicant has not mitigated the
security concerns.  Clearance is denied. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a- 1g: Against Applicant
8
Paragraph 2., Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.c: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied.
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
