Consisting of the FORM, Items 1-14.1
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February2
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)
effective within the DoD on 1 September 2006.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
   )       ISCR Case No. 09-06782
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is denied.1
On 15 June 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) listing security concerns under Guidelines F,
Financial Considerations, and E, Personal Conduct.  Applicant timely answered the2
SOR, and requested a decision without hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me 14
June 2011. The record in this case closed 21 April 2011, the day Applicant’s response
to the government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) was due. Applicant submitted no
response to the FORM.
W hich Applicant incorrectly estimated as July 2004 on his application.3
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the SOR financial allegations, except for SOR 1.c (a $2,100
judgment), SOR 1.g (a $372 collection account he claimed he paid), SOR 1.k (a
$14,000 automobile repossession), and SOR 1.q (a $919 collection account). He denies
the falsification allegations of SOR 2.a, claiming that omission of his adverse financial
information was an oversight. He is a 44-year-old system administrator employed by a
U.S. defense contractor since February 2009. He had a clearance in 1985, but has not
previously held an industrial clearance.
Applicant has an extensive history of financial problems dating back to October
1989, when he first filed for chapter 13 bankruptcy protection. The petition was later
converted to a chapter 7 bankruptcy petition and he was discharged of his
dischargeable debt in May 1991 (Item 11, 12). In October 2004, he again filed for
chapter 13 bankruptcy protection, but his petition was dismissed without confirmation of
a payment plan in May 2005 (Item 11, 13). He refiled his chapter 13 bankruptcy petition
in July 2005, but it was again dismissed without confirmation of a payment plan in
October 2005 (Item 11, 14).
 
In addition to the latter two bankruptcy filings, the SOR alleges, and Government
exhibits (Item 7, 8, 9) substantiate, 17 delinquent accounts totaling over $28,000.
Applicant admits 14 debts totaling nearly $12,000. The debts consist of 13 collection
accounts, an automobile repossession, one judgment, charged-off education loans, and
past-due education loans. Applicant claims, without corroboration, to have paid six small
debts totaling $460. However, only one of these (SOR 1.g) is among the debts he
denied owing.
Applicant acknowledges the majority of his delinquent accounts, but during an
August 2009 interview with a Government investigator, either disputed the debts or
otherwise claimed to not recognize them. He also failed to corroborate the basis of any
of his claimed disputes or any efforts he had made to resolve the debts with the
creditors. Applicant has not stated any clear reasons for his financial problems. His
November 2009 personal financial statement (Item 6) showed positive monthly cash
flow of $1,400. However, he was making no payments on the debts alleged in the SOR.
On Applicant’s March 2009 clearance application (Item 5), Applicant answered
“no” to 15 questions (§26 b.-p) asking him to report any history of financial problems. In
fact, Applicant had an automobile repossession (§26 b.), one unpaid judgment against
him (§26e), 13 collection accounts (§26g), one charged-off account (§26h), and many
accounts that had been 180-days past due or were currently 90-days past due (§26m
and n). Applicant truthfully disclosed a chapter 13 bankruptcy filing (§26 a.) in July 2005
(SOR 1.b),  but falsely stated that “[a]ll debts were satisfied under bankruptcy and all3
has been paid off.” In fact, the petition was dismissed in October 2005 (Item 14) without
confirmation of a payment plan. In addition, during an interview with a Government
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
¶19 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations;5
3
investigator in August 2009 (Item 6), he falsely claimed to have made payments from
October 2004 to February 2005 and received a discharge of his debts, and to have
made payments on a second chapter 13 petition (which he placed in 2007) until April
2009 and received a discharge on those debts.
Policies
The adjudicative guidelines (AG) list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability
for access to classified information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented.
Each decision must also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the
factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself,
conclusive. However, specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed where a case
can be measured against them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to
classified information. Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole,
the relevant adjudicative guidelines are Guideline F (Financial Considerations) and
Guideline E (Personal Conduct).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the Government.4
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline F, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicant has an extensive history of
financial difficulties, which are ongoing.  Further, he has taken no documented action to5
address his debts.
¶20 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that6
it is  unlikely to recur . . . ;
¶20 (b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control . . . and7
the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶20 (c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and there are clear indications that8
the problem is being resolved or is under control;
¶20 (d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts.9
¶16 (a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant and material facts from any personnel10
security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, . . . [or]
determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness. . .;
¶17(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification11
before being confronted with the facts;
4
Applicant meets none of the mitigating factors for financial considerations. His
financial difficulties are both recent and multiple.  He has not established that his6
financial problems were due to circumstance beyond his control, nor he has he
demonstrated that he acted responsibly in addressing his debts.  He has undertaken no7
financial counseling.  None of the debts have been paid, much less in a timely, good-8
faith effort.  I conclude Guideline F against Applicant.9
The Government established a case for disqualification under Guideline E, and
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns. Applicants are expected to give full and
frank answers during the clearance process. Applicant’s failure to disclose any
information about his financial problems constitutes a deliberate omission or
evasiveness inconsistent with the candor required of applicants.  10
None of the Guideline E mitigating conditions apply. The concealed information
was relevant to a clearance decision. Applicant did not disclose this adverse information
until his subject interview.  Applicant’s failure to disclose this information demonstrates11
a lack of candor required of cleared personnel. The Government has an interest in
examining all relevant and material adverse information about an applicant before
making a clearance decision. The Government relies on applicants to truthfully disclose
that adverse information in a timely fashion, not when they perceive disclosure to be
prudent or convenient. Further, an applicant’s willingness to report adverse information
about himself provides some indication of his willingness to report inadvertent security
violations or other security concerns in the future, something the Government relies on
to perform damage assessments and limit the compromise of classified information.
Applicant’s conduct suggests he is willing to put his personal needs ahead of legitimate
Government interests. I resolve Guideline E against Applicant.
5
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-s: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2. Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance denied.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
