KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: The Adjudicative Desk Reference by its own terms cannot serve as the basis for a
denial of access to classified information.  The Judge is required to rely implement the
Adjudicative Guidelines from the Directive, not the Adjudicative Desk Reference.  Adverse
decision affirmed.
CASENO: 09-07066.a1
DATE: 07/26/2011
DATE: July 26, 2011
In Re:
-----
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-07066
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Christopher Graham, Esq.
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 16, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On November 30, 2010, Department Counsel moved to amend the SOR.  This
motion was granted, and Applicant was afforded an opportunity to respond to the amended SOR.
On April 29, 2011, Administrative Judge Juan J. Rivera denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the Board
affirms the Judge’s unfavorable decision. 
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is 31 years old and has
been married since 2006.  Applicant and his sister were born, raised and educated in the United
States.  Applicant’s father was born in Pakistan, and he is a Pakistani citizen with permanent
residency status in the United States.  His mother was born in India, and she is now a naturalized
U.S. citizen.  Both parents live with Applicant in his home.  Applicant’s father has worked at the
embassy of a Middle Eastern country (Country X) since he entered the U.S. in 1978.  His father has
an important position at the embassy.  He has no diplomatic or government-related duties.
Applicant’s father and the family have visited the embassy for festivals and special occasions.
Applicant’s maternal grandfather worked for the Pakistani Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
performed duties in a high level position.  Applicant’s mother has a sister and a stepsister who are
residents and citizens of Pakistan.  She has contact with them approximately six times a year, usually
during religious holidays or special occasions.  Applicant has a paternal aunt living in Pakistan, and
he maintains contact with her only through his father.  
Applicant’s wife was born in Pakistan, but she is now a naturalized U.S. citizen.  Her parents
were both born in Pakistan, but they are now naturalized U.S. citizens living in the U.S.  They travel
to Pakistan every two years. Applicant’s wife’s aunt works in Pakistan as a teacher.  She traveled
to the United States to attend Applicant’s wedding.  Applicant’s wife has not traveled to Pakistan
since around 2000-2001.  Most of the contacts with family members living in Pakistan are
maintained by Applicant’s father and Applicant’s wife’s relatives, and Applicant has limited contact
with them.  Applicant last visited Pakistan in 1995-1996.  He loves the United States and considers
himself to be a loyal, hardworking American.  Applicant noted that he has numerous family
members living in the United States who have been granted access to classified information.  
Pakistan is a parliamentary federal republic which, nonetheless, has a poor human rights
record.  Arbitrary arrests, governmental and police corruption is widespread, and the Pakistani
government maintains several domestic intelligence agencies to monitor politicians, suspected
terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign intelligence agents.  The leader of the Taliban operates
openly in Pakistan, as do extremists from the Pakistani Taliban and Al Qaida.  In early 2009, the
FATA in Pakistan continued to provide vital sanctuary to Al Qaida and a number of foreign and
Pakistani-based extremist groups.  Al Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to
3
support the Afghan insurgency, while also planning attacks against the United States and Western
interests in Pakistan and worldwide.  The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of
traveling to Pakistan in light of terrorist activity.  Country X is an important partner in the ongoing
U.S.-led campaign against international terrorism.  Country X engages in human rights abuses which
include limits on freedoms of speech, press, religion, and movement for certain groups.  There is
also government corruption, trafficking in persons, and violence against women.
The Judge reached the following conclusions: Applicant, by himself or through his wife and
his parents, has frequent contacts (at least twice a month) and a close relationship of affection and/or
obligation with his aunt, his wife’s aunt, and other extended family members who are residents and
citizens of Pakistan.  These contacts create a risk of foreign pressure or attempted exploitation
because there is always the possibility that Pakistani agents, criminals, or terrorists operating in
Pakistan may exploit the opportunity to obtain information about the United States. Moreover,
Applicant’s parents live with him in his house, and his father is a citizen of Pakistan.  For the past
33 years Applicant’s father has been employed by another Middle Eastern country in an important
trust position.  Applicant’s connection to his father in the United States and other family members
in Pakistan creates a potential conflict of interest because his relationships are sufficiently close to
raise a security concern about his desire to help them by providing sensitive or classified
information.  Considering the totality of the facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case, none of the
mitigating conditions apply.  Applicant’s relationship with the United States and his status as a loyal
and productive member of American society must be weighed against the potential conflict of
interest created by his relationship with his father and other family members living in Pakistan.  Of
note is the United States’ recent relationship with Pakistan, especially Pakistan’s systematic human
rights violations, and the ever present danger from terrorists and those who seek to damage U.S.
interests.  Applicant’s father’s long-term working relationship with another foreign country is a
security concern.  
Applicant asserts that his contacts with his extended family in Pakistan are attenuated and
the record does not support a conclusion that these relationships pose a security concern.  He argues
that the facts of the case support mitigation of the Government’s concerns.  Applicant points out that
he has held a security clearance since 2007 and, since neither his circumstances nor the Adjudicative
Guidelines have changed since then, the unfavorable resolution of his case must be the product of
a policy change by adjudicators.  Applicant’s assertions do not establish error on the part of the
Judge.  
Applicant’s arguments rely heavily on references to the Adjudicative Desk Reference
(ADR).  The Judge was required to decide the case by using the Adjudicative Guidelines, not the
ADR.  The ADR itself states that it cannot serve as the basis for denial or suspension of access.  See,
e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-02253 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 28, 2008).  Thus, the Judge’s failure to consider
the individual indicators listed therein does not establish error on the part of the Judge. 
Applicant argues that he has held a security clearance since 2007 and nothing of security
significance has taken place since then.  The Government is not estopped from protecting classified
information because of earlier, favorable adjudications..  See ISCR Case No. 08-05344 at 2-3 (App.
4
Bd. Feb. 3, 2010).  Moreover, the Board is in the position of reviewing only the instant case, not any
prior adjudication of Applicant’s security clearance eligibility.  The Board notes that federal
agencies are entitled to a presumption of good faith and regularity in the performance of their
responsibilities.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-06496 at 3 (App. Bd. Jun. 25, 2009).  Applicant has
not established error or irregularity on this point.     
As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the
favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-
10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the
evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).
Applicant’s arguments are essentially nothing more than an alternate view of the record evidence.
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant
conditions and factors.  He discussed the applicability of the mitigating factors listed under
Guideline B and indicated in some detail why the mitigating conditions did not apply.  This
conclusion was reasonable given the Judge’s findings about the nature of the governments and the
recent histories  of Pakistan and Country X, and the nature of Applicant’s contacts with his foreign
relatives, including a father who has held a trusted position with a foreign government for many
years.   
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
his decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
   Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
5
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                  
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
