 
 
1
                                                
              DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE  
                  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
 
 
In the matter of:                                              ) 
        ) 
         )  ISCR Case No. 10-02336  
        ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance                    ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: J. Theodore Hammer, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esquire 
 
 
________________ 
 
Decision  
________________ 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns raised under the guidelines for foreign 
influence and financial considerations. Accordingly, Applicant's request for a security 
clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP), signed on April 15, 2008. After reviewing the results of the ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security clearance. 
 
 On February 4, 2011, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the Directive 
under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended. 
 
 
2
                                                
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG).2 Applicant signed his notarized Answer to the SOR on 
February 23, 2011. He also requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 10, 2011, and the case 
was assigned to me on May 20, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on June 1, 
2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on June 17, 2011. During the hearing, 
Department Counsel offered five exhibits, which I admitted as Government Exhibits 
(GE) 1 through 5. Applicant testified and offered six exhibits, which I admitted as 
Applicant Exhibit (AE) A through F. I granted Applicant's request to hold the record open 
to submit additional documentation. He did not submit documents. DOHA received the 
transcript (Tr.) on June 27, 2011, and the record closed on July 7, 2011. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 I take administrative notice of facts relating to Colombia, as requested by 
Department Counsel. The facts are set forth in a summary with six attached 
documents, marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. I also take administrative notice of facts 
related to Chile, as requested by Applicant. The facts are contained in two documents, 
which are marked collectively as HE II. The facts administratively noticed are limited to 
matters of general knowledge and not subject to reasonable dispute. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR are incorporated as findings of fact. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings, Applicant’s response to the SOR, and the record 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant seeks a security clearance, required for his employment by a defense 
contractor as a systems engineer. He is 49 years old, and was born in Chile. He came 
to the United States in 1986, when he was 24 years old. He worked at odd jobs, 
including dishwashing, to support himself. From 1989 to 1990, he attended community 
college. At times, he attended school and worked two jobs to pay his bills. He then 
transferred to a university and earned a bachelor’s degree in computer engineering in 
1993. He met his wife, a Colombian citizen, in 1999. They married in Colombia in 2001, 
and returned to the United States. She worked as an attorney in Colombia, but is not 
currently employed outside the home. Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2000, and his 
wife was scheduled to take her naturalization oath on June 27, 2011, ten days after the 
hearing. Their son, who is 8 years old, was born in the United States and attends a U.S. 
elementary school. (GE 1, 5; AE E; Tr. 36-42, 86-88, 90-91) 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Adjudicative Guidelines that were implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. The Adjudicative Guidelines supersede the guidelines 
listed in Enclosure 2 to the Directive, and they apply to all adjudications or trustworthiness 
determinations in which an SOR was issued on or after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
3
 The SOR alleges one debt of $25,554, related to a foreclosed mortgage. In 
2000, Applicant bought a house, and made timely mortgage payments for eight years. 
He was working as a contractor for a financial services company. The market became 
unstable, and in 2007, he lost his job. Applicant contacted his mortgage lender to 
inform it that he had lost his job and the lender suggested putting the house up for sale. 
Applicant had savings, and he was able to continue paying his mortgage while he was 
unemployed in state A. He eventually accepted employment in state B. He and his 
family moved in 2008 to state B, and he rented an apartment there. (Tr. 43-51) 
 
 At that point, Applicant was paying his mortgage in state A, the condominium 
fee on that home, and rental payments in state B. He contacted the mortgage lender 
approximately monthly, to inform the company that although he was paying, he would 
eventually be unable to make the payments. Applicant provided documents from the 
lender showing that he maintained his payments up to May 2008. He took numerous 
steps to try to sell the property including offering it for rent, reducing the price several 
times, and attempting a “short sale.” However, the real estate market had crashed, and 
he was unable to sell the house. In 2008, he notified the lender he was unable to 
maintain the payments. In August 2009, the lender foreclosed. (AE A, F; Tr. 43-52) 
 
 When he called the law firm handling the foreclosure, Applicant was informed 
that the bank purchased the house at auction. The firm forwarded a letter to the same 
effect, dated April 2011. Approximately $25,500 remained on the loan after it sold. The 
bank did not contact Applicant for payment. He contacted the law firm and offered to 
pay the deficiency, but was told the law firm could not accept such payments. He was 
instructed to contact the bank. He contacted the bank several times by letter. He was 
willing to pay any remaining debt, but the bank informed him that it could not accept 
payments. The bank forwarded a payment history dated August 19, 2010, showing no 
balance owed. When he contacted the bank about whether he had any further 
obligation on the loan, he was informed that he did not, because it was covered by 
private mortgage insurance (PMI). (GE 2, 5; AE A, D; Tr. 51-55) 
 
 Applicant submitted a credit summary from a credit reporting agency showing 
that his current credit score is 680, up from 605 one year ago. In the category for “Real 
Estate Debt,” it shows no real estate debt owed. He has $10 in credit card debt. He has 
two open accounts, which are related to a car loan and a student loan, totaling 
$13,331. He testified that both have been paid timely and are in good standing. The 
credit summary noted, “Debt: 0% ($10).” (GE 3; AE C; Tr. 55-58) 
 
 Applicant’s 81-year-old parents and his four sisters are citizens and residents of 
Chile. His father was a civil engineer for a private company, and then taught 
engineering at a public university for 20 years before retiring. He receives a pension 
from the university position, but the children have no inheritance rights to the pension. 
Applicant's mother, also a civil engineer, worked for the Ministry of Public Works before 
she retired 15 years ago. She receives a government pension. Applicant talks with his 
 
 
4
parents by phone weekly. They own two houses in Chile, and Applicant expects the 
properties will be divided equally among the five siblings. (GE 5; Tr. 62-65, 95-97) 
 
Applicant's oldest sister is a humanities professor at a private school. Her 
husband works for a private company. Applicant's second sister is 52 years old and 
divorced. She has a degree in engineering and works in the food industry. Her ex-
husband is a civil engineer at a private company. Applicant's third sister, 51 years old, 
attended nursing school and married a doctor. She has five children and is not 
employed outside the home. Applicant's youngest sister is 42. She also has five children 
and is not employed outside the home. Her husband is a civil engineer for a private 
company. Applicant speaks with his siblings about once per month. (GE 5; Tr. 58-62) 
 
Applicant has savings in the United States, as well as investments in stocks 
through 401(k) plans with his former and current U.S. employers. Neither Applicant nor 
his wife own property or have financial interests in Chile or Colombia. Between 2002 
and 2009, Applicant visited Chile five times to see his family. He informed his security 
officer of his travel plans. He tries to go every year or two because both parents have 
serious medical problems. He does not provide financial support to them, as they are 
financially comfortable. None of them are involved in political organizations or have had 
contacts with government officials. Applicant's wife and parents are aware of his 
security investigation. No other family members in Chile or Colombia know that he is 
seeking a security clearance. (GE 5; Tr. 65-67, 80-82, 84-85) 
 
Applicant's parents-in-law are citizen-residents of Colombia. His mother-in-law is 
68. His 73-year-old father-in-law is a retired family law attorney who had his own 
practice from the 1960s to the 1990s. His father-in-law handled a few cases for the 
local government of the town where he lived. (GE 5; Tr.67-72, 76-77, 103-105)  
 
Two of Applicant's wife’s siblings live in Colombia. His 42-year-old sister-in-law 
lives in a large city. She works for a medical company, and her husband owns a small 
construction company. Applicant's 33-year-old sister-in-law is single and works in 
television production in a different large city. None of Applicant's in-laws are politically 
active and none have had contacts with police or government officials. Applicant's wife 
calls her family on holidays and Applicant may talk with them briefly. He does not 
provide financial support to any of his in-laws. (Tr. 72-75, 77, 102) 
 
Applicant’s brother-in-law was a citizen and resident of Colombia. He now lives 
in Canada. He is a civil engineer, and his wife is an architect. In the past, he lived with 
his family in a large Colombian city. Applicant testified that the large cities are generally 
safe. However, Applicant's brother-in-law could not find sufficient work in the city, so he 
accepted a well-paying job in a rural area. Although he was not personally threatened, 
he felt unsafe because of illegal drug activity in the area. His wife has family in Canada, 
and in 2008, he, his wife, and their two children moved to Canada. Applicant’s 
understanding is that his brother-in-law received a special visa offered to those who, 
inter alia, lived in a country where they felt threatened. His brother-in-law became a 
 
 
5
                                                
legal permanent resident of Canada in September 2009. (GE 5; Tr. 67-77, 97-102, 
160-164)  
 
When Applicant and his wife traveled to Colombia annually from 2000 to 2003, 
they visited his parents-in-law and stayed in their apartment. Applicant and his wife 
were not contacted by authorities or police during their stay. His in-laws are unaware of 
his job or that he is applying for a security clearance. Although his wife goes to 
Colombia every year or two, Applicant has not been there since 2003, and does not 
plan to travel with her to Colombia in the future. (GE 4; Tr. 77-79, 106-107)  
 
Applicant completed all required security paperwork to inform his security 
manager before and after his trips. His facility security officer testified that Applicant 
has attended the necessary security briefings and complies with all security 
requirements. She characterized him as “a model employee, as far as security is 
concerned.” (Tr. 20-34, 81-82) 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts.3 Colombia is a constitutional, 
multiparty democracy with a population of approximately 44.8 million. Dual U.S. – 
Colombian citizens must present a Colombian passport to enter and exit Colombia. 
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the dangers of travel to 
Colombia because violence by narco-terrorist groups continues to affect some rural 
areas and cities. While security in Colombia has improved significantly in recent years, 
terrorists and other criminal organizations kidnapped and held persons of all 
nationalities and occupations. The incidences of kidnapping in Colombia have 
diminished significantly from the peak at the beginning of this decade.  
 
The Colombian government’s respect for human rights continued to improve. 
However, human rights violations continued, committed primarily by illegal armed 
groups and terrorist groups. These violations include political killings and kidnappings, 
forced disappearances, torture, and other serious human rights abuses.  
 
The U.S. Secretary of State has designated three Colombian groups – the 
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the National Liberation Army (ELN), 
and the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) – as foreign terrorist 
organizations. In 2009, these groups carried out bombings and other attacks in and 
around major urban areas, including against civilian targets.  
 
The United States remained fully committed to supporting the Colombian 
government in its efforts to defeat Colombian-based foreign terrorist organizations. The 
Colombian government continues vigorous law enforcement, intelligence, military and 
economic measures against the FARC, ELN, and AUC. The Colombian government 
 
3 The facts cited concerning Colombia derive from Hearing Exhibit 1. 
 
 
6
                                                
has also increased its efforts with neighboring countries to thwart terrorist expansion, 
investigate terrorist activities inside and outside Colombia, seize assets, secure 
hostage release, and bring terrorists to justice. Colombia provided anti-terrorism 
training to nations in the region. The government continues to seek enhanced regional 
counterterrorism cooperation to target terrorist safe havens in vulnerable border areas. 
The United States – Colombia extradition relationship remains the most successful and 
comprehensive effort in the world.  
 
I also take administrative notice of facts related to Chile. According to 
information from the White House Press Secretary, the United States and Chile are 
strong partners in trade, investment, energy and climate change, and environmental 
cooperation. They work together to reduce poverty and bolster institutions critical to 
increasing stability and prosperity in the hemisphere. They cooperate in multilateral 
forums concerning the rule of law, democracy, and full respect for human rights and 
fundamental liberties. The two countries also share a strong defense cooperation 
relationship. (HE II). 
 
Policies 
 
 Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the (AG).4 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the “whole person” factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the 
Guidelines. 
 
 The presence or absence of disqualifying or mitigating conditions does not 
determine a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable 
guidelines are followed when a case can be so measured, as they represent policy 
guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified information.  
 
 A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve the question of whether 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to receive or continue 
to have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance. Additionally, the government must be able to prove 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it falls to 
applicants to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case. Because no one has 
a “right” to a security clearance, applicants bear a heavy burden of persuasion.6 A 
person who has access to classified information enters a fiduciary relationship based on 
 
4 Directive. 6.3. 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
 
7
                                                
trust and confidence. The government has a compelling interest in ensuring that 
applicants possess the requisite judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness to protect the 
national interest as her or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” 
standard compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for 
access to classified information in favor of the government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 AG ¶ 18 expresses the security concern regarding financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially over-
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.  
 
 The evidence requires consideration of AG ¶19(a) (inability or unwillingness to 
satisfy debts). The mortgage loan deficiency of $25,554 on Applicant's foreclosed 
house supports application of this disqualifying condition. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 20, the following potentially mitigating factors are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 When Applicant purchased his home, he was unable to predict that he would 
lose his job, or that the real estate market would crash. These two events, which were 
beyond Applicant's control, caused him to be unable to meet his mortgage payments. 
 
7 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
8
Such a combination of events is unlikely to occur in the future. Applicant acted 
reasonably. He saved money while he was generating income from employment. He 
used these funds to continue paying his mortgage loan even after he lost his job. He 
kept the lender apprised of his financial situation. His good judgment is not in question. 
AG ¶ 20(a) and (b) apply. Applicant also receives credit under AG ¶ 20(d) because he 
made consistent efforts to determine whether or not he had a remaining obligation after 
the house sold. The evidence indicates the loan is resolved, because the deficiency 
was covered by the PMI; the bank notified him in April 2011 that the account was 
closed; and his credit summary from the credit reporting agency notes that he currently 
has no real estate debt. 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern pertaining to foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 7 are relevant: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
Applicant has close foreign ties to his parents and sisters who are citizen-
residents of Chile. His mother was a Chilean government employee until she retired 15 
years ago. Applicant's wife was a citizen of Colombia, and a U.S. resident alien as of 
the date of the hearing. She maintains contact with her family in Colombia. 
Disqualifying conditions AG ¶ 7(a) and (b) apply.  
 
 
 
9
                                                
The foreign influence guideline also includes factors that can mitigate security 
concerns. I have considered the mitigating factors under AG ¶ 8, especially the 
following:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
United States; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats 
from persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties to persons in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives 
in a foreign country and an applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that 
relative, this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and 
could potentially result in the compromise of classified information.8 Here, it is unlikely 
that Applicant would be exploited based on his relationships with his parents and 
siblings in Chile. The United States and Chile share a strong relationship and 
cooperate on numerous fronts including energy, trade, and the environment. The 
documents submitted do not indicate that Chile targets U.S. classified information.  
 
 Applicant's wife’s family in Colombia is more of a concern, given the presence of 
terrorist organizations there. However, Applicant has infrequent contact with his wife’s 
family in Colombia, limited to when he sometimes says hello on the telephone. The last 
time he visited there was eight years ago, in 2003, and he has no intention to return. 
His two sisters-in-law live in large cities and have no connection with the government. 
His father-in-law’s contact with the government was on a local level, and occurred 
about 20 years ago. Although Applicant's brother-in-law sought refuge in Canada, it did 
not result from any personal involvement with government officials or in drug-related 
activities. When he found he could only support his family by working in an unsafe 
area, he left the country to provide a safer environment for himself and his family. He is 
no longer in that situation, and is a legal permanent resident of Canada. 
 
 
9 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 09-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 
2001). 
 
 
10
Applicant's ties to the United States weigh in his favor when evaluating the 
question of potential conflicts of interest based on his relationships in either Chile or 
Colombia. He worked at low-paying jobs to support himself, and succeeded in earning 
a college degree in the United States. He has succeeded in building a professional 
career of more than 20 years in the United States. He is a naturalized U.S. citizen, and 
his son is a native-born U.S. citizen. Moreover, he has followed all security 
requirements, reported his foreign travel, and is a model employee in terms of meeting 
security obligations. I conclude that he would report any incident of attempted 
exploitation if one were to occur, and would choose his strong U.S. ties over his foreign 
connections, in the event that a conflict of interest arose. Mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 
8(a), 8(b), and 8(e) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis   
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
Applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the Applicant’s conduct and 
all the relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
AG ¶ 2(c) requires that the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. Under the cited 
guidelines, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of 
all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.  
 
 Foreign family ties raise security concerns because of the potential for conflicts 
of interest and exploitation. Here, Applicant’s contacts with his family in Chile, and his 
spouse’s family in Colombia, raise such concerns. Although his mother worked for the 
government, any relationship would be tenuous, as she has been retired for 15 years. 
Moreover, Applicant has no inheritance rights in her government pension. His 
remaining family members have no connection with the Chilean government.  
 
 The connection with Colombia is of more concern, given the drug trafficking and 
associated civilian targeting and kidnapping. However, Applicant's contacts with his 
wife’s family in that country are infrequent, he has not traveled there since 2003, and 
has no intention to travel there in the future. Although Applicant's brother-in-law sought 
 
 
11
refuge in Canada, he was not fleeing because he was personally known or specifically 
targeted by drug traffickers. Moreover, he is now a permanent resident of Canada, is 
no longer at risk, and has no intention to return to Colombia. Applicant has strong ties 
to the United States. He has been here for 25 years, half of his life. He showed 
character and resilience by working at low-level jobs to pay for his education, and he 
realized his goal of a college degree. The education and employment he achieved, as 
well as his U.S. family and friends, represent substantial ties to the United States. I 
conclude that he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the United States.  
 
 Applicant home was foreclosed in 2009. The loss of his job in 2007, and 
subsequent real estate market crash, combined to make it difficult to meet his 
payments. He continued making payments, using savings, for as long as he could. He 
kept the lender apprised of his situation. After the foreclosure, he was informed that he 
did not owe the deficiency because it was resolved through PMI. Applicant made a 
good-faith effort throughout these events to meet his obligation on the debt. In light of 
his current credit report which shows no outstanding real estate debt, and his two open 
accounts which have never been delinquent, I find that any security concerns about 
financial considerations are mitigated.  
 
 Overall, the record evidence satisfies the doubts raised concerning Applicant’s 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns arising from the cited adjudicative guidelines. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.g  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline F   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified 
information. Applicant’s request for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
 
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
