 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02829    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The SOR alleges that Applicant 
owes approximately $39,000 in delinquent debt for 38 accounts, 21 of which are for 
medical expenses. Applicant’s delinquent debt resulted from events beyond his control. 
He has resolved 37 of his 38 delinquent accounts. He is making payments on the 
remaining unresolved account. Applicant demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve his 
delinquent debt. He has also shown that his finances are under control. Clearance is 
granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on December 10, 
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO)10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
 
2 
 
reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR detailed the factual basis for 
the action under the Guideline F (Financial Considerations) adjudicative guideline.   
 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was initially 
assigned to another administrative judge in February 2011 and transferred to me on 
June 6, 2011. The hearing proceeded as scheduled on June 7, 2011. Government’s 
Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7 and Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through T were admitted 
without objection. I received the Transcript (Tr.) on June 15, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is employed as a welder with a defense contractor. He is 48 years old 
and has been married twice. He is the father of one child with his second wife. In May 
2009, he completed a security clearance application seeking access to classified 
information for the first time. His background investigation revealed a history of financial 
problems.2 
 
 Applicant is a below-the-knee amputee, the result of a tractor accident in 1986. 
After learning to walk again with the use of a prosthetic leg, he returned to work full-
time. However, complications with his amputated leg made it hard for him to work 
consistently. By the end of 1999, Applicant believes he missed an average of three 
months of work each year. In 2000, Applicant stopped working and began receiving full 
disability benefits from the Social Security Administration (SSA). His monthly $1,700 
disability check was his family’s only source of income. Applicant struggled to make 
ends meet. He often used credit cards to pay his expenses.3 
 
 Applicant’s finances were also aggravated by being medically underinsured. 
While receiving disability benefits, Applicant did not have sufficient health insurance to 
cover all of his family’s medical expenses. As a result, he incurred over $25,000 in debt 
for eight prosthetic legs he used over the years. He also incurred $6,454 in other 
medical debt that he could not pay. In addition his wife, who has serious mental health 
disorders, is unable to work. Her medication typically costs $150 per month, which 
Applicant could not afford on his disability income.4 
 
 In addition to the medical expenses, Applicant’s wife’s disorders have caused her 
to engage in financially destructive behavior. At times when her medication had become 
ineffective or she chose not to comply with her prescription regime, she had episodes 
during which she would disappear for days at time and often writing bad checks from 
the couple’s joint bank account. During one episode she wrote $7,000 in bad checks. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replaces the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 GE 1 – 7. 
 
3 Tr. 65-67.  
 
4 SOR; Tr. 48, 68-69, 73-74. 
 
3 
 
These bad-check sprees often resulted in criminal charges. To avoid his wife spending 
time in jail, Applicant would pay the fees necessary to keep her from facing prosecution. 
Although he kept his wife out of jail, the unexpected expenditures depleted his meager 
financial resources. On two occasions, once in 2000 and another in 2005 or 2006, 
Applicant attended financial counseling offered by his local government to help him 
control his finances, but because his income was not sufficient to cover his expenses, 
he could not do much at the time to rehabilitate his finances. He even tried to 
supplement his income by working part-time as a greeter at a large retail store.5 
  
 In 2007, Applicant decided to return to work as a welder. He accepted a position 
working abroad for a government contractor. He found that living in warmer climates 
caused fewer complications with his leg and allowed him to work consistently year 
round. Earning an annual salary in excess of $100,000, working overseas provided him 
the first opportunity to address his delinquent debt. However, he became a geographical 
bachelor leaving his wife and son, who was 14 at the time, stateside. Prior to starting his 
employment, Applicant terminated his disability benefits.6  
 
 The first year he worked abroad, Applicant relied on his wife to manage the 
family finances. She had not had an episode in almost a year and he believed that she 
could handle the responsibility. During that year he believed his wife was managing the 
couple’s finances without issue. It was not until he returned home for a vacation a year 
later that he learned otherwise. He also discovered that SSA continued to pay his 
disability benefits for almost 10 months after he terminated them, which resulted in a 
overpayment of benefits of more than $17,000. By the time, he learned of the 
overpayment, his wife had spent the money. Upon returning to his duty location 
overseas, Applicant resumed control of his finances and began resolving his delinquent 
debt. First, he repaid the $25,000 related to his eight prosthetic legs. He then began 
repaying the delinquent accounts identified during his background investigation and 
eventually alleged in the SOR.7 
 
 The SOR alleged that Applicant owed 38 delinquent accounts totaling 
approximately $39,000. He admits three of the debts: the $17,906 debt to the Social 
Security Administration caused by the overpayment of his disability benefits (¶ 1.v.), a 
$2,179 account owed to CACH LLC/Providian Bank (¶ 1.y.), which is a duplicate of ¶ 
1.b., and a $23 debt to an unidentified medical creditor (¶ 1.ii.). He has entered into a 
payment plan with the Social Security Administration (1.v.). To date, he has paid $6,500 
toward the balance and has agreed to pay $500 each month until the debt is resolved. 
He has paid the CACH LLC/Providian Bank accounts. He believes the medical debt 
alleged in ¶ 1.ii. was paid as part of a lump sum payment to two different medical 
providers with whom Applicant had several delinquent accounts. However, the account 
is not listed separately in the documentation Applicant submitted, but the $23 account is 
immaterial to the total amount of delinquent debt alleged. Applicant denies the 35 
                                                          
5 GE 3; Tr. 24, 31, 57-59, 71. 
 
6 Tr. 27, 38, 67-68.  
 
7 Tr. 26, 38, 40-42, 61-62, 69.  
 
4 
 
remaining accounts. He has provided documentation showing that accounts, ¶¶ 1.a. - 
1.t., 1.w. - 1.hh, and 1.jj - 1.mm, have been resolved through payment-in-full or 
settlement. Applicant successfully disputed the debt alleged in ¶ 1.u. and requested the 
creditor remove the entry from his credit report.8 
 
 In the midst of resolving his own delinquent debt, Applicant assumed financial 
responsibility for his brother’s eight-person household in January 2010. In order to 
accommodate everyone, Applicant had to undertake significant renovations to his small 
home. Since 2010, Applicant has paid $40,000 towards the renovation. He pays cash 
for the construction costs. He does not use credit cards. Applicant actively monitors his 
finances. His recurring household bills are paid automatically each month. He has 
removed his wife’s name from his checking accounts to prevent her from writing bad 
checks and now relies on his brother’s help to run the large household in Applicant’s 
absence.9  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence. 
  
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
                                                          
8 AE A-T; Tr. 27-40, 42-46, 69-70. 
 
9 GE 3; 25-26, 49-50, 53-54.  
 
5 
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides two Financial Considerations Disqualifying Conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case, “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Both disqualifying conditions apply here. 
 
 Applicant’s financial problems began in the aftermath of his leg-amputation in 
1986. His inability to work consistently between 1988 and 1999 adversely affected his 
finances. When he received disability benefits between 2000 and 2007, his monthly 
allotment was not sufficient to cover his living expenses and medical expenses causing 
him to rely on credit cards to make ends meet. In addition, he was medically 
underinsured. His financial problems were compounded by his wife’s severe mental 
illness and her financially destructive behavior. The cumulative effect of these factors 
caused Applicant to incur $39,000 in delinquent debt between at least 1988 and 2007.  
 
 Upon returning to full-time employment, Applicant began to address his 
delinquent debt. As a result, three of the following mitigating conditions available under 
AG ¶ 20 apply: 
  
 
6 
 
20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors 
or otherwise resolve debts; 
 Applicant’s financial problems are the result of two conditions beyond his control: 
his leg amputation in 1986 and his wife’s mental illness. All of the delinquent debt 
Applicant accumulated over the years can be directly attributed to one condition or the 
other. Although he was unable to affect any appreciable change in his finances prior to 
his re-entering the workforce in 2007, Applicant acted responsibly in attending financial 
counseling courses to seek help. He also acted responsibly in trying to supplement his 
disability income with part-time employment. Since 2008, Applicant has taken control of 
his finances. He has also taken steps to protect his family finances from his wife’s 
actions. Applicant demonstrated that he now has command over his finances. He is 
able to meet his expenses without relying on consumer credit. Most importantly, 
Applicant has also demonstrated a good-faith effort to resolve his delinquent debts. He 
has resolved 37 of his delinquent accounts and has entered into a payment plan with 
his largest creditor. Based on the evidence, I conclude that Applicant has mitigated the 
Guideline F concerns. 
 I have no reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also 
considered the whole-person concept. Applicant has made significant personal sacrifice 
to financially support his family and repay his delinquent debt. Working overseas allows 
him to work consistently and financially support his family, but prevents him from caring 
for his wife and helping his son cope with his mother’s illness. He has shown his 
commitment to financial rehabilitation by paying off an additional $25,000 in debt not 
alleged in the SOR. His commitment is also evidenced by his decision to remove his 
wife’s name from the couple’s bank accounts, a decision necessary to protect his wife 
from criminal charges and the family’s finances from the unexpected costs potentially 
associated with her episodes. Furthermore, Applicant has demonstrated that he is able 
to live within his means, even while supporting a 10-member household. 
 
7 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.mm:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
