KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline F
DIGEST: When Applicant denies an SOR allegation, the government must produce substantial
evidence of the truth of the allegation.  The government’s evidence here included responses to
two interrogatories and the credit reports.  On this record, the government met its burden. 
Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 10-03426.a1
DATE: 07/15/2011
DATE: July 15, 2011
In Re:
-----
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 10-03426
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
James S. DelSordo, Esq.
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On August 26, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of
the basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and
Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992,
as amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On April 29, 2011, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge John Grattan Metz, Jr., denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Applicant appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Government failed to meet its
burden of production; whether the Judge’s application of the Guideline F mitigating conditions was
erroneous; and whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis was erroneous.  The Judge’s favorable
findings under Guideline B are not at issue in this appeal.  Consistent with the following, we affirm
the decision of the Judge.
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is an engineer for a
Defense contractor.  He is seeking to retain a clearance that he has held since 1998.  Applicant has
two delinquent debts totaling almost $198,000.  These represent the deficiency balances owed
following the short-sale of one investment property and a foreclosed second mortgage from another
investment property.  Applicant bought these properties in order to take advantage of the real estate
boom of the mid-2000s.  He intended to sell one of the properties after six months.  The other was
in default after six or seven months from purchase.
Applicant’s claim to have paid on both mortgages until he exhausted his personal savings
was not corroborated.  He has provided no corroboration for his claims that the lenders had forgiven
the debts or that they intended to do so.
Applicant enjoys a good reputation at his job for reliability and trustworthiness.  
In analyzing the case, the Judge concluded that Applicant’s two delinquent debts raised
security concerns under Guideline F.  He acknowledged that the decline of the housing market was
a circumstance beyond Applicant’s control, but he also concluded that Applicant had not
demonstrated responsible action in regard to his debts.  He noted the lack of evidence to corroborate
Applicant’s claims to have been relieved of the deficiency liabilities, concluding that without such
evidence he could not find that Applicant’s problems were under control or that he had made a good-
faith effort to resolve his debts.  
Applicant contends that the Judge erred in concluding that the Government had met its
burden of production.  He contends that the record evidence demonstrates that Applicant did not owe
the deficiency amounts alleged in the SOR.   
When an applicant denies an allegation contained in a SOR, the Government must produce
substantial evidence of the truth of the allegation.  Substantial evidence means “such relevant
evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a conclusion in light of all the
3
contrary evidence in the same record.”  Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  See ISCR Case No. 08-05637 at 2
(App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010).  
In the case at issue here, the Government’s evidence included Applicant’s responses to two
sets of DOHA interrogatories.  It also included three Credit Bureau Reports.  These exhibits
establish the debts alleged in the SOR.  Of particular note is Exhibit 2, Interrogatories, dated June
21, 2010, which includes a copy of Applicant’s short-sale agreement with the lending bank.  This
document states, in pertinent part, the following: “Although [Bank] agrees to release the lien on the
referenced account, the Account Holder and [Bank] both agree that any remaining debt is still owed
and is collectable.”  This document suggests that the lender has not relinquished the right to collect
the deficiency for the short sale.  As the Judge stated in the Decision, there is no evidence to
demonstrate that either debt had been forgiven.  Credit Report entries to the effect that these debts
had been charged off by the lending institutions do not support a conclusion that the debts had been
forgiven.  Accordingly, the Government has presented substantial evidence of Guideline F security
concerns.
The record supports a conclusion that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated
a satisfactory explanation for the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made,’” both as to the mitigating conditions as well as the whole-person factors.
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The
Judge’s adverse decision is sustainable on this record.  “The general standard is that a clearance may
be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the national security.’”  Department
of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  See also Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b):  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”  
  
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.  
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan           
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed; Jean E. Smallin                      
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
4
Signed: James E. Moody                  
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
