1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-06262
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Although Applicant’s troubled finances stemmed from a business downturn and
he has filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection, there is insufficient evidence in the
record to conclude he has mitigated the security concern. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On November 24, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its denial of Applicant’s
security clearance. Specifically, it alleged facts which raise concerns under Guideline F,
financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
2
Applicant answered the SOR on December 8, 2010, and requested a decision on
the record instead of a hearing. On January 6, 2011, the Government prepared a File of
Relevant Materials (FORM). Applicant received the FORM on February 4, 2011, and
was instructed he had 30 days to submit a response. Applicant did not submit a
response, and  the case was assigned to me on April 1, 2011.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 41-year-old man who has been married for nine years. A previous
marriage ended in divorce. Applicant has no children.
Applicant served in the U.S. Navy from 1988 to 1994. He was honorably
discharged. Shortly after leaving the Navy, Applicant enrolled in college, earning a
bachelor’s degree in 1999. (Item 5 at 17) He is a systems engineer who has been
working for the same employer, a defense contractor, since 2006. He has held a
security clearance for ten years. (Item 6 at 7)
For most of the last decade, Applicant’s wife operated a mortgage financing
business. (Items 5 at 54; 7 at 4) The business was initially prosperous, then the real
estate market crashed. (Id.) Applicant’s wife’s salary was based solely on commissions,
therefore, she supported herself between real estate deals with credit lines. After the
market collapse, home sales decreased drastically, limiting her commissions. At or
about this time, her creditors began restricting their access to credit lines, and raising
the interest rates on their outstanding balances. (Item 5 at 60) 
Applicant and his wife had financed their home with a variable rate, interest-only
loan. Shortly after the real estate market collapsed, the interest rate on their home
mortgage accelerated. (Item 5 at 60) Consequently, Applicant and his wife could not
make ends meet, and began falling behind on their finances.  By 2010, they had
accrued approximately $144,000 in delinquent debt. (Item 4)
Applicant and his wife attempted to negotiate interest rate reductions and/or
lump-sum balance payments. These efforts were unsuccessful, and their credit rating
continued “to plummet.” (Item 5 at 60)
In October 13, 2010, Applicant and his wife filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy
protection. (Id.) The status of the bankruptcy is unknown from the record. 
Applicant’s wife no longer operates her business. Currently, she works at a bank.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
3
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied together with the factors
listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person,
past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours. The Government reposes a high degree of trust and
confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to classified information. Decisions
include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or
inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a
certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk
of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline F, Financial Considerations
Under this guideline, “failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts,
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about
an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information” (AG
¶ 18). Moreover, “an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to
4
engage in illegal acts to generate funds” (Id.). Applicant’s history of financial
delinquencies triggers the application of AG && 19(a), “an inability or unwillingness to
satisfy debts,@ and 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Applicant’s financial difficulties were not caused by extravagant or irresponsible
spending. Rather they occurred after his wife’s business failed and the interest rates
increased on his outstanding loans. After Applicant’s attempt at negotiating lower
interest rates and/or lump-sum payments with his creditors failed, he filed for Chapter
13 bankruptcy protection. AG ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the financial
problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation), and the
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances,” applies.
Although Applicant has acted prudently in response to his financial misfortune,
and has filed for Chapter 13 bankruptcy protection, he provided no record evidence of
its current status. Consequently, AG ¶ 20(d), “the individual initiated a good-faith effort
to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts,” applies, but not AG ¶ 20(c), “the
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.”
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Applicant’s financial situation is not unusual. Given the situation he faced after
his wife’s business failed, he did not have many viable options other than to seek
bankruptcy protection. Although his wife now has a job, and the bankruptcy pleading
has been filed, it is too soon to conclude that their financial situation is under control.
Under these circumstances, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security
concern.
5
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
