 
1 
 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05667 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On January 6, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline B. DOHA took this action under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on January 21, 2011, and elected to have the case 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing.1 On February 24, 2011, Department 
Counsel prepared a file of relevant material (FORM) that included a request for 
administrative notice of facts about Afghanistan. On February 28, 2011, Applicant was 
mailed a complete copy of the FORM and advised that he could file objections or submit 
other material for consideration within 30 days of its receipt. Applicant received the 
FORM on March 13, 2011. On March 26, 2011, he submitted a response that included 
character reference letters. Department Counsel had no objection to his response. The 
Government’s exhibits in the FORM are admitted into the record, and the request for 
administrative notice is granted. The facts administratively noticed are set out below in 
the findings of fact.2 Applicant’s response and character reference letters are also 
admitted into the record. The case was assigned to me on May 12, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains seven allegations. Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR 
¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.d, 1.f, and 1.g, and denied SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e. SOR ¶ 1.c alleged, “Your 
father is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan who served in the Afghanistan National 
Army and is a former employee of the Afghan government.” In denying SOR ¶ 1.c, 
Applicant stated, “Yes, my father was a former low ranking employee of the Afghan 
Government. ‘But he never served for the Afghan National Army.’” SOR ¶ 1.e alleged, 
“Your brother is a citizen of Afghanistan residing in Kazakhstan, married to your 
Kazakhstani sister-in-law.” In denying SOR ¶ 1.e, Applicant stated, “No, [his brother] is 
not a citizen of Afghanistan. He is a citizen of Kazakhstan and residing in Kazakhstan.” 
His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough and careful review 
of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact.3 
 
 Applicant is a 39-year-old linguist employed by a defense contractor. He has 
worked for his current employer since December 2007. He was born in Afghanistan. He 
attended high school in the United States for about six months in 2004 and received a 
GED certificate. He also attended a college in the United States for four months in 2005. 
His Public Trust Position Application (SF 85P) reflects that he began residing in the 
United States in August 1999, and he has maintained a U.S. residence since then. He 
became a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 2008. He is married. His SF 86 lists no 
children.4 
 
 Applicant’s wife was born in Afghanistan. She is a citizen and resident of 
Afghanistan. They married in August 2006. She is a high school graduate and is 
                                                          
1 Item 3. Applicant made his election by circling the words “without a hearing” on the letter forwarding the 
SOR. 
 
2 FORM request for administrative notice includes seven source documents. 
 
3 Items 1, 3. 
 
4 Items 4, 6, 7.  
 
 
3 
 
 
unemployed. She has skills to work as a tailor. He is working on obtaining a U.S. 
immigration visa for her. He anticipates that she will travel to Pakistan or India to obtain 
the visa because the U.S. Embassy in Afghanistan is not issuing visas to Afghan 
nationals. While Applicant was working in Afghanistan in May 2010, he had contact with 
his wife every two or three days depending on mission requirements.5 
 
 Applicant’s mother and father were born in Afghanistan. They are citizens and 
residents of Afghanistan. His mother was a school teacher, but left that job after the 
Taliban took over and began creating trouble for her. She is now retired. His father 
worked in an office that oversaw bazaar operations by ensuring no one was 
overcharged or cheated. His father retired 15 years ago and receives a pension of $380 
per year. Applicant maintains weekly to monthly contact with his parents. He has sent 
money to his parents. He sent them $200 to $300 using the Hawala system of 
transferring money in 2004. Since then, he has used companies to transfer the money.6 
 
 Applicant has three brothers and two sisters. All of his siblings were born in 
Afghanistan. Two of his brothers and his two sisters are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. His oldest brother is a doctor who works for the Afghanistan Ministry of 
Health. Applicant is close to his oldest brother, who lives with his parents, and talks to 
him whenever he calls his parents. His other brother in Afghanistan also is a doctor, but 
works in a hospital. Both of his sisters were teachers (elementary and preschool). He 
does not know whether one of his sisters still works as a teacher. He is not close to his 
sisters. Both of his sisters are married. One of his brothers-in-law works for a 
communications company.7 
 
 Applicant has a brother who is a citizen and resident of Kazakhstan. In 1988, his 
brother traveled to Kazakhstan to study civil engineering under a scholarship. At that 
time, the Soviet Union controlled Kazakhstan. After graduating, his brother decided to 
stay there and married a local woman whom he met in school. For the last 15 years, his 
brother and sister-in-law have worked in a bazaar buying and selling goods. In July 
2009 and June 2010, Applicant traveled to Kazakhstan to visit his brother. In 2009, 
Applicant loaned his brother $50,000 to help him buy a home. In 2010, he loaned him 
another $50,000 to assist him in paying off the mortgage. So far, his brother has not 
paid him back.8 
 
 Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Afghanistan. His father-in-law is a driver, and his mother-in-law is a teacher. He has an 
uncle who served in the Afghan Army as a mechanic and tailor. He does not know how 
                                                          
5 Items 6, 7.  
 
6 Items 5, 7.  
 
7 Items 5, 6, 7.  
 
8 Item 7. 
 
 
4 
 
 
long his uncle served in the Army or what rank he attained. His last contact with his 
uncle was when he was married.9 
 
 Applicant has only told his wife and three brothers that he is working with the 
U.S. Government in Afghanistan. For security reasons, he has not told other members 
of his family what he does for a living. He stated that his family would be at risk if his 
type of employment was known in the community. He reportedly stated, “[He] believes 
educated people love America but ‘stupid’ people may hurt his family if they were to 
discover what he does. [He] hasn’t told them because there would be no reason to take 
unnecessary risks.”10 
 
 Applicant cheated on his wife during a trip to Mexico (date unknown). His wife 
does not know of that event. However, he indicated that he intends to tell her face-to-
face when he finds the courage to do so. He has a close friend in Afghanistan to whom 
he gave $5,000 so that it could be used for Applicant’s family in case of an emergency. 
This money was used to pay for Applicant’s father’s surgery.11 
 
 Applicant provided numerous character letters and letters of recommendation 
from senior military officers, senior enlisted personnel, and civilian personnel stationed 
with him in Afghanistan from 2008 to the present. Those writing on his behalf describe 
him as an excellent interpreter who has served with distinction and professionalism. His 
positive attitude, sincere approach, and superior skills set him apart from other 
translators and cultural advisors. He is referred to as a combat multiplier in the counter-
insurgency environment and a great asset. He has served as an interpreter for an 
agriculture-business development team and an Army engineering company. He also 
served as the interpreter for a brigade commander who stated he has no reservations 
about Applicant’s loyalty and dedication to the United States. The brigade commander 
and the command sergeant major both stated, “[Applicant’s] cultural knowledge and 
language skills have been extremely beneficial in hundreds of key leadership 
engagements between village leaders, village elders, village Mullahs, local government, 
provincial government and the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan 
officials and military leaders of Task Force [XX].” As part of his duties, Applicant has 
traveled throughout the Task Force’s area of operations and has gone on convoys.12 
 
 Afghanistan is located in Southwestern Asia and borders Pakistan, Iran, and 
Russia. It has been an independent nation since 1919, after the British relinquished 
control. A monarchy ruled from 1919 until a military coup in 1973. Following a Soviet-
supported coup in 1978, a Marxist government emerged. In 1979, Soviet forces invaded 
and occupied Afghanistan. A resistance movement eventually led to an agreement 
                                                          
9 Items 3, 5, 7. 
 
10 Item 7. 
 
11 Item 7. 
 
12 Applicant’s submission dated March 26, 2011. 
 
 
5 
 
 
known as the Geneva Accords, signed by Afghanistan, Pakistan, the United States, and 
the Soviet Union, which ensured Soviet forces withdrew by February 1989. The 
resistance party was not part of the Accords and refused to accept it. A civil war ensued 
after the Soviet withdrawal. In the mid-1990s, the Taliban rose to power largely due to 
anarchy and the existence of warlords. The Taliban sought to impose extreme 
interpretation of Islam and committed massive human right violations. The Taliban also 
provided sanctuary to Osama Bin-Laden, Al Qaida, and other terrorist organizations. 
 
 After the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, demands to expel Bin-Laden and 
his followers were rejected by the Taliban. U.S. forces and a coalition partnership 
commenced military operations in October 2001, that forced the Taliban out of power in 
November 2001. The new democratic government took power in 2004, after a popular 
election. Despite that election, terrorists including Al-Qaida and the Taliban continue to 
assert power and intimidation within the country. Safety and security are key issues, 
because these terrorists target United States and Afghan interests by suicide 
operations, bombings, assassinations, carjacking, assaults, and hostage taking. At this 
time, the risk of terrorist activity remains extremely high. The country’s human rights 
record remains poor and violence is rampant. 
 
 Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the violence and increased attacks. 
Despite the loss of some key leaders, insurgents have adjusted their tactics to maintain 
momentum following the arrival of additional U.S. forces. It is suspected that the Taliban 
was most likely responsible for suppressing voter turnout in the August 2009 elections 
in key parts of the country. The Taliban’s expansion of influence in northern Afghanistan 
since late 2007 has made the insurgency a country-wide threat. 
 
 Afghan leaders continue to face the eroding effect of official corruption and drug 
trade. Criminal networks and narcotics constitute a source of funding for the insurgency 
in Afghanistan. Other insurgent groups and anti-coalition organizations also operate in 
Afghanistan. Insurgents have targeted non-government organizations, journalists, 
government workers, and United Nations workers. Instability along the Pakistan-Afghan 
frontier continued to provide Al-Qaida with leadership mobility and the ability to conduct 
training and operational planning, targeting Western European and U.S. interests. The 
United States Department of State has declared that the security threat to all American 
citizens in Afghanistan remains critical as no part of the country is immune to violence.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying 
conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in evaluating an applicant’s 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
 
6 
 
 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
 
7 
 
 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them, and the following disqualifying conditions 
potentially apply: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information. Applicant’s wife, parents, two brothers, two 
sisters, mother-in-law, father-in-law are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. He 
maintains close contact with his wife, parents, and one brother in Afghanistan. He has 
provided his parents money and paid at least part of his father’s surgery. Applicant’s 
contact with relatives living outside of the United States is sufficient to raise a security 
concern. I find both of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human 
rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members 
are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an unstable government, a family member 
is associated with or dependent upon the foreign government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. In this regard, Applicant’s brother 
works for the government and his father receives a pension from the government. 
 
There is sufficient evidence of the insurgency operations being conducted in 
Afghanistan against American forces. There is also evidence that Afghanistan has a 
dismal human rights record and has active terrorist groups operating within its borders. 
This places the burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his contacts in 
Afghanistan do not pose a security risk, and he is not in a position to be forced to 
choose between loyalty to the U.S. and his connections to family members and his 
former employers. With its negative human rights record, its government, and the 
 
8 
 
 
violent insurgency that operate within the Afghan borders, it is conceivable that 
Applicant’s family members could be vulnerable to coercion. Such circumstances in 
Afghanistan create a heightened risk. 
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.e, indicating his brother in Kazakhstan is not a citizen 
of Afghanistan, but is a citizen of Kazakhstan. No evidence about Kazakhstan was 
presented. I find in favor of Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.e because that allegation is not 
accurate and now has very limited relevance in evaluating the security concerns arising 
from Applicant’s contacts and interests in Afghanistan. 
 
I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered all of the mitigating conditions 
for this security concern under AG ¶ 8. The following mitigating conditions potentially 
apply: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation. 
 
Applicant contacts in Afghanistan are not casual, infrequent, or minimal. He has 
extensive and close family ties in that country. His wife, parents, two brothers, and two 
sisters are citizens and residents of Afghanistan. One of his brothers is a doctor in the 
Afghan Ministry of Health. His mother left her job as a teacher because of problems the 
Taliban created for her. He has an uncle who served in the Afghan military. For security 
reasons, Applicant has not told all of his family members that he working in support of 
the U.S. Government. Specifically, he is concerned that, if members of the community 
became aware of his current occupation, it may place his family members at 
unnecessary risk. Given his extensive family contacts in Afghanistan and the security 
conditions there, Applicant could be placed in a position of having to choose between 
the interests of foreign family members and the interests of the United States. AG ¶ 8(a) 
and 8(c) do not apply. 
 
Based on record evidence, it appears Applicant first resided in the United States 
in April 2003 and became a U.S. citizen in July 2008. Since then, he has been working 
as an interpreter in Afghanistan. He loaned his brother in Kazakhstan $100,000. His 
 
9 
 
 
financial holdings in the United States and Afghanistan are unknown. None of 
Applicant’s immediate family members are citizens or residents of the United States. 
When considering his contacts and interests in the United States in comparison to those 
in Afghanistan, I cannot find that his sense of loyalty to his family members in 
Afghanistan is so minimal that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in 
favor of the U.S. interest. I find AG¶ 8(b) does not apply.  
 
In cases of this nature, a specific analysis is necessary. The Appeal Board has 
stated: 
 
As a general rule, an applicant’s prior history of complying with security 
procedures and regulations is considered to be of relatively low probative 
value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the security 
concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying conduct 
or circumstances. However, the Board has recognized an exception to that 
general rule in Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by 
credible, independent evidence that his compliance with security 
procedures and regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk 
circumstances in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to 
the national security. The presence of such circumstances can give 
credibility to an applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to 
recognize, resist, and report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or 
exploitation.13 
 
Applicant has worked with the Army in Afghanistan for about three years. As part 
of his duties, he has traveled throughout the Task Force’s area of responsibility and has 
gone on convoys. Considering the dangerous combat conditions that exist in 
Afghanistan, his duties involve inherent risks. Moreover, senior military officers who 
have observed Applicant’s performance have indicated they have no reservations about 
his loyalty and dedication to the United States. However, the exact nature and extent of 
the dangers that Applicant may have faced in Afghanistan are unknown. Likewise, his 
compliance with security procedures and regulations under the existing conditions in 
that country is largely unknown. Based on record evidence, I cannot find that Applicant’s 
service in Afghanistan fits within the Appeal Board’s exception. Specifically, the 
evidence does not support a determination that his actions in dangerous circumstances 
in Afghanistan establishes that his ties and sense of obligation to the United States are 
sufficiently strong that he could be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the United States.14 
 
                                                          
13 ISCR Cases No. 06-25928 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr 9. 2008) (internal citations omitted). See also ISCR Case 
No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 14, 2006) citing ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 13, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. May, 30, 2006); ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006); ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 
2 (App. Bd. July 14, 2006). 
 
14 See ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov 14, 2006). 
 
10 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2 were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. Applicant has 
been a U.S. citizen for almost three years. Since then, he has been supporting the U.S. 
military in Afghanistan. Senior officer and enlisted personnel support granting Applicant 
a security clearance. Nevertheless, Applicant has extensive family contacts in 
Afghanistan that create security concerns. Those security concerns are not mitigated by 
the evidence that Applicant has presented. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with 
questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. 
For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns 
arising under the Foreign Influence guideline. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:   Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.f-1.g:   Against Applicant 
   
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
