1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
------------------             )       ISCR Case No. 10-04741
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Julie R. Mendez, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esquire
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On January 31, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) enumerating security concerns arising under
Guideline E (Personal Conduct), Guideline D (Sexual Behavior), and Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative
guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
In a February 17, 2011, response, Applicant admitted one of the three
allegations set forth in the SOR under Guideline E and denied all allegations under
Guideline D and Guideline J. He also requested a hearing. DOHA assigned the case to
me on May 20, 2011. The parties proposed a hearing date of June 29, 2011. A notice
setting that date for the hearing was issued on June 3, 2011. I convened the hearing as
scheduled. 
Applicant gave testimony and introduced four witnesses. He also presented 15
documents that were accepted into the record without objection as exhibits (Exs.) A-O
Department Counsel offered five documents, which were admitted as Exs. 1-5.  Ex. 5
 Tr. 12-15. W ith regard to redactions appearing in the business record at issue, their inclusion and effect      1
were given appropriate weight in consideration of the document as a whole.
 Ex. 5 (Archived record, cover letter dated Jun. 27, 2011). Applicant already had a security clearance. Tr.      2
40. 
  Ex. 5 is redacted. The unredacted section, however, includes accurate reference to Applicant’s date of      3
marriage and the age of his children, thus providing a persuasive nexus between the summary and Applicant.
Compare Ex. 1 (Security Clearance Application, dated Aug. 12, 2008).
 Ex. 5, note 2, supra.       4
 Ex. 5, supra, note 2 at 4.      5
 Id.      6
2
was accepted into the record over Applicant’s objection concerning issues regarding
foundation and hearsay.  The parties were given until July 5, 2011, to submit any1
additional materials. The transcript (Tr.) of the proceeding was received on July 9,
2011. In the absence of supplementary submissions, the record was closed on July 5,
2011. Based on a review of the testimony, submissions, and exhibits, I find Applicant
failed to meet his burden of mitigating security concerns related to personal conduct,
sexual behavior, and criminal conduct. Clearance denied.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 40-year-old administrator who has worked for the same defense
contractor for approximately six years. He has earned a bachelor’s degree. Applicant is
married and has two minor children. 
Central to the issue in this case is whether Applicant, during security testing for
another agency, reported searching the Internet for images of sexually explicit material,
including images of underage females. The testing took the form of interviews and
lifestyle polygraph testing by another Government entity between August and
December 2007, when Applicant was applying for a special access clearance.  The2
source of this information is a redacted summary report from that organization.  Full text3
copies of the report were available, but not offered into evidence.  The summary notes4
a processing initiation date of August 20, 2007, and a polygraph date of December 3,
2007. A negative final recommendation is shown as having been made on July 29,
2008, on the basis of personal conduct and criminal conduct.
Applicant stated he had searched the Internet for the term “child pornography” to
see what materials would be returned. He stated he was unsure of the term’s true
meaning and that he had told his wife the same thing when she asked him about the
search. The summary notes that he stated that he used specific search engines and
search terms to find provocative images of school girls, who were apparently between
the ages of 13 and 18. It notes that he revised his statement to say the girls were about
16, then again revised his statement to say they were between 13 and 18.  The5
summary notes other variations on the age range at issue. It includes a summation of
Applicant’s depiction of the developmental stage of “the 13 year old females.”  Near the6
 Id.      7
 Id.      8
 Ex. 2 (Interrogatories) at 7 (2008 Testimonies at 3).      9
 Ex. 2 (Interrogatories) at 3 (2010 Testimonies at 1).      10
 The special access clearance apparently  was separate and distinct from Applicant’s then-current security      11
clearance. See Id. (2010 Testimonies at 1-2); Tr. 40-42. It was denied on Nov. 10, 2008. See Ex. 3
(Interrogatories) at  4 (Dec. 17, 2009, notice of disapproval).
 Ex. 2 (Interrogatories) at 8-10 (Nov. 2010 comments).      12
3
end of the summary, it is noted that “subject reiterated that he searched the various
Internet websites in an attempt to view images of young women, using the term ‘young
teens.’ Subject advised that he was not seeking images of females under 18 years of
age.”  It concludes by stating, “Subject affirmed that he searched the Internet utilizing7
the term “child pornography” out of curiosity, and not in an attempt to view videos of
child pornography. Subject finally advised that the more he thinks about it, the images
he viewed depicted females 13 years of age.”  No other interviews or polygraph tests8
are mentioned.
Between November 11, 2008, and December 1, 2008, Applicant was interviewed
by DOD investigators. It was noted in an unsworn declaration that Applicant had a
security clearance issued by another agency.  It stated that he did not have any other9
background investigations. There is no indication Applicant addressed the child
pornography issues.
During an unsworn interview in April 2010, Applicant related facts about his
2007 interviews and polygraph tests at the other agency. In the summary of that
interview, it is noted that in 2007, Applicant “was asked to interpret photographs of
young persons and state which were underage. The subject found certain images
borderline, among 16 and 17 year old young persons. The [other agency] rated the test
failed, stating that the subject should have identified that images as underage minors.
The subject did not agree that there was room for doubt.”  He did not disclose that he10
had admitted to interviewers in 2007 that he had accessed and viewed child
pornography on the Internet. The interview summary noted that a year later, Applicant
was advised that, based on the polygraph testing, a special access clearance had been
denied.  It also noted that Applicant had declined to appeal the decision because he11
had a pending job offer elsewhere that did not require special access. 
In November 2010, Applicant was given the opportunity to review, make
comments, and affirm the investigator’s summaries of the statements made during the
2008 and 2010 interviews.  Applicant made comments regarding the notes about his12
April 2010 statements. He wrote, “[o]n the second day of the [2007] polygraph I was
unable to successfully pass the test because of the question have you ever viewed
underage pornography. After the second test was completed they interrogated me for
around two hours. After [that,] I admitted that I could have viewed young persons from
 Id. at 8.      13
 Id. at 9.      14
 Id. at 8.      15
 Answer to the SOR, dated Feb. 17, 2011.      16
 Id.      17
 Id.      18
 Id.      19
 Id.      20
 Tr. 41.      21
4
the ages of 17-13 years old.”  Consequently, Applicant effectively amended the prior,13
unsworn statements earlier attributed to him. Applicant also noted that when he
returned for his third polygraph, he stated that he wanted to “take back my previous
statement and I did not view young persons from the age of 17-13 years old.”14
Applicant then noted that “due to me taking back my statement they did not test me on
viewing young persons from the age of 17-13 years old. They asked me the question if I
had ever viewed underage pornography. All three of my polygraphs came back
inconclusive.”15
In his response to the January 31, 2011, SOR, Applicant wrote that during his
first polygraph in August 2007, he did not pass the test due to his response to the
question “have you ever commented [sic] a crime over the age of 18.”  He stated that16
he next day, the 2007 interviewers queried about pornography. He wrote that they
asked him to explain the differences in body types of females between the ages of 18
and 13. He stated that he answered the questions and “they tried to pressure [him] to
say that [he had] viewed underage females. [He] did not agree with the agency and
stated [he] only viewed females 18 years of age and older.”  After the second 200717
polygraph test, he said he “could had [sic] viewed underage pornography if the females
lied about their age.”  He noted that on the third 2007 polygraph attempt, he explained18
that he told the interviewers that he wanted to withdraw his previous concession, noting
that he “felt like they led [him] down this path and [he did not] agree with it.”  In his19
SOR response, Applicant stated that he has never actively searched for underage
pornography and has never viewed any images of 13-year-old females. Regarding his
April 2010 interview, he stated that he was too focused on the specific questions asked
at the time to go to his car, retrieve documents related to the 2007 tests, and delve into
that topic. “I was really focused on the investigation at the time . . . . After the
investigation I was very satisfied that I answered all of the questions that were asked.”20
There is no indication whether the documents allegedly in his car were either
exculpatory or explanatory in nature.
During the June 2011 hearing, Applicant testified that he had felt pressured
during the 2007 interviews and tests, and that he did not feel free to leave.  He agreed21
 Tr. 41-42.      22
 Tr. 44.      23
 Tr. 43-44. Applicant stated that the commentator attributed ages to the models at issue based on their      24
separate discussion about the appearance and attributes of females during their developmental stages.
 Tr. 45.      25
 Tr. 42.      26
 Tr. 37.      27
 Tr. 32.      28
 Tr. 33-34.      29
 Tr. 17-28. See also Exs. C-H (Recommendations).      30
5
that the general statements attributed to him in the redacted 2007 summary were
made, including those regarding the general Internet search engine inquiries.  He22
admitted to looking for “porn” or “free porn,” but denied making some of the more
specific and provocative Internet search queries noted in the report.  He also denied23
those aspects of his attributed comments regarding the models’ ages, noting that he
had never inquired about their ages.  To him, the models seemed to be 18 or over. He24
stated that his use of adjectives regarding the models were taken out of context.  In25
addition, he explained that he did a search or searches for “child pornography” for
“information purposes,” not for images.  He confirmed that he chose not to appeal the26
denial of special access.
Applicant understands that viewing sexually explicit images of underage subjects
could constitute a criminal act. He denies ever knowingly viewing such material.27
Applicant’s wife knows that he has viewed pornography, but does not know the nature
of the content.  When she asked her husband whether he had viewed child28
pornography, he denied it.  She has never noted any indication that their home29
computer has been used to access pornography. His best friend and former work peers
describe him in glowing terms, such as a being a “stellar” performer and a man of
“impeccable” character.   His witnesses were generally aware of the allegations. At30
work, he is a highly regarded employee.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating
conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under AG ¶ 2(c), this
process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      31
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      32
 Id.      33
 Id.      34
6
person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all reliable information about
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a31
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  32
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of
denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access33
to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of protecting such sensitive
information.34
Based upon consideration of the evidence, Guideline E (Personal Conduct),
Guideline D (Sexual Behavior), and Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) are the most
pertinent to this case. Conditions pertaining to those AGs that could raise a security
concern and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate such
concerns, are set forth and discussed below.
 AG ¶ 15.      35
 Id.      36
7
Analysis
Guideline E – Personal Conduct
Security concerns arise from matters of personal conduct because conduct
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information.  In addition, any failure to35
provide truthful and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process is of special interest.  36
Here, Applicant reported to interviewers in 2007 that he had accessed and
viewed underage pornography via the Internet. He was denied a special access
clearance by another  agency in 2008 due to that admission. Such facts are sufficient to
raise Personal Conduct Disqualifying Conditions AG¶ 16(e) (personal conduct, or
concealment of information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to
exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if known,
may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. . . .). 
In 2007, Applicant informed interviewers that he had researched child
pornography via Internet. He stated that he subsequently told the interviewers that he
recanted this admission in another session, but there is insufficient evidence regarding
his recantation to raise Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition (PC MC) AG ¶ 17 (a)
(the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or
falsification before being confronted with the facts).
Applicant stated that his admission of accessing and viewing underage
pornography was followed by a retraction. However, the Government’s evidence, while
excerpted and redacted, does not confirm this. It only references the single December
2007 meeting. Its form, content, and conclusion seem self-contained. Applicant offered
no evidence in rebuttal or any documents tending to show the results of other interviews
or polygraphs during the investigatory period. Similarly, he failed to provide a plausible
explanation as to why or how the Government’s exhibit, which is both contemporaneous
and highly detailed in its depiction of 2007 statements attributed to Applicant, is at odds
with his subsequent version of the facts. Moreover, Applicant admits that he was denied
a special access clearance in November 2008, less than three years ago, based on the
information elicited during the 2007 interview. To date, the competing versions of what
happened in December 2008 remain unreconciled. In light of these facts, and given the
gravity of the type of material at issue, none of the other mitigating conditions apply. 
Guideline D – Sexual Behavior
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may subject the
 AG ¶ 12. The concern described further notes that “no adverse inference concerning the standards in this      37
Guideline may be raised solely on the basis of sexual orientation of the individual.”
 AG ¶ 30.      38
8
individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or duress can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified
information.  Here, Applicant admitted that he searched for underage pornography on37
the Internet. This is sufficient to raise Sexual Behavior Disqualifying Conditions (SB DC)
AG ¶ 13(a) (sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has been
prosecuted), AG ¶ 13(c) (sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to
coercion, exploitation, or duress), and AG  ¶ 13(d) (sexual behavior of a public nature
and/or that reflects lack of discretion or judgment). With a disqualifying condition raised,
the burden moves to Applicant to mitigate security concerns.
 Given Applicant’s age and the use of the Internet, it may be assumed that the
conduct at issue occurred during Applicant’s adulthood. Therefore, Sexual Behavior
Mitigating Condition (SB MC) AG ¶ 14(a) (the behavior occurred prior to or during
adolescence and there is no evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature) does
not apply. In addition, due to the lack of a date for the admitted conduct and Applicant’s
alleged recantation of the claim that he accessed underage pornography, there are
insufficient facts to raise ¶ 14(b) (the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so
infrequently, or under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment).
Applicant’s initial admission that he searched, accessed, and viewed Internet
images of child pornography constituted a disturbing revelation. He has since stated
that he recanted this admission in a subsequent interview and polygraph session,
although there is no evidence to that effect. Ultimately, that admission and testing
constituted the basis of his special access denial by another agency. To date, no
documentary evidence has been introduced supporting his assertion that a recantation
was effectively made, nor has a plausible explanation been made as to how such a
detailed summation was incorrectly comprised by another entity. Applicant continues to
dispute the other agency’s depiction of the 2007 interview, and denied having searched
for images of child pornography. Today, the issue remains unclarified. Given the nature
of the allegation, AG ¶14(c) (the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion,
exploitation, or duress) does not apply. None of the other mitigating conditions apply. 
Guideline J – Criminal Conduct
The concern under this guideline is that criminal activity creates doubt about a
person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into
question a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.38
Here, before his alleged recantation, Applicant reported to the Government that he had
accessed and viewed underage pornography. Such an incident is sufficient to raise
Criminal Conduct Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple
lesser offenses) and AG ¶ 31(c) (allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless
9
of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted).
Consequently, it is Applicant’s burden to mitigate the security concerns raised.
The underlying interview and testing process occurred in late 2007. It was then
documented by a Government agency in the normal conduct of business. Applicant’s
full version of what transpired in late 2007 was first offered last year. There is no
evidence that Applicant was coerced into taking a lifestyle polygraph, only that he was
seeking a special access clearance. Applicant failed to provide an explanation or
interpretation of that facts that would reconcile his version of what happened in 2007
with the summary made by another agency at that time. Neither Criminal Conduct
Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior
happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment) nor AG ¶ 32(c) (evidence that the person did not commit the offense)
applies. None of the other mitigating conditions apply.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the whole-person factors.
Applicant is an educated, 40-year-old man who is married and has two minor children.
He is a highly regarded employee and has won the admiration of his peers. 
In his late 30s, Applicant applied for a special access clearance with another
governmental entity. During that process, he admitted to searching for and accessing
child pornography on the Internet. In the face of a highly detailed Government
summation of his interview which detailed his admission and related comments,
Applicant failed to substantiate his claim that he later effectively recanted this
admission. Moreover, he failed to provide a plausible explanation as to why that
contemporaneous Government document would purposefully, and with great detail,
misrepresent his interview statements. Lacking some tangible evidence that the
Government document is false or intentionally misleading, or that only his rendition of
the facts is true, Applicant’s admission – which he agrees was at least initially made –
remains at issue. This is not to say that Applicant’s entire rendition of the facts is
patently false. Rather, Applicant failed to meet his burden, which, in these proceedings,
is placed squarely on an applicant. Given that any reasonable doubt about whether an
applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of
protecting such sensitive information, I find that Applicant failed to mitigate security
concerns arising under personal conduct, sexual behavior, and criminal conduct.
Clearance is denied. 
10
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.b-1.c: For Applicant 
Paragraph 2, Guideline D: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
