 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 10-00144 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). Applicant refuted the allegations under 
Guideline E, but he did not mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on September 2, 
2009. On April 12, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny 
his application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant received the SOR on April 21, 2011; answered it on April 29, 2011; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on May 
2, 2011. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on May 13, 2011, and the case was 
assigned to me on May 20, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on May 24, 2011, 
scheduling the hearing for June 8, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 5 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, presented the testimony of one witness, and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A through H, which were admitted without objection. I kept the record 
open until July 8, 2011, to enable Applicant to submit additional documentary evidence. 
He timely submitted AX I. He submitted AX J on July 11 and AX K on July 13, 2011. 
Department Counsel did not object to the untimely submissions nor did he object on any 
other grounds. Accordingly, AX I, J, and K were admitted. Department Counsel’s 
comments regarding AX I, J, and K are attached to the record as Hearing Exhibits I and 
II. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on June 15, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.d 
and denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.b. His admissions in his answer and at 
the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old research associate employed by a federal contractor 
since January 2008. He has a high school education. He and his wife married in 
November 1995. They have four children, ages 17, 14, 13, and 11. He has never held a 
security clearance. (Tr. 18.)1 
 
 Applicant worked for another federal contractor as an inventory specialist from 
July 2000 to October 2005. He also was a self-employed owner-operator of a 
commercial moving company from December 1998 to December 2007. 
 
 Applicant and his wife formed their company in December 1998, but it did not 
become a full-time enterprise until about 2005. Until October 2005, Applicant was 
working full-time for a federal contractor and part-time in the evenings for his moving 
business. (Tr. 54, 71.) In October 2005, Applicant left his contractor job and began full-
time work with their moving business. They expanded the company from one cargo van 
to four 24-foot trucks. They provided services to several federal agencies and private 
companies, but about 75 percent of the income was from one federal agency, with 
which they had contracts that generated income of about $200,000 per year. Their 
income abruptly stopped when an employee of that agency was investigated for fraud 
and every vendor who had done business with that employee was suspended. They 
were underbid on several other contracts, and their business declined rapidly. (Tr. 49-
50, 54-55.) The business shut down in December 2007, and all its assets have been 
sold.  
                                                          
1  Applicant stated in his SCA that he received a security clearance in February 2008 (GX 1 at 37), but he 
stated at the hearing that he has never held a clearance. 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant and his wife filed a joint Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition in January 
2009, and they completed the debt counseling required by the bankruptcy court. (GX 2 
at 26.) Their primary purpose was to protect their home from foreclosure. They had 
refinanced their home several times to acquire trucks and equipment for the moving 
company and were unable to make their mortgage payments, which were about $4,000 
per month. The bankruptcy petition listed only three debts: their home mortgage and 
two motor vehicle loans. (GX 2 at 27, 35, 53, and 58.) They voluntarily dismissed the 
bankruptcy petition in September 2009, because they believed they could make more 
progress in resolving their debts by dealing directly with their creditors rather than 
through the bankruptcy trustee. (GX 2 at 9; Tr. 66-67, 72.) 
  
 When Applicant submitted his SCA, he disclosed the Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
petition in response to question 26a. He also disclosed a vehicle repossession in 
response to question 26b. However, he answered “No” to question 26d, asking if he had 
a lien placed against his property for failing to pay taxes or other debts in the last seven 
years. He also answered “No” to question 26e, asking if he had a judgment entered 
against him in the last seven years. He did not disclose a judgment entered against him 
in October 2008 by the creditor alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and tax lien entered against him in 
April 2009 by a local government alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b. The judgment and tax lien were 
reflected on his credit report dated October 6, 2009. (GX 3 at 3.) 
 
 Applicant testified that he was unaware of the judgment and the tax lien when he 
submitted his SCA. (Tr. 58.) His wife, who handled the finances for the moving business 
as well as the family, testified that they learned about the tax lien when they were 
informed of it at the hearing on their motion to dismiss the bankruptcy petition in 
February 2010, and they learned about the judgment when she applied for a security 
clearance in May 2010. She testified that they moved shortly after the repossession and 
never received notice that a lawsuit had been filed. (Tr. 72-73.) 
 
 On June 3, 2010, Applicant and his wife sold their home and paid off the 
mortgage with the proceeds. (GX 2 at 16.) The HUD-1 settlement statement reflected 
that $10,171 was paid from the proceeds of the sale to satisfy income tax liens. (GX 2 at 
18.) Applicant’s wife testified that the proceeds were intended to satisfy their personal 
taxes, but the funds were erroneously applied to their business taxes. (Tr. 74.) In April 
2011, Applicant’s credit report reflected that the lien for unpaid personal income taxes 
was unsatisfied. (GX 5.) 
 
 In December 2010, Applicant and his wife made a $25 payment on the judgment 
alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a but had made no further payments as of the date of the hearing. 
(AX G.) In June 12, 2010, the creditor agreed to a payment plan providing for payment 
of the balance due in two installments on July 12 and July 26, 2011. (AX K.) Although 
Applicant made an untimely submission of documentary evidence on July 13, 2011, he 
submitted no evidence showing that the first installment was paid. 
 
In April 2009, a tax lien was imposed on Applicant for unpaid local income taxes. 
On a date not reflected in the record, he and his wife submitted an offer in compromise 
 
4 
 
 
for the unpaid taxes. In August 2010, the tax authorities requested additional 
information regarding the offer in compromise, and  also advised them that they might 
be eligible for a tax amnesty program. (GX 2 at 12.) The record contains no response 
from Applicant or his wife regarding the offer in compromise or the tax amnesty 
program. (GX 2 at 12.) On July 1, 2011, Applicant and his wife executed a payment 
agreement for the tax lien, providing for an initial payment of $100, to be paid 
immediately, and monthly $300 payments on the 16th of each month until the debt is 
satisfied. (AX I.) Applicant did not submit any evidence showing that the initial $100 was 
paid. His federal tax refunds have been applied to the local tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.b. (AX B.) His local tax exemptions have been reduced to zero until the tax debt is 
satisfied. (AX C.) 
 
In April 2010, Applicant and his wife accepted an offer to settle the debt alleged 
in SOR ¶ 1.c, and they made one $250 payment in July 2010. (GX 2 at 13-14.) The 
record does not reflect any other payments pursuant to this agreement. On June 6, 
2011, Applicant and his wife accepted another settlement offer to resolve this debt by 
making a $300 down payment and paying $166 per month for 36 months. (AX H.) They 
paid the initial $300 on June 30, 2011. (AX J.)  
 
Applicant’s wife was a federal employee until July 2010. She is now unemployed, 
but she is actively looking for a new job. (Tr. 102-03.) Her net monthly income while she 
was employed was about $1,640. (GX 2 at 8.) As of the date of the hearing, the family’s 
net income was about $4,632, their projected expenses were about $3,323, and their 
projected debt payments totaled about $968, including payments pursuant to the three 
payment plans for the debts alleged in the SOR. Their anticipated net monthly 
remainder was about $342. (Tr. 110-11.)  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
5 
 
 
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges an unsatisfied judgment for about $450 (SOR ¶ 1.a), an 
unsatisfied tax lien for about $9,502 (SOR ¶ 1.b), and a delinquent debt for $9,671 
(SOR ¶ 1.c). It also alleges a Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition filed in January 2009 and 
dismissed in February 2010 (SOR ¶ 1.d). 
 
 
6 
 
 
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
The evidence establishes two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 
19(a) (“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts)” and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not 
meeting financial obligations” Although one of the debts alleged in the SOR is a tax lien, 
AG ¶ 19(g) (“failure to file annual Federal, state, or local income tax returns as required 
or the fraudulent filing of the same”) is not established, because Applicant’s tax debt 
was not due to failure to file or fraudulent filing of tax returns.  
 
 Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s 
delinquent debts are recent and numerous, but they occurred under circumstances 
making them unlikely to recur. Applicant appears to have learned from his mistakes and 
is not likely to make another attempt to establish and operate a private business by 
borrowing heavily against his home and personal credit card account. However, his 
failure to timely resolve his delinquent debts raises doubt about his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. He has been employed since January 2008 and 
his wife was employed until July 2010, but they did not negotiate their most recent 
payment agreements until they received the SOR. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 20(a) is 
not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Applicant’s business was thriving and growing 
until an unexpected business downturn, but he did not react responsibly. He and his 
wife had an opportunity to resolve some of their debts when they filed a Chapter 13 
bankruptcy petition in September 2009, but they voluntarily dismissed the petition 
before the debts were fully resolved. They did not negotiate the most recent payment 
agreements for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c until after the SOR was issued in 
April 2011.  
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
and his wife completed the mandatory counseling required by the bankruptcy court. 
They have negotiated payment agreements for their three unresolved debts, but they 
have not yet established a record of compliance with those agreements. Thus, I 
conclude that AG ¶ 20(c) is not established, because the evidence falls short of the 
“clear indications” required to establish this mitigating condition. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). An applicant is not required, as a matter of 
law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant need only 
establish a plan to resolve financial problems and take significant actions to implement 
the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all delinquent 
debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the SOR be 
paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 On the other hand, a history of delinquent debts is not mitigated by payment of 
debts if payment is motivated primarily by the pressure of qualifying for a security 
clearance. The three payment plans for the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c are recent 
and were negotiated after the SOR was issued. Applicant made one payment under the 
agreement for repayment of the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, but he presented no 
evidence of payments on the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. I conclude that AG ¶ 
20(d) is not established. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 The SOR alleges that Applicant falsified his SCA by failing to disclose the 
judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a and the tax lien alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b.  The concern 
under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
 The relevant disqualifying condition in this case is “deliberate omission, 
concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, 
personal history statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine 
employment qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities.” AG ¶ 16(a). 
 
 When a falsification allegation is controverted, as in this case, the Government 
has the burden of proving it. An omission, standing alone, does not prove falsification. 
 
8 
 
 
An administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine an 
applicant’s state of mind at the time of the omission.  See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 
(App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004).  
 
 An applicant’s level of education and business experience are relevant to 
determining whether his failure to disclose relevant information on his SCA was 
deliberate. ISCR Case No. 08-05637 (App. Bd. Sep. 9, 2010). Applicant has a high 
school education and limited business experience. He has never held a clearance. He 
was candid and sincere at the hearing. His testimony about his lack of knowledge about 
the judgment and the tax lien was credible and plausible. I conclude that Applicant did 
not intentionally falsify his SCA. Thus, I conclude that AG ¶ 16(a) is not established. No 
other disqualifying conditions under this guideline are established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant and his wife made significant financial commitments to establish a 
commercial moving company, but their lack of business experience left them vulnerable 
to a business turndown. At the hearing, Applicant was candid and sincere, but he 
demonstrated little knowledge of the family’s financial situation or the financial operation 
of their former business. He recently negotiated payment agreements for the three 
delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, but the evidence reflects only a single payment on 
the debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c, and there is no evidence of payments on the agreements 
for the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b. Applicant has a history of negotiating settlements 
but not following through. It is too soon to determine if he will comply with his most 
recent payment agreements.  
 
9 
 
 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has refuted the allegations under Guideline E, but he has not mitigated the 
security concerns under Guideline F. Accordingly, I conclude he has not carried his 
burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant him 
eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.b:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
