 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07453 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated alcohol consumption and personal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 22, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines G (alcohol consumption) and E (personal conduct). The action was taken 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR in an undated response and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 16, 2011. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on June 16, 2011, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on July 12, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which 
 
2 
 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, but she did not submit any 
documentary evidence. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 20, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 20-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She seeks to retain 
a security clearance that she has held since 2008. She attended college for a period but 
did not obtain a degree. She is not married. She has a baby who was born several 
weeks ago.1 
  
 Applicant’s first experience with alcohol was in about 2002, when she drank a 
glass of beer. She did not drink again until 2007 or 2008, when she started drinking 
about once a week. She estimated that she would drink about three to four mixed 
drinks, beers, or glasses of wine, and that she drank to the point of intoxication about 
five times.2 
 
 In May 2009, Applicant attempted to drive home after becoming extremely 
intoxicated at a bar. She hit several bushes along the side of the road, and she 
sideswiped a car that had a driver and a passenger. She kept driving after hitting the 
car. The police arrested her after she stopped in a parking lot. Applicant admitted the 
facts of what occurred based upon the police report and what she was told about the 
incident. She has no memory of the incident, as she had an alcohol “blackout.”3 
 
 Applicant was charged with driving while intoxicated (DWI). In October 2009, she 
pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 180 days in jail, which was suspended, probation 
for 18 months, a $1,000 fine, court costs, and her driver’s license was suspended for 90 
days. As part of her probation, Applicant was ordered to abstain from the use of alcohol 
and have an ignition interlock device placed on her car.4 
 
 Applicant continued to drink alcohol while on probation. The ignition interlock 
device prevented her car from starting if the driver blew into the device with alcohol on 
their breath. In February 2010, Applicant blew into the interlock device with alcohol on 
her breath. She admits that she was intoxicated, but she denies that she was driving. 
She stated that a friend was acting as the designated driver but was unable to operate 
the interlock device. Applicant stated that she blew into the device in order to start the 
car for the friend to drive them home. She attempted to fool the interlock device by 
eating something before she blew into the device. The device reported the incident to 
the probation department.5 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 26-28; GE 1. 
 
2 Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 18-20; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
4 Tr. at 18, 22-23; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
5 Tr. at 21-25; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
3 
 
 In April 2010, Applicant was determined to have violated probation, and she was 
ordered to serve seven days in jail. She actually served 11 days because she was in jail 
a few days awaiting her probation hearing.6 
 
 Applicant reported her DWI and probation violation to her company’s security 
officer. She stated that she has not drunk any alcohol since April 2010. She admitted 
that she did not initially take her probation as seriously as she should have. She stated 
that she has learned her lesson and will not disregard the law again. Her probation 
ended in April 2011. She gave birth a few weeks ago. She turns 21, the legal age to 
drink alcohol in her state, in a few months. She stated that she does not plan to drink 
until she turns 21, but she may have a drink in December to celebrate the holidays.7 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 23-24; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
7 Tr. at 17, 23-26; GE 2, 3. 
 
4 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
     
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent. 
 
Applicant’s underage drinking, DWI, and drinking on probation establish AG ¶ 
22(a). Her pattern of alcohol consumption raises AG ¶ 22(c).  
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
 
5 
 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant’s DWI occurred in May 2009, and she continued to drink alcohol while 
on probation. Applicant has not had a drink of alcohol since April 2010. However, she 
was pregnant and on probation for most of the period since then. AG ¶ 23(b) is partially 
applicable. I find that her alcohol-related incidents are recent, did not happen under 
unusual circumstances, and I am unable to determine that they are unlikely to recur. 
Applicant’s alcohol consumption continues to cast doubt on her reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 23(a) is not applicable. AG ¶ 23(b) is partially 
applicable. No other mitigating conditions have been raised by the evidence. I find that 
alcohol consumption security concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially applicable: 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as 
. . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
Applicant’s underage drinking and probation violations constitute conduct that 
created a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. AG ¶ 16(e) is applicable.  
 
6 
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
 Applicant has refrained from alcohol since April 2010, and she has been honest 
about her alcohol incidents, which has reduced her vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, and duress. AG ¶ 17(e) is applicable. However, I remained concerned 
about her disregard for the law. I am unable to determine that such behavior is unlikely 
to recur. It continues to cast doubt on her reliability, trustworthiness, and good 
judgment. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and 17(d) are not applicable. I find that personal conduct 
security concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
7 
 
under Guidelines G and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I believe Applicant has learned from her mistakes. However, her disregard for the 
law continues to concern me. She has not yet turned 21 years old. She needs to mature 
and establish a longer track record of obeying the law before she should have access to 
classified information. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated alcohol consumption and personal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
