 
1 
 
 
                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-06187 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 7, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 29, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 3, 2011. DOHA 
 
2 
 
 
issued a notice of hearing on March 10, 2011, scheduling the hearing for April 12, 2011. 
Because of the potential for a government-wide shutdown on the hearing date, the case 
was rescheduled to May 10, 2011. The hearing was convened as rescheduled on May 
10, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 and 2 which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing 
Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified, presented one witness, but did not have any 
documents at the hearing. The record was held open until May 27, 2001, to allow 
submission of additional evidence. Applicant submitted exhibits (AE) A and B that were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s transmittal letter is 
marked as HE II. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 18, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted the single allegation of drug use 
under Guideline H. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, testimony, and 
exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 26 years old. He is single and has no children. He has a master’s 
degree. Since January 2010, he has worked for a defense contractor as an engineer. 
He has no military service and has not previously held a security clearance.1   
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR includes: using marijuana on 
numerous occasions from January 2002 through December 2009 (See SOR ¶ 1.a). 
  
 Applicant attended college from 2002 through 2009. During this time, he obtained 
both a bachelor’s and a master’s degree in engineering. It was during this time that he 
began using marijuana. His use of marijuana varied to a few times a year to as many as 
10 times a year. He used more during the early part of his college career than he did 
later. He used at parties with some of his college friends by smoking marijuana through 
a bong or smoking a joint. One time, he ate brownies containing marijuana. The effects 
he felt from smoking marijuana were the urge to laugh more often and being hungry. He 
stopped smoking marijuana in November or December 2009.2  
 
 He stopped using marijuana for at least two reasons. First, he moved from his 
college location across the country to take his current job, and he saw the move as a 
fresh start to get away from his college activities. Second, he was starting competitive 
bicycling and he needed to be in peak performance condition for that endeavor. He 
testified that he does not intend to use marijuana in the future. He also signed a “no 
intent to use statement.” He understands the ramifications of his job and the 
requirement to be drug-free. He is willing to undergo random drug testing by his 
employer. Although he still has some friends who use marijuana, he makes it a practice 
to leave the setting if marijuana is produced by those friends. He admitted his past 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 38-40, 45; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
 
marijuana use in his security clearance application and also to a defense investigator 
during his security clearance interview. He was consistent with his admissions.3 
 
 The chief operating officer (COO) of Applicant’s company testified that Applicant 
is a “star performer” for the company. He also highly recommended him for a security 
clearance (He is also the company’s facility security officer). Although the company 
does not currently have a drug testing program, he is willing to implement one. He was 
aware of Applicant’s college drug use. Applicant was given an overall “outstanding” on 
his recent performance appraisal, which is the highest rating available.4  
   
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
                                                          
3 Tr. at 32-35, 37-45; GE 2; AE B. 
 
4 Tr. at 20-28; AE A. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25, including the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse. 
 
 Appellant used marijuana on a number of occasions while in college. I find the 
above disqualifying condition applies. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26, including the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 Applicant’s use of drugs was infrequent and his last use was over one year ago. 
In this case, because of his youthfulness while attending college, the period of 
abstinence is sufficient to demonstrate Applicant’s intent not to use in the future. 
Additionally, his commitment to competitive cycling and his expressed written intent not 
to use drugs in the future are evidence of a demonstrative intent not to use in the future. 
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) both apply. Applicant has mitigated his past drug use. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the circumstances of 
Applicant’s marijuana use while in college. I also considered Applicant’s supportive 
character evidence from his current COO who recommends granting a clearance to 
Applicant. Finally, I considered Applicant’s statement of intent not to use drugs in the 
future. Applicant provided sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline H, Drug 
Involvement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
