                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )             ISCR Case No. 10-06668 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esquire, Department Counsel 
 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
O’BRIEN, Rita C., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I conclude that Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns raised under the guideline for financial 
considerations. Accordingly, his request for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 10, 2009, Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) to request a security clearance (Item 4). After reviewing the results 
of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request.  
 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as 
amended. 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
On December 24, 2010, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons 
(SOR) that specified the basis for its decision: security concerns addressed in the 
Directive under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of the Adjudicative Guidelines 
(AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Applicant 
received the SOR on January 17, 2011. (Items1, 2) 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR on January 21, 2011, denying SOR allegation 
1.d and 1.e, and admitting allegations 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c. He also requested a decision 
without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case, in a 
file of relevant material (FORM) dated March 22, 2011.2 In addition to the documents 
already identified, the FORM contained Applicant's response to DOHA interrogatories 
(Item 5), his Personal Financial Statement (Item 6), and four credit bureau reports 
(Items 7 - 10). Applicant received the FORM on April 17, 2011, and was given 30 days 
from the date he received the FORM to file a response. Applicant timely submitted a 
one-page response. Department Counsel did not object, and I admitted it as Applicant’s 
Exhibit (AE) A. The case was assigned to me on July 12, 2011, for an administrative 
decision based on the record. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant’s admissions in response to the SOR are admitted as findings of fact. 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, the FORM, and Applicant’s response to the 
FORM, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant, 49 years old, was born in Afghanistan, and became a naturalized U.S. 
citizen in 1990. He married a citizen of Afghanistan in 1996, and they separated in 
2009.3 Applicant has three children: twins aged 11, and a third child aged 4. Applicant's 
mother, three children, three brothers, and two sisters are all U.S. citizens, and as of 
2009, they all lived in the United States. Applicant earned an associate’s degree from a 
U.S. college in 1996. (Item 4) 
 
 Since 1992, Applicant has worked as a plant engineering technician for a 
shipping company, and as a maintenance specialist for a county housing authority. In 
his security clearance application, Applicant listed continuous employment from 1992 to 
the present, except for a period of about one and one half years between 2005 and 
2007, when he listed his employment as “landlord” of an apartment complex. It is 
unclear whether this was paid employment. Currently, he works for a defense contractor 
in Afghanistan. (Item 4) 
 
2 See Directive, Enclosure 3, Section E3.1.7. The FORM included ten documents (Items 1 - 10) proffered 
in support of the Government’s case. 
 
3 Applicant's July 2009 security clearance application indicates he separated in January 2009. His subject 
interview of January 2010 refers to his wife. It is unclear whether this reference is to his first wife, or he 
has divorced and remarried since completing the security clearance application in July 2009. (Items 4, 5) 
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant’s credit bureau report of July 2009 shows approximately 50 accounts, 
most designated as “pays as agreed.” His July 2009 credit report shows 24 separate 
credit card and store charge accounts, as well as numerous mortgage loans, and/or 
personal loans.. Most were in good standing at that time.  
 
 The same credit report also lists 17 mortgage accounts. Some of the accounts 
are likely duplicates, but I cannot determine from the record evidence which loans are 
duplicates that were sold to different lenders over time. Three of the listings do have the 
same balance and likely refer to the same loan. (Item 8)  
 
 Applicant began to have financial problems in 2009. He had a sub-prime 
mortgage loan on a property, and the interest rate adjusted. As a result of the rate 
increase, his monthly payments doubled, and he was no longer able to afford the 
payments. He notes that his marriage was also going through a difficult period, which 
contributed to his financial issues. However, he does not explain how his marriage 
difficulties affected his ability to pay his mortgage. He has not received financial 
counseling. He claims that he was the victim of unjust lending practices that occurred 
during the subprime mortgage crisis. He also stated during his security interview that he 
has sufficient funds to pay his debts, but before paying, he requires that the lenders 
waive all penalties and interest charges. (Items 3, 5) 
 
 Applicant’s annual gross income as of June 2009 was approximately $74,600. 
He also received an additional $2,500 per month in rental property income. His monthly 
net remainder was $1,830. He listed several debts on his personal financial statement 
(PFS), but indicated that he was not making payments on any of the listed debts. (Items 
5, 6) 
 
 Applicant's income more than doubled in 2010. In October 2010, Applicant listed 
a gross income of $185,000. His monthly net income was $9,000, with monthly 
expenses of $6,110. His monthly net remainder was approximately $2,890. He did not 
list any debts, or any debt payments on his PFS. He had assets of $558,000, including 
$55,000 in savings and a 40 percent share in an apartment building. In September 
2010, he vacationed in Dubai for approximately two weeks. (Items 5, 6) 
 
 Four of the five debts listed in the SOR total approximately $22,503. That does 
not include any amounts related to the $600,000 mortgage that was foreclosed 
(allegation 1.c). Applicant has paid three of the debts. The delinquencies appear in 
Applicant's credit reports of July 2009, April 2010, and November 2010. (Items 7 – 10) 
 
 Equity line of credit ($19,000), allegation 1.a - UNRESOLVED. During his 
security interview, Applicant stated that he did not receive these funds, which were part 
of the financing for his home. He states in his interrogatory response of October 2010, 
 
This money was never received by me. They opened this account as 
equity line of credit and they used the money in order to make the loan 
work. This was one of the dirty tricks that creditors were using during the 
 
4 
 
 
sub-prime mortgage crisis. The actual loan was $600,000. They made two 
loans one for $580,000 and one for $19,998. They used the $19,998 for 
closing costs and other expenses. (Items 3, 5) 
 
The latest credit report, dated November 2010, shows that $19,000 is delinquent. 
Applicant stated that, “The house had been foreclosed and they kept my $100,000 
down payment. I have talked to a lawyer and was advised that I am not obligated to 
pay, since the house has been foreclosed.” However, Applicant has not provided 
documentation from the lender showing that this debt is resolved. (Items 3, 10) 
 
  Credit card ($3,266), allegation 1.b – RESOLVED. In June 2009, Applicant 
was having marital problems, his mortgage payment had doubled when his interest rate 
adjusted, and he was making only $3,000 per month. He was contacted by the creditor 
about the delinquency, but was unable to pay the debt. During his January 2010 
security interview, he stated he would pay it the following month, but did not. Later, 
Applicant accepted a settlement offer of $2,200 from the creditor. He submitted bank 
statements showing a payment of $700 on January 19, 2011, and a payment of $1,500 
on January 20, 2011. (Items 3, 5, 7-10) 
 
 Mortgage (foreclosure), allegation 1.c – UNRESOLVED. Applicant bought a 
home for $600,000, using a sub-prime loan with an adjustable interest rate. The 
evidence indicates he financed 100 percent of the loan, with a loan for approximately 
$580,000 and another for approximately $20,000. Applicant stated in his security 
interview that he bought the house intending to improve it and then sell it quickly. In 
2009, the interest rate adjusted, and his mortgage payment doubled. He had a 
temporary job at the time, and was earning only $3,000 per month. He was unable to 
sell the house because the real estate market had collapsed. The lender foreclosed on 
the loan in 2009. Applicant's November 2010 credit report lists $3,000 past due on the 
mortgage when the foreclosure process started. Applicant states in his Answer that 
because the loan is foreclosed, and the bank kept his down payment, he has no further 
obligation to pay the debt. However, he failed to provide any documentation from the 
lender indicating that the debt is resolved. (Items 3, 5, 10)  
 
 Utility bill ($170), allegation 1.d – RESOLVED. Applicant paid the collection 
agent for this debt and provided a letter from the agent dated January 2011 showing it is 
paid in full. (Item 3) 
 
 Parking debt ($67), allegation 1.e – RESOLVED. Applicant paid this debt and 
provided a January 2011 email confirming a $70 payment. (Item 3) 
 
Policies 
 
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense 
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information, 
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the AG.4 Decisions 
must also reflect consideration of the factors listed in ¶ 2(a) of the guidelines, commonly 
referred to as the “whole-person” concept. The presence or absence of a disqualifying 
or mitigating condition is not determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. 
However, specific applicable guidelines are followed whenever a case can be measured 
against them as they represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access 
to classified information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by 
the parties require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors 
addressed under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
 
A security clearance decision is intended only to resolve whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest5 for an applicant to either receive or continue to 
have access to classified information. The Government bears the initial burden of 
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or 
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the Government must be able 
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it 
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the Government’s case.  
 
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy 
burden of persuasion.6 A person who has access to classified information enters into a 
fiduciary relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, 
the Government has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the 
requisite judgment, reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national 
interests as his or her own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard 
compels resolution of any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in 
favor of the Government.7 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶18 expresses the security concern regarding financial considerations: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, 
and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, 
lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and 
regulations, all of which can raise questions about an 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially over-
4 Directive. 6.3. 
 
5 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988). 
 
6 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531. 
 
7 See Egan; Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b). 
 
6 
 
 
extended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to 
generate funds.  
 
 Applicant has paid three of the five debts alleged in the SOR. The two largest 
debts, related to mortgage loans, remain unresolved. Applicant purchased a house for 
$600,000 and obtained two loans for the total amount, representing 100 percent 
financing. He intended to improve the house and sell it quickly for profit. However, the 
real estate market collapsed, and he was unable to sell it. In 2009, he was earning only 
$3,000 per month at a temporary job, had approximately 24 open credit card/charge 
accounts, and he was unable to keep up with the mortgage loan payments. The 
following disqualifying conditions under AG ¶19 apply: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 The Financial Considerations guideline also contains conditions that can mitigate 
security concerns. The following conditions under AG ¶ 20 are relevant: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond 
the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, 
unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the 
individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant's delinquencies are not distant in time, as 
the two largest debts remain unresolved. His decision to seek 100 percent financing of a 
$600,000 debt, with the hope of quickly selling the property, does not demonstrate good 
judgment.  
 
 The real estate market crash had a negative effect on Applicant's financial 
situation in 2009. Applicant had no way to foresee the crash. Therefore, starting in 
2009, he was affected by events beyond his control. However, his financial difficulties 
also stem from his knowing decisions to take on excessive credit card and other debt, 
so that when his situation deteriorated, he was unable to meet his obligations. He did 
not act reasonably in relation to these debts. In the years since 2009, he did not make 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
an effort to work out payment plans or otherwise resolve these debts. He can claim only 
partial credit under AG ¶ 20(b). In addition, he did not seek any financial counseling 
during the time his debts remained delinquent. Although he paid three debts, the two 
largest debts remain unresolved, and his financial situation is not under control. AG ¶ 
20(c) does not apply. 
 
 Mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d) requires a good-faith effort to repay debts. The 
Appeal Board has defined “good faith” as acting in a way that shows “reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.”8 Applicant has not 
demonstrated good faith in regard to the SOR debts. He paid the three paid debts in 
January 2011, just weeks after he received the SOR. He was responding primarily to 
the security clearance process, rather than demonstrating a good-faith desire to meet 
his financial obligations. The record contains no indication that he made good-faith 
efforts to work with the lenders who hold the two mortgage loans. In 2009, when 
Applicant had a substantial monthly net remainder of $1,830, he was making no 
payments on his debts. In 2010, his income increased dramatically. Although he took a 
two-week vacation in another country in September 2010, his PFS still shows no debt 
payments. He admits that he can afford to pay his debts, but will not do so until the 
lenders waive the interest and penalty charges. Applicant's history in regard to his debts 
does not demonstrate a good-faith effort to meet his obligations. AG ¶ 20(d) does not 
apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate the 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the 
appropriate adjudicative factors under the cited guideline. I have also reviewed the 
record before me in the context of the whole-person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult of 49 years. It appears that he was financially stable 
before 2009. Although he had a large number of credit cards, charge accounts, and 
mortgage accounts, most were up-to-date, and he was able to qualify for mortgage 
loans. Although  Applicant’s credit bureau reports show a large number of mortgage 
8 ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004), quoting ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. 
Bd. June 4, 2001). 
 
8 
 
 
loans, the record evidence alone is insufficient to determine if Applicant was speculating 
in real estate or flipping properties.  
  
 Applicant's fortunes changed when his income decreased, the real estate market 
crashed, and he could not sell a heavily-mortgaged property. The lender foreclosed. 
Applicant claims that he was “a victim of the sub-prime mortgage crisis” and suffered 
from unscrupulous practices by lenders. However, without further information and 
evidence, I am unable to determine whether or how Applicant was affected by such 
practices. 
 
 Since at least 2009, when Applicant completed his security clearance application, 
he has been on notice that delinquencies are a security concern. Yet there is little 
evidence that he made efforts in regard to his debts. He did not contact creditors, 
arrange payment plans, or otherwise deal with his delinquencies. Under the Appeal 
Board’s jurisprudence, an applicant does not have to show that he paid every debt, or 
paid every debt in full; but he does have to show that he has taken steps to implement a 
viable plan to resolve them. Applicant's decision to avoid resolving his mortgage debts 
fails to demonstrate reliability and good judgment.  
 
A fair and commonsense assessment of the available information bearing on 
Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance shows he has not satisfied the doubts 
about his ability and willingness to protect the Government’s interests.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are as follows: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.b   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.c   Against Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.d   For Applicant  
  Subparagraph 1.e   For Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest 
to allow Applicant access to classified information. Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance is denied. 
 
 
_  
RITA C. O’BRIEN 
Administrative Judge 
