 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-08055 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the Personal Conduct, Drug Involvement, and 
Criminal Conduct security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is 
denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 7, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline E, 
Personal Conduct; Guideline H, Drug Involvement; and Guideline J, Criminal Conduct. 
DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 
2 
 
In an undated document, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing.1 
Department Counsel submitted the ready to proceed notification on May 11, 2011. The 
case was assigned to me on May 18, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on June 
2, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on June 21, 2011. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I. Applicant testified, called two witnesses to testify on his behalf, and offered 
exhibits (AE) A through D, which were admitted into evidence without objection. The 
record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant timely 
submitted exhibit AE E, which was admitted into evidence. Department Counsel’s email 
indicating he had no objection to AE E was marked as HE II. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 6, 2011. 
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Three preliminary rulings merit noting. First, Applicant waived the 15-day notice 
requirement imposed by ¶ E3.1.8 of the Directive. Second, Department Counsel made a 
motion to amend Paragraphs 1.a and 1.b of the SOR by adding “and May 24, 2010” 
following the date listed in each of those allegations. Applicant had no objection to the 
proposed amendment, and the SOR was amended as proposed. Third, Department 
Counsel requested I take administrative notice of 18 U.S. Code § 1001. The Applicant 
had no objection to that request, and administrative notice was taken of that statute.2 
 
Findings of Facts 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted each of the allegations in the SOR. In 
addressing the two Guideline E allegations, however, he indicated that he did not 
intentionally provide false information on his Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) signed on May 24, 2010. Consequently, his answers to the two 
Guideline E allegations are considered denials. His admissions to the allegations under 
Guidelines H and J are incorporated as findings of fact.3 
 
Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has been 
working there since August 2009. He is a high school graduate. He is married and has 
no children. This is the first time that he has applied for a security clearance.4 
  
At the age of 17 in May 1999, Applicant was arrested and charged with 
trespassing and providing false information to a police officer. On that occasion, he and 
                                                          
1 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he “would like a hearing if necessary to get 
my clearance.” 
 
2 Tr. at 12-14. 
 
3 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
 
4 Tr. at 5-6, 47; GE 1. Since starting his current job, Applicant’s company was bought out by 
another company. 
 
3 
 
a couple of friends were walking in the woods when they learned there was an 
individual nearby with a gun. They ran out of the woods and were caught about half a 
mile down the road. When questioned by a police officer, Applicant initially denied that 
he was in the woods. Approximately 45 minutes later, he told the police officer that he 
had, in fact, been in the woods. He went to court on the above charges and believed he 
pled guilty to the trespassing charge, but was not sure. He was sentenced to community 
service.5 
 
In May 1999, Applicant began using marijuana and continued to use it until about 
2003. During that period, the frequency of his marijuana use varied, but he estimated it 
to be monthly. In September 2003, Applicant stopped at a red light and a police car 
stopped in the opposite lane at that intersection. When the light turned green, Applicant 
cut off the police officer by turning in front of him. During a subsequent traffic stop, he 
stated the police officer found a “little piece” of marijuana on the floor of his truck. 
Applicant was transported to the police station in the police car, but stated that, to his 
knowledge, he was neither handcuffed nor arrested on that occasion. He was charged 
with possession of marijuana. He claimed the marijuana found in his truck did not 
belong to him, and his friend “took the rap for it.” The charge against him was dismissed 
without him having to appear in court. He also testified that he did not use marijuana on 
the date of that arrest.6 
 
During an interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator 
on June 29, 2010, however, Applicant reportedly stated he was arrested by the police 
for simple possession of marijuana in September 2003. He also stated the police officer 
found about a quarter gram of marijuana on the floorboard of his truck and that he was 
by himself in the truck when stopped by the police. Despite his claim that the marijuana 
did not belong to him, I find that he illegally possessed marijuana in September 2003.7 
 
Applicant claimed he did not use marijuana from 2003 to 2009. During that 
period, he operated his own business and was focused on work. He met his wife in 
approximately 2005 and they married in March 2009. He indicated that she was “highly 
against” marijuana. In January 2010, Applicant went to a party at a longtime friend’s 
house and used marijuana. He believed this was a New Year’s Eve party. On that 
occasion, he smoked a marijuana joint with three or four other people. He stated that his 
wife was upset with him for using marijuana, and he had to sleep on the couch that 
night.8 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 40-43, 51-53. 
6 Tr. at 43-46, 53-60; GE 2. 
7 GE 2. 
8 Tr. at 46-48, 53-55. Applicant indicated that he knew the friend hosting the party since the 
eighth grade. Applicant’s responses to questions about whether he used marijuana from 2003 to 2010 
were not definitive denials, but qualified with phrases such as “not off the top of my head” or “not to best 
of my knowledge.” During his testimony, the following exchanges occurred:  
 
Department Counsel: Okay. Between 2003 and 2010, do you think you used [marijuana]? 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant submitted an e-QIP on May 24, 2010. He responded “No” to Section 
22e that asked whether he had ever been charged with any offenses related to alcohol 
or drugs. This question also required him to report information regardless of whether the 
record had been sealed, expunged, or otherwise stricken from the court record or the 
charge was dismissed. Applicant gave two explanations for answering this question 
inaccurately. First, in his Answer to the SOR, he stated, “I thought the possession 
charge had happened before September 2003, and was removed from my record 
entirely.” At the hearing, he also testified, “At the time I filled this out, I filled it out to the 
best of my knowledge and did not think it fell in that seven-year period.” In essence, he 
had misinterpreted the reporting period covered by Section 22e and did not remember 
accurately when he was charged with that offense. Second, he testified that he did not 
believe he was charged with possession of marijuana, because he never had to go to 
court and the matter was dropped. He stated, “Since the charges were dropped against 
me, I thought that, therefore, I wasn’t charged.”9 
 
On that e-QIP, Applicant also responded “No” to Section 23a that asked, in part, 
if he had used marijuana in the last seven years. In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
indicated that he did not recall answering “No” to that that question and made a mistake 
in doing so. At the hearing, he testified that, when filling out the e-QIP, he did not think 
about the incident in which he smoked marijuana in January 2010. He stated that he 
filled out the e-QIP to the best of his knowledge and was honest in answering the 
questions. During the OPM interview, the investigator first brought up his arrest for 
possession of marijuana in 2003 that led to other questions about Applicant’s use of 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
Applicant: I -- like I say, when I filled out the e-QIP, that my -- I did it to the best of my 
knowledge. In 2010 I remember that I did smoke. Between 2003 and that time, though, I 
would say no because I had actually -- I learned my lesson. It’s (sic) brought a bunch of 
heartache in my life. 
* * * 
 
Department Counsel: Okay. So between 2003 and 2009 when you got married, you didn’t 
use marijuana at all? 
 
Applicant: No, sir. 
 
Department Counsel: Okay. 
 
Applicant: Not off the top of my head; no, sir.  
* * * 
 
Administrative Judge: From 2003 to 2010, January 2010, you didn’t use marijuana at all? 
 
Applicant: Not to the best of my knowledge; no. My recollection – from what I can remember of 
the time in 2010 that I did, I want to say between 2003, 2009, I didn’t. . . . 
9 Tr. at 39-40, 56-59; GE 1; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR.  
 
 
5 
 
marijuana. He indicated that, when asked by the investigator about his marijuana use, 
he freely admitted his use of marijuana in January 2010.10 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant indicated that he has surrounded himself 
with different people since he last used marijuana. He has not received any drug 
treatment or counseling. Nor has he ever been diagnosed as a drug abuser or drug 
dependent. On the day before the hearing, he took a urinalysis test, which was negative 
for illegal drugs. Overall, I find that Applicant’s testimony lacked credibility. Specifically, I 
do not find credible his explanation for why he failed to report his use of marijuana in 
January 2010 on his e-QIP.11 
 
Applicant’s first and second-line supervisors testified that he is credible and 
reliable. They have no reason to believe he has used illegal drugs. Furthermore, they 
indicated that he has done nothing that would cause them to question his eligibility for a 
security clearance. Applicant also submitted letters of reference that indicate he is a 
dedicated and hardworking employee. The letters also indicate he is a good role model 
with a strong character. A recent performance evaluation reflects that he meets or 
exceeds expectations in most core competencies.12 
 
Applicant testified that he had no intention of ever using marijuana again. After 
the hearing, he submitted a signed statement indicating that he understood that his 
security clearance would be revoked if he engaged in any unlawful activity. 
Furthermore, he stated, upon request, he would provide a drug test or enroll in a 
certified drug/alcohol course. He applied to have the possession of marijuana charge 
expunged from his record and indicated that process normally takes eight to ten weeks 
to complete.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 39-40; 57-61; GE 1; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
11 Tr. at 60; AE C; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
12 Tr. at 28-32; AE A-B. 
13 Tr. at 46-47; AE D, E. 
 
6 
 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for Personal Conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15, as follows: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
7 
 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, 
award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 A falsification under this disqualifying condition must be made deliberately – 
knowingly and willfully. An omission of relevant and material information is not 
deliberate if the person genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, 
misunderstood the question, or genuinely thought the information did not need to be 
reported. Here, Applicant smoked marijuana with three or four other individuals at a 
party in January 2010. His wife was upset with him for using marijuana on that occasion 
and made him sleep on the couch that night. In filling out his e-QIP approximately four 
month’s later, he responded “No” to the Section 23(a) that asked if he used marijuana in 
the last seven years. He testified that he did not think about his use of marijuana in 
January 2010 when filling out the e-QIP. His explanation was not believable. I find that 
he knew of his recent use of marijuana when he submitted his e-QIP and deliberately 
failed to report it. I find that AG ¶ 16(a) applies to SOR ¶ 1.b. 
 
Applicant was arrested for possession of marijuana in September 2003. At that 
time, he was transported to the police station in the police car and questioned. He was 
charged with possession of marijuana, but the charge was later dismissed without him 
making a court appearance. He has given two reasons for not disclosing that drug 
charge in responding to Section 22e of the e-QIP. First, he thought that, because the 
matter was dropped, he did not believe he was charged with an offense. Second, he 
indicated that he thought the charge fell outside the seven-year reporting requirement, 
which was obviously a misinterpretation of Section 22e that asked if he “ever” was 
charged with a drug or alcohol offense. While I found that Applicant’s testimony, in 
general, lacked credibility and that the two explanations above were somewhat 
inconsistent, I find that he misunderstood Section 22e and did not deliberately falsify 
that answer. Given the length of time since his arrest for possession of marijuana and 
the circumstances surrounding its dismissal, his claim that he thought he did not have to 
report that matter is plausible. Consequently, I find in favor of Applicant on SOR ¶ 1.a.  
 
 AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advise of 
unauthorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the 
individual specifically concerning security clearance process. Upon being 
made aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
8 
 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
 Applicant deliberately falsified his response to Section 23(a) on his e-QIP. This is 
recent and serious misconduct. This falsification casts doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. Although he did disclose to the OPM investigator 
his use of marijuana in January 2010, he did so only after the investigator began 
questioning him about the possession of marijuana charge. Moreover, he still has not 
admitted that he deliberately falsified his e-QIP by failing to report his marijuana use in 
January 2010. Consequently, he still has not been completely truthful about the 
allegation in SOR ¶ 1.b. After examining all of the applicable mitigating conditions, I find 
that none mitigate the Guideline E security concerns arising from his deliberate 
falsification on his e-QIP. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and find the following are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture, 
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia. 
 
 
9 
 
From 1999 to 2003, Applicant used marijuana on about a monthly basis. In 
September 2003, he illegally possessed marijuana. In January 2010, he again used 
marijuana at a party. AG ¶¶ 25(a) and 25(c) apply. 
 
I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
Applicant used marijuana from 1999 to 2003 and again in January 2010. His 
most recent use of marijuana occurred at a party hosted by a friend who he has known 
since the eighth grade. Such use of marijuana casts doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 26(a) does not apply. Applicant indicated that 
he had no intention of ever using marijuana again and that he has surrounded himself 
with different people. He also submitted a statement indicating he understood that his 
security clearance would be revoked if he engaged in any further unlawful activity. 
Furthermore, he expressed a willingness to take drug tests or enroll in a certified 
drug/alcohol course. AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies, but it does not fully mitigate the 
security concerns arising from his illegal drug usage.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
 In 1999, Applicant was arrested for trespassing and providing false information to 
a police officer. Although he did not remember his pleas to those offenses, he was 
 
10 
 
sentenced to community service. In 2003, he illegally possessed marijuana and was 
charged with that offense. In 2010, he deliberately falsified his e-QIP in violation of 18 
U. S. Code § 1001. I find the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the mitigating conditions for Criminal Conduct under AG 
¶ 23 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
 (b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life; 
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and  
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 When Applicant was charged with the trespassing and false information offenses, 
he was 17 years old. These offenses occurred over 12 years ago. Soon after making 
the false statement to the police officer, he corrected that statement by admitting that he 
trespassed in the woods. These offenses were relatively minor and happened so long 
ago as to not cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 
23(a) mitigates SOR ¶ 3.a. 
 
 Applicant’s possession of marijuana charge was dismissed without him having to 
make a court appearance. Nonetheless, he was the only person in the truck when the 
police officer found about a quarter of a gram of marijuana on the floorboard near him. 
His claim that a friend “took the rap for it” is difficult to believe. I found that he illegally 
possessed marijuana in September 2003. His denial of this offense weighs against a 
finding that he has rehabilitated himself. Although this offense happened over seven 
years ago, I cannot find that such criminal behavior is unlikely to recur because he 
again illegally possessed and used marijuana in 2010. Based on the evidence 
presented, I find that none of mitigating conditions apply to the possession of marijuana 
offense. 
 
 Applicant’s violation of 18 U.S. Code § 1001 is a recent and serious offense. I 
have considered all of the evidence and conclude none of the mitigating conditions 
apply to this falsification offense.  
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline H and Guideline J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the 
factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s work performance. He is a dedicated and hard working 
employee. His supervisors are pleased with his performance. Nevertheless, he used 
marijuana less than two years ago when he was about 28 years old. He later 
deliberately failed to disclose that marijuana use when he filled out his e-QIP. Overall, 
the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. Applicant has failed to mitigate the Personal 
Conduct, Drug Involvement, and Criminal Conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings on the SOR allegations, as required by section E3.1.25 of 
Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 3.b - 3.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
