1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------- )       ADP Case No. 10-00784
)
Applicant for Public Trust Position )
Appearances
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Frederic M. Levy, Esquire
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant is seeking ADP access to sensitive information. On August 25, 2010,
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and
Guideline B (Foreign Influence). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
In an October 21, 2010, response to the SOR, Applicant admitted the facts
underlying the sole allegation raised under Guideline C and admitted four of the eight
allegations raised under Guideline B. He also requested a hearing before an
administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 8, 2010. Department
Counsel and Applicant agreed to a February 9, 2011, hearing date. A Notice of Hearing
setting the hearing for that date was issued by DOHA on January 27, 2011. An
amended Notice of Hearing was issued on January 31, 2011, to reflect a change in the
time for the hearing.
 Ex. 4, Attachment VIII (U.S. Dep’t of Justice, Office of Public Affairs, Ten Alleged Secret Agents Arrested1
in the United States, dated Jun. 28, 2010).
 Applicant originally received a Russian passport as a teen, before he became a U.S. citizen. It was needed2
as identification to help him obtain a green card from the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service. Tr. 38.
In 2008, he pursued its renewal on the prospect that he might wish to later visit his brother in Russia. Tr. 39.
This was deemed necessary since the Russian government will not grant a visa to a U.S. passport holder who
it considers to be a Russian citizen. Id.
2
The hearing took place as scheduled. Department Counsel submitted four
exhibits (Ex.), including administrative notice materials, which were accepted into the
record as Exs. 1-4 without objection. Applicant gave testimony and offered 20 exhibits,
which were accepted into the record without objection as Exs. A-T. The transcript (Tr.)
was received on February 15, 2011, and the record was closed. Based upon a review
of the case file, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to sensitive information is
granted.
Administrative Notice
The Government requested administrative notice of certain facts and materials
regarding the Russian Federation (Russia). Its submission (Ex. 4) included nine
attachments, consisting of documents issued by various components of the U.S.
Government. Those materials detail historical, civic, legal, demographic, economic,
human rights, and diplomatic information about Russia, in general, and were
considered in their entirety. Of particular applicability in this proceeding, it is noted that
Russia has an active, ongoing information collection program targeting the United
States. Russia and China have long been the most aggressive collectors of sensitive
and protected U.S. technology and accounted for the majority of such targeting.
Russian espionage specializes in military technology and gas and oil industry technical
expertise. In June 2010, ten alleged secret agents who allegedly had been carrying out
long term, deep cover assignments on behalf of Russia were arrested.  1
In addition, Russia often fails to follow the rule of law and seeks to militarily
dominate its neighbors. It has provided various military and missile technologies to
other countries of security concern, including China, Iran, Syria, and Venezuela. Finally,
the U.S. Department of State has warned U.S. citizens about the dangers of travel to
parts of Russia, including the threat of terrorism and hostage taking in Chechnya and
the Caucasus region. 
Findings of Fact
As a preliminary matter, it is noted that the sole allegation under Guideline C
concerns the alleged exercise of dual citizenship manifested by Applicant’s application
for, and receipt of, a Russian passport in March 2008.  This occurred after September2
2001, when Applicant both became a naturalized U.S. citizen and received a U.S.
passport. His eligibility for the Russian passport was based on his birth in Russia to
parents of Russian citizenship. On February 3, 2011, Applicant surrendered his unused
 Ex. Q (Affidavit, dated Feb. 3, 2011). See also Tr. 11, 109. In addition, Applicant offered to provide a written3
declaration renouncing his Russian citizenship if that status is still at issue. He had not done so previously
because he was never “required to do so.” Tr. 45. It is his understanding that in order to further renounce his
Russian citizenship under Russian law, he would have to travel to Russia, register for its military draft, obtain
a domestic passport, make declarations showing he has no financial interests in Russia, then begin the
renunciation process. Tr. 45-46. He also testified that he cannot travel to Russia on a U.S. passport because
Russia still considers him to be a Russian citizen, regardless of his choice or subsequent citizenship in
another country. Applicant noted that all of these requirements would “take months” away from the United
States, his family, and his work. Tr. 46-47. He further noted that with the destruction of his Russian passport
in February 2011, he is no longer able to return to Russia to execute that process. Tr. 47-48. 
 Tr. 111,116-117.4
3
Russian passport to his security officer, who accepted and physically destroyed the
passport.  3
Applicant is a 30-year-old consulting associate with expertise in business and
finance. He has worked for the same defense contractor for eight years. He is married
and has one minor child. Applicant earned a bachelor’s degree in economics and a
graduate-level certification in business and finance from a prestigious U.S. university. 
Applicant was born in Russia in 1980, but spent several of his formative years
with his parents in Western Europe, where his father was employed as a private sector
teacher. At age 12, Applicant and his parents came to the United States, where his
father had secured a position in post-secondary academia. The family applied for U.S.
citizenship shortly thereafter.  Applicant excelled as a high school student, where he4
received many honors. He also excelled as an undergraduate at a leading university.
After receiving political support and based on his academic credentials, Applicant
applied to transfer to a miliary academy, but his application was denied because he was
not yet a U.S. citizen. He persevered at college, where he helped pay for his education
through his efforts as a personal trainer. Two years later, in 2001, he became a
naturalized U.S. citizen and received the aforementioned U.S. passport, which he
subsequently used for international leisure travel. He graduated from college in 2002.
He has not returned to Russia since immigrating to the United States at age 12.
During undergraduate school, Applicant met a student from Russia who was
visiting his area on a work exchange program. Despite their budding courtship, she
returned to Russia in 2001 to complete a graduate degree. She returned to the United
States in 2002, and the two married. He later completed a two-year, post-graduate
certificate program for professionals at a highly prestigious U.S. graduate school of an
exclusive American university. Now an accountant, Applicant’s wife became a U.S.
citizen in 2007. Their son was born the following year in the United States.
Although Applicant and his parents are citizens and residents of the United
States, Applicant has a brother who is a resident and citizen of Russia. That brother is
16 years older than Applicant and did not move to the United States with the rest of the
family in 1992. Applicant’s brother currently resides in a property inherited by his
 Tr. 114. The property at issue is Applicant’s parents’ sole remaining holding in Russia. They do not have5
other financial ties to Russia. Applicant is expected to inherit his parents’ U.S. property.
 Tr. 53.6
 Tr. 53, 86-88.7
 Tr. 52.8
 Tr. 53-54.9
 Tr. 54.10
 Tr. 102-103.11
 Tr. 115-116. Applicant has never met his nephew or his brother’s first wife.12
 Tr. 56.-57, 97-100. Notice is taken that the current Russian Federation’s civilian tertiary education levels13
are divided between federal universities, state (regional) universities, and private institutions, replacing the
pre-Federation structure of national  entities. Applicant is unsure of the classification of his in-laws’ employer.
However, he makes the distinction that his in-laws are employees of a “state” university within the Russian
Federation, not direct employees of the national Russian Federation government. 
 Tr. 58-60.14
4
parents. Applicant’s brother is expected to inherit the property.  His brother is an5
engineer who previously served in the Russian military as part of his compulsory
service. Other than his compulsory service term, the brother has never worked for the
Russian government.  Applicant does not believe his brother has worked for a Russian6
governmental-related entity.  The brother has applied for a green card and for entry into7
the United States. He visited the United States in 1995. After receiving “a favorable
letter after his application was reviewed,” he was awaiting an interview with the
Immigration and Naturalization Service to finalize his preparation to immigrate to the
United States.  The two are “not particularly close.”  Their contact varies. At times they8 9
communicate every two or three weeks, at other times they may only communicate
every few months.  When they communicate, they use Skype, an Internet-based10
telephonic system,  and generally talk about their aged parents or family matters.11
Applicant has never visited his brother. Applicant’s brother is married to a woman who
works in the private sector, but Applicant has never met his sister-in-law.   12
In addition, Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are residents and citizens
of Russia. They are educators employed by a state university.  Applicant does not13
believe the father-in-law ever served in the Russian military. Applicant only speaks to
his in-laws by telephone once or twice a year, on holidays or birthdays, although his
wife speaks with them telephonically about once a week.  Applicant’s in-laws visited14
Applicant and his wife about three years ago, after the birth of Applicant’s child.
Applicant does not provide his in-laws or any other foreign contacts with financial
assistance.
 Tr. 61-62.15
 Tr. 64, 105-106, 121. Applicant considers this individual to be a friend with whom he maintains casual16
contact.
 Tr. 74.17
 Tr. 71.18
 Tr. 72. W hile I found Applicant entirely sincere in his statement, it is noted that the Appeal Board has19
determined that an applicant’s stated intention about what he “might do in the future under some set of
hypothetical set of circumstances is merely a statement of intention that is not entitle[d] to much weight, unless
there is record evidence that the applicant has acted in a similar manner in the past under similar
circumstances.” ISCR Case No. 06-24575 at 5 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007), citing to ISCR Case No. 03-09053
(App. Bd. May 29, 2006). 
5
Applicant also has a brother-in-law who is a Russian citizen, but who is a
resident of the United Kingdom. This in-law and his wife both work in the private sector.
Applicant does not believe his brother-in-law has ever worked for the Russian
government. Applicant is not close to his brother-in-law, and they only speak once or
twice a year, although Applicant’s wife maintains regular telephonic contact with her
brother.  Applicant’s brother-in-law visited the United States about three years ago,15
after the birth of Applicant’s child.
In addition, Applicant maintains contact with a Russian citizen and resident he
met in 2001. This acquaintance was a colleague of Applicant’s future wife on a work
exchange program in the United States. The man lives in Russia, where he works for a
French  private sector entity, and has no ties to the Russian government. Applicant
characterizes this individual as a “casual acquaintance.”  They maintain contact16
through Skype every few months, when they exchange news about their growing
families. Applicant last saw this acquaintance when the man traveled through the
United States in 2009 on a family pleasure trip. 
Neither Applicant nor his wife have any financial ties to Russia. He owns no
property abroad and has no foreign bank accounts or assets. Applicant has no plans to
visit Russia. He is devoted to his life in the United States. His sole source of income is
from his current position, where he makes about $70,000. His wife earns about $65,000
a year. The couple owns their own condominium, which is valued at about $330,000,
and live comfortably. Applicant has domestic investments amounting to close to
$150,000 and a retirement account with over $80,000. He currently has in excess of
$10,000 in his personal checking account. His wife has a retirement account with a
balance of about $30,000. Applicant votes in U.S. national and local elections. He has
been active in his community.  Applicant is proud be a U.S. citizen, considers the17
United States to be his home, and noted “I wouldn’t be anywhere else. I mean, this is
my country, this is where my son was born, so I’m not going anywhere.”  If he was18
forced to choose between any remaining interests abroad and the United States,
Applicant flatly noted, “it’s not a question. U.S. interest comes first.”  Applicant is soon19
 Tr. 113.20
 Tr. 27-26.21
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).22
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).23
6
expecting a second child. He and his wife plan to raise their family In the United States.
To the best of Applicant’s knowledge, no member of his family has ever been a
member of the Communist party.20
At work, Applicant is highly valued as an efficient and thorough business
researcher. A popular co-worker and friend, he has received multiple promotions and
honors.  His evaluations reflect a highly admirable work ethic, responsibility,21
professionalism, and initiative. He has received training in the protection of sensitive
information compatible with his application for ADP access eligibility.   
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, the
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations
for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions
and mitigating conditions, which are required in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for
access to classified information. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative
judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” All available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, must be and will be considered in
making a decision.
The protection of sensitive information is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
sensitive information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching my
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence submitted.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a22
preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  23
 
 Id.24
 Id.25
 Executive Order 10865 § 7.26
 ISCR Case No. 07-16511 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.33.3). See ISCR Case No. 09-27
03773 at 7 n. 4-6 (A.J. Jan. 29, 2010) (discussing appellate standards of review).
7
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard sensitive information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
sensitive information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information). “The clearly consistent standard
indicates that [assignment to a public trust position] determinations should err, if they
must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant24
should be allowed access to sensitive information must be resolved in favor of
protecting such sensitive information.   The decision to deny an individual access to25
sensitive information is not necessarily a determination as to the loyalty of an
applicant.  It is merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines26
the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for assignment to a
position of trust. The DOHA Appeal Board may reverse an administrative judge’s
decision if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  The federal courts generally27
limit appeals to whether or not the agency complied with its own regulations.
Based upon consideration of the evidence, I find Guideline C (Foreign
Preference) and Guideline B (Foreign Influence) to be the most pertinent. Conditions
pertaining to these AGs that could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying, as
well as those which would mitigate such concerns, are discussed below.
Analysis
Guideline C – Foreign Preference
The concern regarding foreign preference is that when an individual acts in such
a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the U.S., then he or she
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests
 AG ¶ 9.28
 AG ¶ 10(a). 29
 Afroyim v. Rusk, 387 U.S. 253 (1967).30
8
of the U.S.  Conditions that could raise an applicable concern and may be disqualifying28
include exercise of any right, privilege, or obligation of foreign citizenship after
becoming a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member.  29
As a threshold matter, it must be noted that dual citizenship is not a bar to
eligibility for a position of public trust, nor is its possession incompatible with the
standards required for access to sensitive information. The United States Supreme
Court recognized a right under the United States Constitution for United States citizens
to have dual citizenship with another country.  Eligibility for a position of trust must be30
determined by application of the disqualifying conditions for foreign preference under
the factual circumstances. In promulgating the disqualifying conditions, the President
could have specified that dual citizenship by itself barred appointment to a public trust
position, but he did not. The rule that was promulgated raises a concern based on an
exercise, not the mere possession, of dual foreign citizenship. 
A foreign passport can be construed as evidence of dual-citizenship to the extent
its acquisition and use is an exercise of a right of foreign citizenship. Here, Applicant
first acquired a Russian passport as a teen. This occurred when he was still a Russian
citizen, based on his birth in Russia and his parents’ status of Russian citizens, before
he became a naturalized U.S. citizen. He later sought and received renewal of his
Russian passport. Although that passport was never used, its acquisition and
possession is sufficient to invoke Foreign Preference Disqualifying Condition AG ¶
10(a) (exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming
a U.S. citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes, but is
not limited to: (1) possession of a current foreign passport). With a disqualifying
condition raised, the burden shifts to Applicant to mitigate AG concerns.
Here, Applicant’s dual-citizenship status was based on his place of birth and the
nationality of his parents. Foreign Preference Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 11(a) (dual
citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country) applies.
Moreover, Applicant credibly testified that he only failed to formally renounce his
Russian citizenship previously because he did not know a formal declaration was
required. Since learning of the appropriate steps under Russian law, he has not done
so because of the undue burden involved in traveling to Russia, fulfilling various
requirements, and enduring a protracted period away from his family and job. His ability
to execute this process was vexed by his submission and the destruction of his Russian
passport, a document essential for the passage into Russia of one considered by
Russia to be a Russian Federation citizen. At the hearing, however, he expressed his
9
willingness to submit a declaration renouncing his Russian citizenship. Therefore, AG ¶
11(b) (the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship) applies.
In addition, Applicant surrendered his unused Russian passport to his security
officer. The security officer accepted and destroyed the Russian passport.
Consequently, AG ¶ 11(e) (the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the
cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated) applies.
Guideline B – Foreign Influence
The concern under Guideline B is that foreign contacts and interests may raise a
public trust concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests,
may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or
coercion by any foreign interest. Consideration should be given to the identity of the
foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but
not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target
U.S. citizens to obtain protected information or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
Conditions pertaining to this adjudicative guideline that could raise a security concern
and may be disqualifying, as well as those which would mitigate security concerns, are
discussed in the conclusions below. Here, the country at issue is Russia. It targets the
United States with active intelligence gathering programs and fails to follow the rule of
law, thus necessitating serious consideration of related foreign influence public trust
concerns. 
Applicant has a brother, in-laws, and a friend of Russian citizenry. Most of them
reside in Russia. He or his wife maintain varying degrees of communication with them.
Foreign Influence Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 7(a) (contact with a foreign family
member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of
or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of exploitation,
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion) and AG ¶ 7(b) (connections to a
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest
between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and
the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that
information) apply. With disqualifying conditions thus raised, the burden shifts to
Applicant to mitigate security concerns.
Applicant maintains sporadic contact with his brother in Russia. Other than
compulsory military service, there is no evidence this sibling is or was an employee of
the Russian government. Applicant’s brother is currently preparing to immigrate to the
United States. The brother is 16 years older than Appellant. The brother was already a
grown and independent man when the 12-year-old Applicant and his parents came to
the United States. Applicant and his brother were raised separately and have lived in
separate continents for nearly two decades. Although he once contemplated visiting his
brother several years ago, Applicant’s plan of a potential trip to Russia to see this
10
sibling never materialized. Applicant has no longer has any interest in visiting Russia,
and he is currently unable to visit there. He describes his relationship with his brother as
“not particularly close.” The relationship described tends to rebut the usual presumption
of a close familial relationship between siblings. An even more remote relationship is
maintained with an acquaintance who is a citizen and resident of Russia. Applicant’s
acquaintance in Russia is an individual socially defined as a friend, but their infrequent
Skype contact and singular in-person visit over the past decade only reflect a non-
familial and casual acquaintance of long-standing. 
Applicant’s relationship with his parents-in-law and brother-in-law, who are
Russian citizens, is even more tenuous. They do not appear to have a defined, familial
relationship, and contact is limited to infrequent telephonic contact. His in-laws visited
Applicant and his family once, on the occasion of the birth of Applicant’s child. There is
no direct evidence showing that his parents-in-law, who are residents and citizens of
Russia, work for the federal Russian government or are otherwise agents of a foreign
nation; their employment status as collegiate academics remain unclear. Applicant’s
brother-in-law is an engineer, a Russian citizen who works in the private sector in the
United Kingdom. In these proceedings, however, the relationship between a spouse
and foreign nationals can be similarly attributed to an applicant. Here, Applicant’s wife
keeps contact with these individuals about once a week by telephone. Thus, it can be
concluded that Applicant’s wife maintains a close familial contact with her family
members.
Overall, Applicant, now 30 years old, has lived in the United States since he was
12. He and his parents began the process to become U.S. citizens shortly after their
arrival. He was educated in American schools, where he excelled as a student. He
completed his undergraduate and post-graduate studies here. He became a naturalized
U.S. citizen in 2001. Like his parents, he has established a social life in the United
States. Applicant met his wife, then a Russian citizen and resident, in the United States.
She chose to remain in the United States, the couple married, and she became a U.S.
citizen. She is committed to Applicant and their child. Both now have successful private
sector careers and are expecting a second child. They intend to raise their children
here. They have a home worth about $330,000 and have a combined income of
approximately $140,000 a year. They both have retirement plans through their work.
Applicant has considerable domestic investments. In contrast, neither has any financial
ties with Russia, nor do they have any assets or future interests abroad. Applicant’s
aged parents live here. He is devoted to his job, where he is popular and respected.
Applicant has no plans to visit Russia. He considers the United States to be his home.
There is no suggestion that he is anything less than a highly loyal American devoted to
his life here. 
The country at issue is Russia, meriting serious consideration, and Applicant is
seeking ADP access. As a whole, despite the above facts, Applicant’s strong ties to his
family and life in the United States, and his comparatively tenuous ties to Russia,
Applicant’s spouse’s relationships with her family in Russia appear close. Foreign
11
Influence Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 8(a) (the nature of the relationships with foreign
persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of
those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group,
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.) and AG ¶ 7(b) (there is no
conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest) only partially
apply.
With regard to Applicant’s brother and Russian friend, AG ¶ 8(c) (contact or
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation) applies. Due to
his wife’s contact and relationship with her family, however, that condition does not
apply to Applicant’s in-laws. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the
ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for ADP access must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant is a mature and forthright individual who has found much success in
the United States. Through his credible explanation of circumstances and the
relinquishment of his Russian passport, Applicant mitigated concerns regarding foreign
preference. 
With regard to concerns raised regarding foreign influence, due consideration of
the whole-person is given beyond those referenced in terms of the available mitigating
conditions. Applicant maintains an emotionally neutral relationship with his brother, who
is considerably older, declined to move with his family from Russia to the United States
nearly 20 years ago, and whose wife and child Applicant has never met. Their level of
communication seems to have been heightened when the brother was seeking to
immigrate to the United States. That communication is now more sporadic, which
seems appropriate given their disparate ages, distance, and their minimal contact. Such
factors tend to rebut the presumption of a close relationship between immediate family
members. Moreover, Applicant’s non-familial acquaintance with a Russian national
appears to be politely casual, and not close enough to raise concerns. 
12
One element increasing the foreign influence security concern is Applicant’s
wife’s frequent contacts with her parents and brother. While Applicant has minimal
contact with these extended family members, such marital contacts and relations are
regularly imputed to the applicant in these proceedings. Based on the regularity of the
contact between Applicant’s wife and both her parents and her brother, and in absence
of evidence to the contrary, these individuals must be assumed to share a close familial
relationship. Due to their citizenship and, with regard to Applicant’s parents-in-law, their
residency, these kin are vulnerable to Russian coercion and non-coercive measures.
Moreover, in failing to provide sufficient evidence that his parents-in-law are not
constructively or effectively Russian government employees, there is the risk that the
Russian government could exert pressure on them by threatening their employment or
any future pensions. Moreover, Russia is known to threaten its neighbors and has
demonstrated a disregard of the rule of law. Such behavior is additionally troublesome.
Consequently, the potential for illegal or coercive practices to obtain sensitive
information through Applicant’s parents-in-law remains an issue.
There are significant factors supporting Applicant’s application for ADP access to
sensitive information. Applicant was highly credible in his testimony. He arrived in the
United States with his parents as a child. Applicant and his parents quickly decided to
start the process for gaining U.S. citizenship. Applicant excelled in school, worked his
way through college, and completed a competitive post-graduate certification program
for business professionals at a prestigious university. He remains close to his parents,
who are settled in the United States. When he married, he and his wife chose to remain
in the United States. They are planning on raising their child, who is a native-born U.S.
citizen, in this country. Applicant has embarked on a successful professional career
here. At age 30, he has accumulated a high degree of financial comfort and has earned
the admiration of his professional superiors. His considerable financial assets, career,
social life, and family are in this country, where he has also been civically active in his
community. He has no financial ties or investments in Russia. Applicant freely
surrendered his Russian passport to his security officer with the full knowledge that its
destruction constructively barred his reentry to that country. He has neither the desire
nor the current ability to return to Russia. He is devoted to the United States, takes
pride in his U.S. citizenship, and plans to build a life for his growing family here. Finally,
although his in-laws are Russian citizens, they apparently lead quiet lives. There is no
evidence they have had any conflict with or scrutiny by their government. 
A case under Guideline B or Guideline C involving Russia does not call for
automatic denial, but does warrant a thorough consideration of the facts. In a 2006
decision, the Appeal Board held the Administrative Judge properly determined under
the “whole-person” concept that an applicant with very significant connections to Russia
had mitigated security concerns under Guideline B. In ISCR Case No. 03-04300 (2006
 The Appal Board in that case reversed the Administrative Judge’s decision to grant a clearance because31
of the strict requirements of the Money Memorandum (Applicant in the underlying case had not relinquished
her Russian passport by the close of evidence). 
 As in the instant case, there is no clear indication whether this woman or this applicant’s father-in-law are32
employed by Russian Federation educational institutions. 
13
DOHA Lexis 264 at *17-*21 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2006),  the applicant had weekly31
contact with her mother (an engineer employed by a Russian educational institution and
who lives in Russia),  contact three times per year with her aunt (who lives in Russia),32
contact about four times a year with her father-in-law (a physicist who work for a
science society and who lives in Russia); and multiple annual contacts with other
relatives living in Israel. Her son, who was born in Russia, later became a naturalized
U.S. citizen. That applicant had visited her family in Russia and Israel on multiple
occasions after she immigrated to the United States. Moreover, she owned a half
interest in her mother’s apartment in Russia, and provided financial support to both her
mother and aunt. The Administrative Judge’s whole-person analysis (that the Appeal
Board determined was sufficient to mitigate such significant foreign influence security
concerns) stated: 
Looking at all of [whole person] factors, I conclude Applicant has overcome foreign
influence security concerns. Given her strong ties to the U.S. and her limited
contact with Russia and Israel since she became a U.S. naturalized citizen, there
is limited potential for coercion, exploitation or duress. (E.2.2.1.8. The potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress.)  All of her immediate family are in the
U.S., and the majority of her financial ties are in the U.S. Applicant has been a
naturalized U.S. citizen for over fifteen years. She returned to Russia in April 2005
to abjure her Russian citizenship and has had limited visits with her mother, aunt
and father-in-law in 1995 and 2002. She provides minimal support to her mother
and aunt. She has only visited her sister and family in Israel in 1991, 1994, and
1997. While she has contact with her relatives in Russia and her relatives in Israel,
that contact is limited.  While her niece serves in the Israeli military, she has limited
contact with her.  Clearly, she put her interests in the U.S. ahead of her loyalty to
her elderly mother when she chose to renounce her Russian citizenship.
Given her long history with her employer since April 2000, it is unlikely that she
could be exploited by coercive or non-coercive means by the government in
Russia or in Israel in a way that could force Applicant to choose between loyalty to
her mother, aunt, father-in-law, her sibling and family and her loyalty to the United
States. She stated that should any such attempt be made she would immediately
contact the appropriate U.S. authorities. Thus, any risk of either coercive or non-
coercive foreign duress or influence on Applicant and/or her immediate family
would appear to be slight and clearly manageable. Contacts with citizens of other
countries are relevant to security determinations only if they make an individual
potentially vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure through threats against
those foreign relatives.
 In ISCR Case No. 03-04300, the applicant’s connections to the United States are as follows: (1) the33
applicant’s husband and son live in the United States and they are both dual-citizens of Russia and the U.S.;
and (2) the applicant had lived in the United States since 1989. The applicant in that case was a professional
with doctoral-level teaching employment.
 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).34
14
Although clearance decisions are inherently based on numerous facts, and
as such are made after a case-by-case analysis, it is beyond debate that the
applicant in ISCR Case No. 03-04300 had more significant connections to Russia
than either the Applicant or Applicant’s wife does in this case.  I found Applicant33
highly credible, in his personal demeanor, persuasive testimony, references to
mitigating facts, and overall presentation. I also considered the risks posed by the
country at issue. After carefully weighing the evidence of his connections to
Russia, and to the United States, I conclude that Applicant has carried his burden
of fully mitigating the foreign influence and foreign preference security concerns
raised in connection to his application for a public trust positon. 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v.
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person
factors”  and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under34
the Adjudicative Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the
AG. For the reasons stated, I find Applicant is eligible for a position of public trust. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a-2.h: For Applicant
15
            Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances  presented by the record in this case,  it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a public
trust position. Access to sensitive information is granted.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
