 
 
1 
 
 
                                           
                                                          DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07283 
                                                                      )     
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits in this case, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. Her eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
On July 15, 2010, Applicant completed and certified an Electronic Questionnaire 
for Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On February 4, 2011, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial Considerations.1 The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
1 The caption on the SOR sent to Applicant did not spell her first name correctly. I have corrected the 
spelling of her first name on the caption of this decision.  
  
 
2 
 
 
                                           
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant provided a notarized answer to the SOR, dated March 7, 2011, and 
requested that her case be determined on the written record. The Government compiled 
its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on March 30, 2011. The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 10. By letter dated April 6, 2011, DOHA 
forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any additional 
information and/or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file on 
May 9, 2011. Her response was due on June 8, 2011.  
 
Applicant filed additional information within the required time period. Department 
Counsel did not object to Applicant’s response to the FORM. However, Department 
Counsel filed a Memorandum for Administrative Judge, dated June 9, 2011, in which 
she pointed out additional collateral matters, not alleged on the SOR, that were raised 
by Applicant’s information. On June 21, 2011, the case was assigned to me for a 
decision. I marked Applicant’s response to the FORM as Item A and entered it in the 
record. I marked Department Counsel’s Memorandum to Administrative Judge as Item 
11, and I left the record of the case open and provided Applicant with additional time to 
respond to Department Counsel’s Memorandum. Applicant did not respond to the 
Memorandum. I closed the administrative record on Friday, July 22, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains two allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG F, Financial 
Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.). In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted in 
part SOR ¶ 1.a. and provided additional information. She denied the allegation at SOR ¶ 
1.b. Applicant’s admission is entered as a finding of fact. (Item 1; Item 4.) 
  
 The facts in this case are established by the record provided by the Government 
and by information provided by Applicant in response to the FORM. The record 
evidence includes Applicant’s July 15, 2010 e-QIP; official investigation and agency 
records; Applicant’s responses to DOHA interrogatories;2 Applicant’s credit reports of 
February 19, 2000, July 27, 2010, and November 24, 2010; and records of the Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS), provided by Applicant, dated April 13, 2011. (See Items 5 
through 11; Item A.) 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old and employed by a federal contractor as a business 
analyst. She has worked for her present employer since August 1985. She was first 
granted a security clearance in 2000, and she now seeks renewal of her clearance. 
(Item 5.) 
 
2Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
(OPM) on August 9, 2010. After reviewing the investigator’s report, Applicant signed a statement, dated 
January 21, 2010, in which she agreed that the investigator’s report accurately reflected her August 9, 
2010 interview. (Item 7.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
 A.)   
                                           
 Applicant is the mother of two adult children. She has been married four times. 
She was married for the first time in 1975. She and her first husband divorced in 1980. 
Applicant married for a second time in 1981. She and her second husband divorced in 
1983. In 1986, Applicant married for a third time. She and her third husband divorced in 
1990, and Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy in 1991. In 2001, Applicant remarried 
her third husband, who owns and operates a dental laboratory business. Applicant and 
her husband file joint federal income returns. (Item 4; Item 5; Item 10; Item A.)  
 
 In response to financial questions on her e-QIP, Applicant acknowledged that 
she was currently delinquent on a federal debt. She also reported that, in January 2009, 
she and her husband had satisfied a federal tax lien for federal taxes owed in 2005 and 
2006. Applicant’s credit report of July 27, 2010, confirmed that in February 2009, 
Applicant had satisfied a federal tax lien for $20,879, which had been filed against her 
and her husband in September 2008. (Item 5, 40-43; Item 9.) 
 
 When she was interviewed by an OPM investigator in August 2010, Applicant 
acknowledged that she and her husband owed approximately $40,000 to $60,000 in 
federal tax delinquencies. The SOR alleges that Applicant owes the Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) $38,493 for a tax lien entered against her in January 2006 (SOR ¶ 1.a.).3 
In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the unpaid tax lien. She stated that the 
lien arose when her husband’s business declined, clients did not pay him, and he fell 
behind in paying his federal taxes. She stated that she and her husband were in contact 
with the IRS and were attempting to arrange a payment plan. To corroborate her 
assertion that she and her husband were in contact with IRS regarding payment, 
Applicant provided a letter from the IRS, dated December 13, 2010, addressed to 
Applicant and her husband, reporting that it was still processing information and would 
contact them within 45 days regarding payment of a federal tax delinquency for the tax 
period ending December 31, 2007. This federal tax delinquency was not alleged on the 
SOR. (Item 7 at 3; Item 1; Item 4 at 1; Item 6 at 5.) 
 
 In her response to the FORM, Applicant provided a letter from the IRS, dated 
April 13, 2011, accepting a proposal from Applicant and her husband to pay their 
delinquent federal taxes in monthly installments. The IRS letter identified the following 
tax periods as subject to the payment plan: December 31, 2004; December 31, 2005; 
December 31, 2007; December 31, 2008; December 31, 2009; and December 31, 
2010. The IRS letter specified that Applicant and her husband would pay $4,000 a 
month until the tax delinquencies were satisfied.4 The total amount of Applicant’s 
federal tax delinquency was not specified in the record. (Item
 
 
3 Applicant’s credit report of July 27, 2010, lists an unsatisfied federal tax lien of $38,493, filed against her 
in January 2006. (Item 9 at 5.)  
 
4 The letter also stated that the IRS would apply any federal tax refunds due to Applicant and her 
husband to the reduction of their total tax liability. The record does not reflect that any payments were 
made under the April 2011 payment plan. (Item A.) 
 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
 On January 11, 2011, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant prepared a 
personal financial statement. She reported that her monthly net salary was $4,685 and 
her husband’s net monthly income was $6,600, for a total net family monthly income of 
$11,285. Applicant listed $2,254 in monthly living expenses. Each month, she makes 
$6,204 in debt payments to creditors.5 Applicant’s net monthly remainder is $2,827. 
Applicant’s personal financial statement does not list payments on the federal tax lien 
entered against her in 2006. (Item 6 at 3-4.) 
 
 Applicant listed the following assets: real estate, $20,000; vehicles, $25,000; and 
retirement fund, $136,000. In her answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that she planned 
to withdraw money from her retirement fund, identified as her Voluntary Investment Plan 
(VIP), to pay her federal income tax delinquencies. (Item 4 at 1-2; Item 6 at 3-4.)   
 
 In her interview with the OPM investigator, Applicant denied a $93 debt to a 
communications company. She denied the debt, also alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b., in her 
answer to the SOR. She provided documentation establishing that she had written to 
the creditor to contest the debt on August 10, 2010. The debt appears on Applicant’s 
credit report of July 27, 2010, but it does not appear on her credit report of November 
24, 2010. (Item 6 at 6; Item 7 at 4; Item 8; Item 9.)  
 
 The record does not reflect that Applicant has had financial credit counseling.   
 
                                           Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
5 On her personal financial statement, Applicant listed two loans from her Voluntary Investment Plan 
(VIP) with her employer. One loan was for $24,000; the other was for $5,000. Each month Applicant pays 
$871 on the first VIP loan and $597 on the second VIP loan. (Item 6 at 3.) 
   
 
5 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
 Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information). 
   
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
 
6 
 
 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns in this 
case. Under AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially 
disqualifying.  Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ 
may raise security concerns.   
 
Applicant is responsible for an unsatisfied federal tax lien of $38,493, entered 
against her in January 2006. Additionally, the IRS payment plan she submitted in her 
response to the FORM suggests that she owes additional federal tax delinquencies. 
Applicant has been steadily employed since 1985, but she failed to demonstrate that 
she had satisfied the federal tax lien, which has existed for over five years. This 
evidence is sufficient to raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c). 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions 
could apply to the security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. 
Unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if it “happened so long ago, was so 
infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” 
(AG ¶ 20(a)). Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s 
control, (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.”  (AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might 
apply specify that “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” 
(AG ¶ 20(c)) or “the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts” (AG ¶ 20 (d)).  Finally, security concerns related to financial 
delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)). 
   
Applicant has a history of financial delinquencies. Despite a substantial monthly 
net remainder, she made no effort for several years to satisfy a federal income tax lien 
of $38,493. The lien remains unsatisfied. Applicant’s failure to resolve the federal lien 
casts doubt on her reliability and judgment. While Applicant merits credit for contacting 
the IRS and working out a payment plan to resolve her federal tax delinquencies, there 
is no record of payment at this time. Under the terms of her payment agreement, 
Applicant is required to pay the IRS $4,000 every month until her federal tax debts are 
satisfied. Her required monthly payments exceed her net monthly remainder. Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
has stated that she intends to use her retirement savings to satisfy her unpaid federal 
tax lien. However, the record does not reflect that she has allocated financial resources 
to pay or otherwise satisfy this financial delinquency. In determining an individual's 
security worthiness, the Government cannot rely on the possibility that an applicant 
might resolve his or her outstanding debts at some future date. ISCR Case No. 98-0614 
at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 1999).  
 
Applicant attributed her tax delinquency to a downturn in her husband’s business. 
While this unfortunate reversal was beyond her control, she failed to provide 
documentation that when she learned of the tax lien in 2006, she informed the IRS of 
her financial hardship and requested forbearance or reduced payment arrangements. 
While Applicant may have been unable to control the effects of the economic downturn 
on her husband’s business income, she failed to show that she acted reasonably under 
the circumstances. 
 
Applicant has worked for her current employer since 1985. Despite this apparent 
financial and employment stability, Applicant failed to demonstrate that she made a 
good-faith effort to satisfy her federal tax lien. She has not had financial counseling, and 
there is no evidence that her husband’s business has recovered or that her financial 
situation is under control. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) do not 
apply in mitigation to SOR ¶ 1.a. 
 
Applicant denied SOR ¶ 1.b., and she provided documentation establishing that 
she had contested the debt. The debt does not appear on her most recent credit report. 
I conclude that AG ¶ 20(e) applies in mitigation to the $93 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.b.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.    
     
 
8 
 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult. Her 
husband’s business was affected by an economic downturn. The record is not clear 
about the onset or the duration of the downturn that affected Applicant’s husband’s 
business. Applicant attributes their federal tax delinquencies to difficulties in her 
husband’s business. It would appear from the documentation provided by Applicant that 
she and her husband are responsible for federal tax delinquencies that arose over 
several years. Applicant continues to be responsible for an unresolved federal tax lien of 
over $38,000, which dates to 2006. She has had a steady job with the same employer 
for 26 years, and she and her husband report a net monthly income of over $11,000. 
While they recently agreed to pay the IRS $4,000 monthly to resolve their tax debts, 
they failed to provide evidence of timely payments.   
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with doubts about Applicant’s eligibility 
and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude that Applicant failed to mitigate the 
security concerns arising from her financial delinquencies.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:          Against Applicant 
   
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant  
  
                                                          Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_______________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
