                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-03233 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O'Neal, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald C. Sykstus, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 20, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to renew a security clearance for his position with a 
defense contractor. His access to classified information was continued. In late 2009, an 
adverse information report concerning Applicant's conduct was forwarded by law 
enforcement sources to the appropriate security officials. After reviewing the results of 
an ensuing background investigation completed on February 21, 2010, adjudicators for 
the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant two 
interrogatories to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying information. After reviewing 
the results of the background investigations and Applicant's responses to the 
Interrogatories, DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative findings required to 
issue a security clearance. On November 24, 2010, DOHA issued a Statement of 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns for personal conduct under 
Guideline E. These actions were taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective in the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Applicant 
acknowledged receipt of the SOR on November 30, 2010. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 8, 2010. He admitted the five 
allegations under Guideline E, and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. 
Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 24, 2011. The case was 
assigned to me on February 23, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on March 18, 
2011, for a hearing on April 6, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled. The 
Government offered three exhibits, which I marked and admitted into the record without 
objections as Government exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 3. Applicant and seven 
witnesses testified on his behalf. Applicant offered six exhibits which I marked and 
admitted into the record without objection as Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex.) A through F. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 26, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact. Applicant admitted the five allegations under 
personal conduct. His admissions are included in my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 36-year-old systems engineer. He graduated from high school in 
1993 and worked for a US Army non-appropriated activity. He returned to college and 
earned an associates degree in computer information systems in 2003 and started 
working for a defense contractor as a systems engineer. He recently was hired by the 
government as a GS-12 systems engineer. Applicant first marriage ended in divorce. He 
married his present wife in 2005 and they have one child. Applicant has held a security 
clearance since August 2005. His wife works for a defense contractor. (Tr. 16-25; Gov. 
Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated July 20, 2007)  
 
Applicant always had some problem with his knees. The pain became so severe 
that he went to his family doctor for treatment on March 4, 2009. His doctor had been 
his family doctor for a few years. He informed her of the pain and she prescribed 
Lortab1 to ease the pain and referred him to an orthopedic specialist. The specialist sent 
him for tests and gave him a second prescription for Lortab consisting of 7.5 milligrams 
of hydrocodone and 350 miligrams of tylenol. The doctor recommended that Applicant 
have surgery on the knee. He had knee surgery on April 24, 2009. Prior to the 
operation, Applicant took approximately four Lortab per day as prescribed by his doctor. 
(Tr. 25-32) 
 
1 The name of the drug is spelled wrong in the SOR. The correct spelling is used in the decision. 
 
3 
 
 
Hydrocodone is in a group of drugs called narcotic pain reliever. Acetaminophen 
is a less potent pain reliever that increases the effects of hydrocodone. Hydrocodone 
may be habit-forming and should be used only by the person for whom it was 
prescribed. It must be taken exactly as prescribed by a physician. It must not be taken 
in larger amounts, used for longer than recommended by the physician, and should 
never be given to another person, especially someone who has a history of drug abuse 
or addiction. It can cause side effects that may impair thinking or reactions. (See 
Physician's Desk Reference, Medical Economics) 
 
A few days after the surgery, Applicant returned to work using crutches for 
support. As he entered a classified work area, he tripped and severely twisted the knee 
that had been operated on. He was in considerable constant pain. He returned to the 
orthopedic surgeon, had the knee drained, and the doctor tried various medications and 
treatments, including continued use of Lortab, to ease the knee pain. His knee and pain 
did improve over time. Applicant would receive a prescription for the drug from his 
doctor with approximately a 14 day supply. There were no refills authorized. If he 
needed more pills, he had to call the doctor's office and receive a new prescription. 
Applicant estimates he received approximately 15 new prescriptions over the time he 
was taking the drug starting in March 2009. In June 2009, Applicant's doctor started to 
reduce his use of Lortab by reducing the number of pills he could take each day. 
Applicant experienced some side effects from the lower dosage of Lortab such as a lack 
of energy and a sick feeling all of the time. He could not eat well and lost weight. Since 
his wife had their first child about the same time, he also did not get much sleep 
because of the baby and the knee pain. (Tr. 32-34, 59-65) 
 
Applicant did not inform either his family doctor or the specialist that he was 
experiencing side effects from the reduced number of Lortab. He admits that he 
received proper medical advice but he did not follow the directions of his doctor. 
Instead, Applicant consulted a web site on how to obtain Lortab over the internet without 
a prescription. That web site provided detailed instructions on how to purchase online, 
pay for the order, and accept delivery. The directions were to use an address other than 
a home address, not send money or a credit card number, but use a fictitious Western 
Union money order number. In July 2009, Applicant submitted an order to a web site for 
Lortab. The only dosage of the drug he could order was for a higher dosage pill 
containing 10 milligrams hydrocodone and 500 milligrams tylenol. He did not have a 
prescription for the additional drugs or for that level of dosage. He still had a valid 
prescription from his doctor to order in the normal way. When he ordered over the 
internet as instructed in the original web site, Applicant provided an address for a vacant 
house a block from his house, and a false Western Union money order number. The 
cost of the drug at his pharmacy was approximately $30 for the 14 day supply. The 
price for the drug over the internet was $500. Applicant was provided a United Parcel 
Service (UPS) tracking number so he could track the shipment. Applicant monitored the 
vacant house and the tracking number. When the delivery was left at the house, he 
picked up the package containing approximately 30 Lortab pills. (Tr. 34-35, 59-67, 78-
79) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Later in July, Applicant used the same procedure and ordered more Lortab. 
When the package was delivered to the vacant house, it contained only a Mexican 
telephone book. Applicant placed another order in September 2009 using the same 
procedures, and received a UPS tracking number. This time when he checked the 
tracking number, he was advised to call UPS. He called UPS from his office phone on a 
military installation and was told him that he had to go to a certain location to pick up the 
package. Realizing that he was doing something illegal by ordering drugs over the 
internet, using a fake Western Union money gram number, and having the drugs 
delivered to a vacant house, Applicant decided not to retrieve the package. However, 
Applicant's calls to UPS were monitored by law enforcement. Three law enforcement 
personnel came to the military installation and took Applicant to the police station. He 
was questioned but released. The police initially thought he was a drug dealer, but after 
learning Applicant purchased the drug for his own use, released him. No criminal 
charges are pending. At the time Applicant was placing these orders and taking more 
pills than prescribed, he held a security clearance. (Tr. 34-40, 67-72) 
 
Applicant realized he was doing something wrong by ordering drugs over the 
internet but he continued to do it. He received adequate medical advice, he just decided 
not to follow that advice. After leaving the police station, Applicant realized he was 
addicted to Lortab. He requested assistance from his company's Employee Assistance 
Program (EAP). The counselor at the program advised him to go home, tell his wife 
what he had done, and see his family doctor. That night, Applicant told his wife and the 
next day he told his family doctor about his addiction to Lortab. His doctor was 
concerned about withdrawing him from the drug because of other health issues. She 
sent him to a substance abuse facility for withdrawal. Applicant went to that facility the 
same day but they did not have room to admit him, Immediately, Applicant went to 
another recommended facility. At the second facility, he was provided a prescription to 
manage the side effects of withdrawal from Lortab and advised to see a specialist. He 
called that specialist but the specialist was no longer taking new patients. He kept his 
family doctor apprised of each activity. (Tr. 40-43, 72-73, 80-81) 
 
A few days later he was able to get an appointment with a different specialist. 
This specialist prescribed a new drug, to assist him in stopping the addiction to Lortab. 
While this doctor could prescribe the drug, he had difficulty with the pharmacy accepting 
the prescription. Applicant returned to his family doctor who directed him to a doctor in 
her practice that could prescribe the medication. He signed a commitment letter with 
this doctor that he would not seek other drugs, the drugs were for his personal use, and 
he would not sell the drug. When he started to take the new prescribed medication, he 
flushed the remaining Lortab down the toilet. His prescription was for only a two week 
supply with no refill. He had to return to the doctor's office to receive a new prescription 
every few weeks. He used the medication from September 2009 until February 2010 
when he was released by the doctor. His family doctor also advised him to attend a 
substance abuse program provided by a local church. (Tr. 40-46, 73-78; App. Ex. G, 
Doctor's Letter, dated March 30, 2011)   
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant attended the substance abuse program at the church. The program 
consisted of one group meeting a week. He attended this program from September 
2009 until January 2010 when he was released from treatment by his doctor. The last 
Lortab he took was on September 25, 2009. He has made all of his doctors and 
pharmacists aware of his addiction to Lortab. (Tr. 46-51) 
 
Applicant and his former wife rented an apartment and subleased part of it to a 
high school friend who helped with the rent. The high school friend brought in one of his 
friends who also stayed at the apartment. In June 1997, Applicant and his wife went on 
vacation. The second person in the apartment was staying by himself so he purchased 
some marijuana to sell from the apartment. When Applicant and his wife returned from 
vacation, he was apprehended. He was charged with the sale of marijuana since his 
name was on the apartment lease. The charged was reduced to a misdemeanor for 
possession of marijuana. At the time, Applicant was scheduled for overseas assignment 
by his defense contractor employer. He was to be paid a significant salary. Applicant 
wanted to take the overseas job because he and his wife needed the money. He was 
advised by his attorney to plead guilty since the offense of possession of marijuana was 
a misdemeanor and the guilty pleas would resolve the issue. Applicant pled guilty. He 
was advised at the time by his facility security officer (FSO) that the possession of 
marijuana offense would be a security clearance issue for him. He has always included 
this offense in response to questions on his security clearance applications. The issue 
was adjudicated in 2003. He initially had difficulty receiving a clearance but eventually 
he was cleared. He received at least one more favorable clearance decision since then. 
(Tr. 48-59)  
 
A Government employee testified that she worked for the company Applicant 
initially worked for over 15 years. She was a team lead and the person who hired 
Applicant. She saw him almost every day on the job for a number of years. Applicant 
was an excellent employee and has an excellent reputation for dependability and ethical 
conduct. She has held a security clearance for many years. She is aware of the 
Government's security clearance concerns. This does not alter her opinion of Applicant 
and she would still hire him. (Tr. 84-90) 
 
A witness who was one of Applicant's co-workers and also a college professor in 
computer security testified that she initially worked with Applicant. Later when she was 
promoted, she hired Applicant to work in her department. Applicant was working for her 
in her department when he had knee surgery in summer 2009. She is aware of the 
Government's security concerns and it does not affect her opinion of his security 
worthiness. Applicant was open with her when he worked for her about his addiction to 
Lortab after the knee surgery. She believes he is trustworthy, reliable, and has good 
judgment. (Tr. 90-98) 
 
A co-worker, who is also a pastor, testified that he and Applicant worked together 
for approximately a year. He saw Applicant on a daily basis. Applicant's work reputation 
was one of dedication to the job, and meeting requirements and responsibilities. He is 
aware of the security clearance concerns and does not see a problem with Applicant's 
 
6 
 
 
security worthiness. He has no problems working with Applicant. As a pastor, he sees 
Applicant as a dedicated husband and focused father. As a person with substance 
abuse counseling experience, he believes Applicant has a good prognosis. He values 
and trusts his judgment and honesty. (Tr. 98-106) 
 
Another co-worker testified that she has worked with Applicant since about 2005. 
She would see him daily. Applicant was very serious about carefully handling classified 
information. She is aware of the security concerns. She was surprised about his 
addiction to Lortab, but she would still work with him. She does not think he would do it 
again. She considers him to be trustworthy and reliable. (Tr. 106-112) 
 
A government employee testified that he worked with Applicant when they both 
worked for the defense contractor starting in 2006. He worked with Applicant when he 
had his knee surgery in 2009. He described Applicant as ethical and hardworking. He 
knew Applicant was in pain after his knee surgery. He is aware of the security concerns, 
and he has no issues with Applicant having access to classified information. He never 
saw any issue with Applicant's handling of classified information. He would be pleased 
to continue working with Applicant. (Tr. 112-121) 
An associate pastor from Applicant's church testified he has known Applicant for 
about two years and his family for several years before that. He is aware of Applicant's 
problems with Lortab since Applicant came to him for assistance and pastoral advice in 
the fall of 2009. Applicant knew he had a terrible problem and he wanted advice as to 
how to manage his problem. Applicant did not appear to have an addictive personality 
so he suggested that Applicant work with the church's addiction recovery program. This 
is the same recovery program suggested to Applicant by his doctor. He knows that 
Applicant attended the program and dealt with his problem very effectively. He believes 
Applicant's problem with Lortab was an isolated incident. (Tr. 121-128)  
 
Applicant's wife testified that she has been a Government employee for 
approximately three years and holds a security clearance. Before his knee surgery, 
Applicant had terrible knee pain. After his surgery, his pain continued and his knee 
swelled from physical therapy. At home her husband was fine and she had no idea he 
had an addiction problem. She knew he was taking the medication but did not know 
there was a problem. He told her one day he was addicted to the pain pills so both of 
them went to see their family doctor. When Applicant was advised to cut back on the 
number of pills he took, he seemed earnest in his efforts. It was not easy but he 
followed the doctor's directions. He earnestly attended the recovery program at church. 
She has no concerns about him slipping back into an addiction. She was aware of 
Applicant's previous issue with a security clearance because of a marijuana possession 
conviction. She knows that he is aware that similar conduct could cause him a security 
issue. (Tr. 128-141)  
 
Applicant introduced his performance appraisals from 2005 until 2010. The 
appraisals were uniformly excellent. (App. Ex. B through F, various dates) Applicant 
 
7 
 
 
also presented a certificate provided to his team for being the Team of the Month in 
October 2010. (App. Ex. A, dated October 29, 2010)  
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or protect 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 A security concern is raised because conduct involving questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. (AG ¶ 15) Personal conduct is always a security concern because 
it asks the central question does the person’s past conduct justify confidence the person 
can be entrusted to properly safeguard classified information.  
 
 Applicant ordered a drug for which he did not have a prescription over the 
internet on three occasions. He used an address for a vacant house for delivery and 
provided a false money order for payment. He received the drug on only the first 
occasion. He also pled and was found guilty of marijuana possession in 1997. These 
fact raise Personal Conduct Disqualifying Condition (PC DC) AG ¶ 16(c) (credible 
adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not sufficient for an 
adverse determination under any other single guideline, but which, when considered as 
a whole, supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not properly 
safeguard protected information); and AG ¶ 16(e) (personal conduct, or concealment of 
information about one's conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in activities which, if know, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing,).  
 
 Applicant was prescribed a drug by his doctor for knee pain. When the doctor 
tried to cut his dosage, he did not tell the doctor he was experiencing side effects from 
the lesser dosage. Instead, Applicant ordered more pills without a prescription over the 
internet. He used false information to have the drugs delivered to a vacant house and to 
avoid having to pay for them. This type of conduct is covered under different security 
guideline provisions and shows questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, lack of 
candor, and an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations. His personal, 
professional, and community standing would be affected if his conduct was known. 
Applicant admitted and the Government established SOR allegations 1.a through 1.e. 
 
 The Government produced sufficient evidence to establish the disqualifying 
conditions as required in AG ¶¶ 16(c), and 16(e). The burden shifted to Applicant to 
produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns under 
financial considerations. An applicant has the burden to refute an established allegation 
or prove a mitigating condition, and the burden to prove or disprove it never shifts to the 
Government. Applicant raised conditions that may mitigate the security concern 
 
 I have considered Personal Conduct Mitigating Condition (PC MC) AG ¶ 17(c) 
(the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unique circumstances that is unlikely to recur and does not 
 
9 
 
 
cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment); and AG 
¶17(d) (the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to 
change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, 
circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate 
behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur); and AG ¶ 17(e) (the individual has 
taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress). These mitigating conditions apply.  
 
 Applicant was addicted to Lortab. When his doctor tried to cut his dosage, 
instead of discussing his addiction problem and side effects of withdrawal with the 
doctor, he turned to the internet and ordered more of the drug without a prescription. He 
used a vacant house for delivery and provided a false money order number. He tried 
this three times, succeeding only once. Applicant's actions were ill-advised, showed 
poor judgment, and a lack of candor, leading to concerns about his untrustworthiness 
and reliability. Applicant knew at the time such conduct could create security problems 
because of a past incident of marijuana possession that affected his security clearance 
approval. His addiction problem arose from receiving medically prescribed drugs for 
knee pain. However, when Applicant was confronted by law enforcement about his 
activities in ordering illegal drugs over the internet, he immediately turned to the medical 
professionals and sought help for his addiction. He followed their medical advice and 
was weaned from the drug. He also attended a substance abuse program. His problem 
of ignoring medical advice and purchasing pills over the internet is unlikely to recur. He 
was released from medical care for substance abuse and the substance abuse program 
in January 2010, over 18 months ago. His last use of the illegal drug was almost two 
years ago in September 2009. Applicant took positive steps to resolve his problem 
when confronted with the issue by law enforcement. He immediately sought help for his 
problem. These positive steps relieved the issue of vulnerability and manipulation and 
eliminated the stressors causing inappropriate behavior. Applicant by his rehabilitation 
efforts mitigated the security concerns for personal conduct. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 
10 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the testimony of his 
supervisors, friends, and fellow employees concerning his reputation for honesty, 
candor, reliability, judgment, and trustworthiness. I considered his reputation as an 
excellent employee and his record of accomplishments. Applicant was prescribed a 
narcotic drug by his physician to ease his knee pain. When the doctor tried to reduce 
the dosage, Applicant ordered the narcotic drug over the internet without a valid 
physician's prescription three times from June through September 2009. He ordered the 
drug for his own use to ease pain and not for the distribution or sale of the drug to 
others. His actions were reckless and irresponsible and showed poor judgment, lack of 
candor, and untrustworthiness. However, he realized his inappropriate actions when 
questioned by law enforcement. He immediately sought help for his addiction to the 
drug from his family physician. He followed the medical advice to stop the addiction and 
attended a substance abuse program. His last use of the drug was in September 2009. 
By February 2010, he was no longer addicted and was released from the substance 
abuse program and medical care for addiction. He continues to see his family physician 
who is aware of his prior addiction. He mitigated the security concerns by following 
medical advice, successfully completing a substance abuse program, and not abusing 
drugs for almost two years. His actions in rehabilitation indicate that he will properly 
handle, manage, and safeguard classified information. The record evidence leaves me 
without questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the personal 
conduct security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.e:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
