 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01496 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace L. Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 2, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 28, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was originally assigned to another judge on 
November 5, 2010. The case was reassigned to a second judge on January 3, 2011. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 6, 2011, setting the hearing for January 
 
2 
 
26, 2011. The hearing was cancelled and rescheduled for February 16, 2011. The 
hearing was held as rescheduled, but the Applicant requested a continuance to obtain 
counsel. The continuance was granted. The case was reassigned to me on March 2, 
2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 10, 2011, scheduling the hearing for 
April 12, 2011. Because of the threat of a government-wide shutdown, the case was 
rescheduled for May 10, 2011. The hearing was held as rescheduled. The Government 
offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
The Government’s exhibit list was marked as hearing exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified 
and offered exhibits (AE) A through C, which were admitted into evidence without 
objection. The record was held open for Applicant to submit additional information. 
Applicant submitted exhibits AE D through J, which were admitted without objection. 
Department Counsel’s forwarding memorandum is marked as HE II. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on May 18, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a defense contractor. For the past 12 
years he has worked in telephone maintenance for his employer. He has a bachelor’s 
degree in business administration. He is married and has one adult child. He served in 
the Air Force from 1975 to 1981 and was discharged with an honorable discharge in the 
pay grade of E-5.1  
 
 The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts in the amount of about $42,000. The 
debts were listed on credit reports obtained on September 23, 2009, March 25, 2010, 
and November 3, 2010. Applicant admitted owing the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b – 1.e 
and 1.g – 1.i. He disputes the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f.  
 
 In 2005, Applicant borrowed approximately $100,000 from his in-laws. He 
needed this money to pay his existing debts and expenses. Under the terms of his 
agreement with his in-laws, he would pay approximately $5,000 per month for two 
years. His in-laws acquired the money by taking out a loan from a bank. He eventually 
paid this loan approximately two years ago. He no longer owes anything to his in-laws 
and the underlying loan from the bank was also paid. However, as a result of Applicant 
using all of his resources to pay the in-laws’ loan, he did not have the funds to pay his 
other obligations, including the SOR debts.2    
 
 In 2008, Applicant sought out the assistance of a debt management agency in an 
attempt to consolidate his debts. The debt management agency collected a monthly 
service fee for their assistance. The fee was in excess of $5,000, and had to be paid in 
full before they would contact creditors. Applicant paid the fee for several months, but 
since his creditors were still seeking payment while he paid the debt management 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 5, 25-26; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 27-28; GE 2. 
 
 
3 
 
agency’s fee, he decided to forego their service and work directly with his creditors to 
settle his debts.3 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is a judgment in the amount of $2,499 that has 
been satisfied. This debt resulted from a consumer loan. This debt is resolved.4 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a credit card debt in the amount of $1,253. 
Applicant claims he has contacted the creditor to work out a payment arrangement, but 
nothing has developed. This debt remains unpaid with no repayment agreement in 
place.5   
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is a credit card debt in the amount of $4,053. This 
debt is unresolved.6 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is a consumer debt in the amount of $639 
Applicant contacted the creditor but no payment plan was implemented. This debt is 
unresolved.7 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is a consumer debt in the amount of $2,432. 
Applicant contacted the creditor but no payment plan was implemented. This debt is 
unresolved.8 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is a credit card debt in the amount of $8,878. 
Applicant provided documentation showing this debt was paid. This debt is resolved.9 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is a consumer debt in the amount of $3,570. 
Applicant made one $25 payment toward this debt on April 30, 2011. He provided no 
other payment information. This debt is unresolved.10 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is a consumer debt in the amount of $8,262. 
Applicant made a series of payments toward this debt. This debt is under control.11 
                                                          
3 GE 2; AE B. 
 
4 Tr. at 30-31; GE 2; AE A at p. 4. 
 
5 Tr. at 31-32; GE 2; AE A at p. 8. 
 
6 Tr. at 32; GE 2; AE A at p. 7. 
 
7 Tr. at 33; GE 2; AE A at p. 13. 
 
8 Tr. at 34; GE 2; AE A at 12. 
 
9 Tr. at 34-36; GE 2; AE A at pp. 5, 17-18, AE H. 
 
10 Tr. at 36-37; GE 3; AE G. 
 
11 Tr. at 38-44; GE 3; AE A at pp. 10-11, AE D-E. 
 
 
4 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is a consumer debt in the amount of $10,499. 
Applicant reached a repayment arrangement with the creditor to pay $100 per month for 
six months beginning on February 28, 2011. Applicant provided proof of three payments 
(February, March, and April) under this plan. This debt is under control.12 
  
 Applicant has not received any credit counseling recently, although he thought he 
received some counseling back in the early 1990’s. He also stated that after paying all 
of his current monthly obligations, he has disposable income of about $300 per month.13   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
12 Tr. at 44-45; GE 3; AE A at p. 9, AE F. 
 
13 Tr. at 51, 52, 54. 
 
 
5 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and  
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to satisfy his obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
 
6 
 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
Except for the two paid debts (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.f), Applicant still owes on the 
remainder of the debts listed in the SOR. He has made some payments toward several 
of the outstanding debts. However, his financial issues are recent and ongoing and he 
failed to present evidence to show that these types of debts will not recur. AG ¶ 20(a) is 
not applicable.  
 
Applicant’s financial difficulties were partly caused by a loan from his in-laws that 
he paid back instead of meeting his other obligations. He also used a debt management 
service to his detriment. Neither of these events qualifies as conditions that were 
outside his control. He chose his own course of action in each instance. AG ¶ 20(b) is 
not applicable.  
 
 Applicant has not received recent financial counseling. He clearly can benefit 
from such counseling and advice on how to manage his money. Although he has made 
some payments on his delinquent debts, at this point, his overall finances are not being 
resolved and are not under control. His limited payments on several debts are 
insufficient to support a finding that he has made a good-faith effort to pay or otherwise 
resolve his remaining debts. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are only applicable to the debts 
listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.f, 1.h and 1.i. At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern 
despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
7 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s service to his employer and his military service. I also 
found Applicant to be candid about his finances. However, Applicant failed to establish 
that he has a clearly established plan to deal with his current debts. He is currently living 
on a tight margin with no relief in sight. His past financial track record does not inspire 
confidence that he will resolve his debts in the foreseeable future.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph   1.a:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraphs 1.b – 1.e:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph   1.g:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.h – 1.i:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
