 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01916 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant rebutted personal conduct security concerns, but he has not mitigated 
criminal conduct concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 24, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
J, criminal conduct. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on April 8, 2011, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. DOHA amended the SOR on May 3, 2011, adding three 
allegations under Guideline E, personal conduct. Applicant responded to the amended 
SOR on May 9, 2011. The case was assigned to me on May 16, 2011. DOHA issued a 
 
2 
 
notice of hearing on June 16, 2011, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on 
July 12, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted 
without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A and B, which were 
admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on July 20, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is applying for a 
security clearance for the first time. He attended college for a period but did not obtain a 
degree. He has never been married. He has a ten-year-old child.1 
  
 Applicant was involved in criminal activities as a young man. He was drinking 
heavily and was transporting drugs. In October 1993, Applicant lost a quantity of drugs 
while transporting them. He felt that his life was in danger from the individual who 
owned the drugs. He decided to rob a bank in order to repay the drug owner. He stole a 
truck and entered a bank wearing a ski mask and carrying a loaded shotgun. He 
brandished the shotgun, but the employees ran. He jumped on a counter and attempted 
unsuccessfully to get money out of a drawer. He fled the bank. Applicant was 
contemplating robbing a convenience store when the police pulled up to the stolen 
truck. Applicant was arrested after a car chase.2 
 
 Applicant was charged in state court with aggravated robbery and unauthorized 
use of a motor vehicle. He was separately charged in federal court with attempted bank 
robbery. Applicant pleaded guilty to the state charges and was sentenced to ten years 
in the state department of corrections. He also pleaded guilty to the federal charge and 
was sentenced to 51 months confinement in a federal penitentiary, followed by a five-
year term of supervised release. The federal time was to be served upon his release 
from the state department of corrections.3  
 
 Applicant was confined in the state department of corrections until 1998, when he 
was released. He served about two months in the federal penitentiary before he was 
released under supervision of the U.S. Probation Office in December 1998. His 
supervised release was originally scheduled to expire in December 2003.4 His federal 
probation officer reported: 
 
From December 10, 1998 until about December 2002, [Applicant] did not 
present any supervision problems. He reported as instructed and followed 
the instructions of his probation officer. He submitted his written monthly 
report form as directed and provided all requested financial information. 
He attended substance abuse counseling as required and submitted urine 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 20, 64-65; GE 1. 
 
2 GE 2, 3, 5, 6. 
 
3 Tr. at 42; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 5, 6. 
 
4 Tr. at 41-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 5, 6. 
 
3 
 
samples when instructed. While under supervision he did not submit a 
positive urine specimen. He was gainfully employed and maintained a 
stable residence. Additionally, he satisfied all special conditions.5  
 
 In November 2002, Applicant received a $200 city check in the mail payable to a 
former resident. Applicant’s friend forged the signature on the check, and Applicant 
deposited the check in his credit union account. In January 2003, Applicant was 
arrested for forgery of a financial instrument. Applicant fled to another state before trial. 
State and federal warrants were issued for his arrest. Applicant stated that he panicked 
because his lawyer told him that he would likely have to serve extensive time in the 
federal penitentiary for his probation violation.6  
 
 In April 2005, Applicant was a passenger in a car that was stopped by the police 
for a traffic violation. He was arrested after the police discovered his warrants. He was 
extradited to the state where he committed his crimes. In June 2005, he pleaded guilty 
in state court to forgery, a felony. He was sentenced to six months in jail, with 88 days 
credit for time served. His federal case was revoked in June 2005, “with no supervision 
to follow.” It is unclear how much time he served in federal custody for his probation 
violation. He was released from incarceration in late 2005.7 
 
 Applicant worked for a defense contractor from February 2008 to September 
2009. He worked in Iraq for about 20 months without the need for a security clearance. 
He was hired by his current employer in September 2009.8 
 
 Applicant submitted a questionnaire for national security positions (SF 86) in 
October 2009. He listed a number of delinquent debts under the pertinent financial 
questions. Under the question asking about felony charges, he listed his conviction for 
forgery. The question asked for the date of offense, not the date of arrest or the date of 
conviction. He listed the date of offense as “11/02 (estimated).” He wrote in the 
comments section “I have made some bad choices in my youth. And I made a bigger 
on[e] by cashing a bad c[hec]k for a friend.”9  
 
 Applicant did not list his state and federal convictions or that he was arrested in 
2005 pursuant to his arrest warrants. Applicant credibly testified that he did not 
intentionally falsify the SF 86. He stated that he misread the felony and firearms 
questions, and thought he was only required to report offenses from the last seven 
years. He also did not think the robbery charge constituted a “firearms offense.” He 
thought he was reporting his 2005 arrest when he reported the forgery charge. He 
stated that he felt it would have been pointless to intentionally omit the information 
                                                          
5 AE B. 
 
6 Tr. at 25-26, 36-37, 44-45; GE 3, 5, 6. 
 
7 Tr. at 36, 39, 45; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 5, 6; AE B. 
 
8 Tr. at 26; GE 1, 2, 4. 
 
9 GE 1. 
 
4 
 
because the Government had instant access to the information.10 After considering all 
the evidence, including Applicant’s testimony and the derogatory information he listed 
under different questions, I find that Applicant did not intentionally falsify his SF 86.  
 
 Applicant was granted an interim security clearance. He worked in Afghanistan 
for about six months and had access to classified information without any security 
violations. He submitted a number of documents attesting to his superior service in Iraq 
and Afghanistan. He has passed examinations and received certifications qualifying him 
in his trade. Applicant sustained traumatic brain injury (TBI) in November 2010, when 
the vehicle he was driving struck an improvised explosive device (IED). He has for the 
most part recovered from his injuries, but still has some memory issues and other 
recurring problems.11  
 
 Applicant stated that he has learned painful lessons from his criminal conduct 
and time spent incarcerated. He stated that he is committed to being a law-abiding 
citizen. He would like a security clearance so that he can return to Afghanistan. He feels 
that he was able to give something back to this country by his service in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, and he hopes that it makes up, in some part, for his criminal conduct.12  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
                                                          
10 Tr. at 23-24, 27, 30-35, 45-56, 59-60; GE 1; AE A. 
 
11 Tr. at 20, 22, 27-29; GE 4. 
 
12 Tr. at 23, 27-30; GE 4. 
 
5 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program.  
 
Applicant’s multiple arrests, convictions, and probation violations are sufficient to 
raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
6 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s criminal conduct was significant and serious. He stole a truck and 
attempted to rob a bank with a loaded shotgun. He was contemplating robbing a 
convenience store when the police saw him in the stolen truck. He fled the scene before 
he was arrested. His motive for robbing the bank was that he was transporting illegal 
drugs, he lost a shipment, and he was afraid of the owner of the drugs. He cashed a 
forged check in 2002 while on federal probation. He fled the state rather than face state 
charges and federal incarceration for his probation violation. He was captured in 2005 in 
another state. I considered Applicant’s employment, his work in Iraq and Afghanistan, 
and his injury while supporting the U.S. mission. His remorse was candid and sincere. I 
find there is some evidence of successful rehabilitation. However, despite a clean 
record since 2005, Applicant’s criminal record is so extensive and occurred over such 
an extended period that it continues to cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶ 32(a) is not applicable. AG ¶ 32(d) is partially applicable. I find 
that criminal conduct security concerns remain despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
 
7 
 
 Applicant provided incomplete and inaccurate information on his SF 86, but it 
was not intentionally false. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. SOR ¶¶ 2.a, 2.b, and 2.c are 
concluded for Applicant. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines J and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I believe Applicant is sincere in his desire to make amends for his criminal past. 
He risked his life and was seriously injured in Afghanistan while supporting the U.S. 
mission. However, his criminal record is extensive, and he was a fugitive from justice 
from 2003 to 2005, when he was arrested during a routine traffic stop. I have lingering 
doubts about Applicant, and I am required to resolve any doubts in favor of national 
security.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
rebutted personal conduct security concerns, but he has not mitigated criminal conduct 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
 
8 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:  For Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
