1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-04596
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
 For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Sheldon I. Cohen, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
CURRY, Marc E., Administrative Judge:
Applicant failed a drug test in April 2007 and provided an explanation at the
hearing that was not credible. This raises unmitigated security concerns regarding his
personal conduct. Clearance is denied.
Statement of the Case
On November 23, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under
Guidelines H, Drug Involvement, and E, Personal Conduct. The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs
issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR, admitting all of the allegations, and requesting a
hearing. DOHA received the answer on December 16, 2010. The case was assigned to
me on January 25, 2011. On March 29, 2011, a notice of hearing was issued,
2
scheduling the case for April 27, 2011. The hearing was held as scheduled. At the
hearing, I received seven Government exhibits, 27 Applicant exhibits, and the testimony
of Applicant and four character witnesses. The transcript (Tr.) was received on May 5,
2011.
Evidentiary Ruling
At the hearing, Department Counsel moved to strike SOR subparagraph 1.b and
the portion of SOR subparagraph 2.b that cross-referenced subparagraph 1.b. Applicant
did not object and I granted the motion.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 44-year-old single man with no children. He is a U.S. Army
veteran, serving from 1985 to 1993. He was honorably discharged. (Tr. 85) While in the
Army, Applicant earned, among other things, six Army Achievement Medals and one
Army Commendation Medal. (AE C-I) Since leaving the military, Applicant has worked
for various defense contractors on the same contract, excluding a stint with the federal
government from March 2007 through June 2007. Over the years, he has been steadily
promoted, advancing from administrative specialist, the position he first held upon
leaving the Army, to operations officer, the position he currently holds. (Tr. 84) 
Since March 2008, Applicant has worked for the same employer. (GE 4 at 15) He
monitors a database containing all of the contractor and government personnel that are
deployed abroad. (Tr. 34)
Applicant is highly respected on the job. According to a former supervisor, his
“reliability [was] continually unsurpassed,” and his contributions to the company were
“invaluable.” (AE T) Another former supervisor characterized Applicant’s work ethic as
“second to none.” (AE V) His current supervisor characterizes him as “a top-notch
employee” who “thinks outside of the box.” (Tr. 46-47) In 2010, Applicant’s supervisor
nominated him for employee of the year. (AE Q)
One Saturday evening in March 2007 while socializing at a Veterans of Foreign
Wars (VFW) post, Applicant met a woman who invited him to attend a party to watch a
pay-per-view championship boxing match. (Tr. 98, 123) Applicant then left the VFW
post with the woman. The party was in a basement of a home. People were playing
cards, mingling, shooting pool, and smoking cigars. (Tr. 98)  
The following Monday morning, Applicant was administered a random drug test
and failed, testing positive for cocaine. (Tr. 95) Applicant then requested that the urine
specimen be re-tested. His employer re-tested it, and it again was positive for cocaine.
(Tr. 96) 
After Applicant failed the drug test, his employer suggested that he participate in
counseling through the company’s employee assistance program. (Tr. 101) Applicant
then met with a counselor who told him that, as a first-time offender, he may be able to
3
keep his job if he enrolled in a drug program. (Tr. 101) Applicant refused to enroll
because he vehemently denied using cocaine and considered enrolling in the drug
program tantamount to an admission of drug use. (Tr. 102)
In June 2007, Applicant’s employer fired him. (Tr. 103) Also, his security
clearance, which he held at the time he failed the drug test, was suspended. (GE 6)
Applicant was unemployed for ten months before his current company hired him.
Applicant contends that he has never knowingly used any illegal drugs or
substances. (Tr. 116) He testified that he left the fight party around 12:30 a.m. because
he started feeling “hot,” “sweaty,” and “out of sorts.” (Tr. 122, 123) He had never felt that
way before. (Tr. 122)  He did not leave the party with the woman with whom he had
gone to the party, and went home alone. 
When Applicant got home, he called another woman and asked her to come to
his apartment and “hang out.” (Tr. 126) When she arrived, he told her that he suspected
someone “put something in a drink of [his].” (Tr. 123) Applicant did not seek emergency
medical attention. (Tr. 123)
During an interview with an investigative agent in March 2010, Applicant stated
that some of the people at the fight party were smoking marijuana. (GE 7 at 3) At the
hearing, he said that no one at the party was smoking marijuana. (Tr. 124)
Applicant’s current second-tier supervisor was aware of Applicant’s failed drug
test when he hired him. (Tr. 33) He decided to hire Applicant, in part, because of an
impressive recommendation from his previous employer. (Tr. 31) 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.”
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
4
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
Under this guideline, “use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can
raise questions about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness
to comply with laws, rules, and regulations” (AG ¶ 24). Applicant’s failed drug test in
2007 triggers the application of AG ¶ 25(b), “testing positive for illegal drug use.” 
Applicant denies using illegal drugs, and suspects that he failed the drug test
because someone at a fight party he attended two days before the drug test must have
slipped some cocaine into his drink. In support of this contention, he testified that while
at the party he began feeling unusually ill shortly after midnight, and this feeling was so
troubling that he left the party and went home. This explanation is inconsistent with later
testimony that once he got home, he immediately called a friend and invited her to his
home to hang out. I conclude Applicant’s  testimony that he felt sick when he left the
party was not credible.
The credibility of Applicant’s explanation for testing positive for cocaine is
additionally undercut by his contradictory accounts of whether people were smoking
marijuana at the fight party. Consequently, I conclude that Applicant used cocaine
before the drug test, and that this use caused him to fail a drug test. AG ¶¶ 25(a), “any
drug abuse,” and 25(g), “any illegal drug use after being a security clearance,” also
apply.
Because Applicant denies ever using illegal drugs, it is difficult to assess the
applicability of the mitigating conditions. Nevertheless, there is no evidence that
Applicant has used illegal drugs since failing the drug test in March 2007. Consequently,
AG ¶¶ 25(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not case doubt on the
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” and 25(b)(3), “an
appropriate period of abstinence,” applies. Applicant has mitigated the drug involvement
security concern.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
Under this guideline, “conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor,
dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified
information.” (AG ¶ 15) Applicant used cocaine at some point in 2007. Subsequently, he
failed a drug test and lost his job. AG ¶ 16(e) personal conduct, or concealment of
5
information about one’s conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation,
manipulation, or duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect
the person’s personal, professional, or community standing. . .,” applies.
Applicant’s current supervisor is aware of the failed drug test. Applicant has not
used any illegal drugs since 2007. AG ¶ 17(e), “the individual has taken positive steps to
reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress,” applies. 
Applicant is a highly respected professional who has made invaluable
contributions to his employers and to the U.S. government over the years. Nothing in his
record indicates that he was ever a habitual illegal drug user. Based on his background,
and the favorable testimony of the witnesses, I conclude the drug use that caused
Applicant to fail the drug test in 2007 was an anomaly.
However, providing truthful and candid information during the security clearance
process is especially important in security clearance evaluations. (AG ¶ 15) Applicant’s
testimony failed to meet this threshold. The negative ramifications of this failure
outweigh the isolated and remote nature of the misconduct. I conclude Applicant has
failed to mitigate the security concern generated by his failed 2007 drug test.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
I have considered the applicability of the whole-person factors in my analysis of the
guidelines above, and I conclude that they do not warrant a favorable conclusion. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: WITHDRAWN
6
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a - 2.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                             
MARC E. CURRY
Administrative Judge
