                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05039 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O'Neal, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Ronald C. Sykstus, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
CREAN, Thomas M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On April 1, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to obtain a security clearance required for his position 
with a defense contractor. After reviewing the results of an ensuing background 
investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant two interrogatories to clarify or augment potentially disqualifying 
information. After reviewing the results of the background investigations and Applicant's 
responses to the Interrogatories, DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
findings required to issue a security clearance. On December 7, 2010, DOHA issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns for criminal 
conduct under Guideline J, sexual behavior under Guideline D, and alcohol 
consumption under Guideline G. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective in the Department of Defense on September 1, 
2006. Applicant received the SOR on December 16, 2010.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 28, 2010. He admitted the allegations 
under Guidelines D, J, and G with explanation. He requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on January 24, 
2011. The case was assigned to me on February 23, 2011. DOHA issued a Notice of 
Hearing on March 18, 2011, for a hearing on April 6, 2011. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. The Government offered six exhibits, which I marked and admitted into the 
record without objections as Government exhibits (Gov. Ex.) 1 through 6. Applicant and 
three witnesses testified on his behalf. Applicant offered 12 exhibits which I marked and 
admitted into the record without objection as Applicant Exhibits (App. Ex.) A through L. 
DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on April 27, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 After a thorough review of the pleadings, transcript, and exhibits, I make the 
following essential findings of fact. Applicant admitted the allegations under criminal 
conduct, alcohol consumption, and sexual behavior with explanation. His admissions 
are included in my findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a single 31-year-old electrical and optical engineer. He graduated 
from high school in 1998, and immediately started college. He received a bachelor's 
degree in electrical engineering in 2002, and became a teaching assistant while 
continuing his studies for a dual master's degree in electrical engineering and optical 
sciences, which he received in 2006. While in undergraduate and graduate school, 
Applicant lived in campus housing in a fraternity-style setting. He usually drank five to 
ten vodka drinks one night per week, and was intoxicated about once a week. He did 
not typically drink during the week but on week-ends since he wanted to concentrate on 
his studies. He continued working at the engineering department of the university while 
in graduate school from 2004 until 2006. He moved into his own apartment off campus 
with his brother and a roommate in 2005. From 2005 to 2006, he lived in an apartment 
with his brother and a friend. In 2006, he purchased a house. He now lives in that house 
with his brother and four other friends who rent rooms from him. (Tr. 16-27, 56-62; Gov. 
Ex. 1, e-QIP, dated April 1, 2010; Gov. Ex. 2, Answers to Interrogatories, Interview 
Summary, dated May 18, 2010; App. Ex. A, Bachelor's Degree Diploma, dated 
December 2002; App. Ex. B, Master's of Science in Engineering Diploma, dated 
December 2004 App. Ex. D, Transcripts, dated January 17, 2011) 
 
Applicant started to work for his defense contractor employer in June 2006, and 
received a security clearance in April 2007. He was terminated from his employment 
with the defense contractor in July 2009 because his access to classified information 
was challenged based on a June 2009 incident. While working for the defense 
 
3 
 
 
contractor, and after his employment was terminated, Applicant continued his studies 
and received a Masters of Business Administration degree in 2010. Applicant is now 
employed as a business development specialist for a local university which requires him 
to have access to classified information. He also works as a general manager of a local 
restaurant. He has never, except for the incident in question, had any alcohol-related 
incidents. Up until June 2009, his record was clean. (Tr. 27-30, 62-66; App. Ex. C, 
Master's Degree in Business Administration Diploma, dated May 2010) 
 
In June 2009, Applicant and some coworkers were away on temporary duty for 
approximately ten days for his defense contractor employer. The group was staying in 
separate apartments in a condominium complex close to a vacation beach. Applicant's 
condominium was on the first floor with the front accessing the parking lot and the back 
accessing a walkway to the beach. The other members of the group were staying n 
different parts of the complex. Their tasks were completed early on a Thursday and the 
group was preparing to leave to return home the next day. Applicant does not 
remember if he ate lunch that day. He started drinking alcohol by himself about 3 or 4 
p.m. that afternoon. He had six or seven beers and five or six vodkas and amaretto 
drinks within a two to three hour period, and admits he was intoxicated that afternoon 
and early evening. He testified that he went out to the beach for awhile and then 
returned to his condominium. He sat on the deck since it was early. He got up, 
straightened his swim trucks and went inside. There were other vacationers walking 
around the condominium complex. He does not know what his blood alcohol level was 
after consuming the alcohol, but he was intoxicated. He has never had blackouts from 
drinking, or failed to remember evening events in the morning. He does not remember 
everything perfectly from that night. From his perspective, nothing happened. (Tr. 30-32, 
64-71) 
 
A family consisting of a husband, wife, and five-year-old daughter were staying in 
the condominium next to Applicant's. The family was outside their condominium at 
approximately 7:30 p.m. when the daughter told her parents she saw the "privates" of 
the man next door. She told them that the man had placed his hands on his swim trunks 
and pulled them down. She saw a "stick." The mother looked over at the man and noted 
he had an erection in his swim trunks. The father saw the same condition and sent his 
family inside their apartment. The family then saw the man walk by and look into their 
window. The husband immediately called the police. When the police arrived at 
approximately 7:45 p.m,, the family described what they had seen and that the man was 
living in the next condominium. The daughter confirmed to the police officers the 
account given by her parents and what she had seen. Applicant does not remember any 
interaction with the family. He does not feel that their statements to police were 
accurate.  
 
The police went to Applicant's condominium and woke Applicant who was 
sleeping. Applicant was intoxicated. The police informed him of the family's allegations. 
They also advised him of his rights. Applicant had no memory of seeing the family or 
exposing himself to the girl. He denied pulling down his swim trunks and exposing 
himself. Applicant had never met the family before and they had not talked to him or 
 
4 
 
 
previously complained about his conduct. He has read their account of the evening. He 
admits he had an erection that evening and admitted he masturbated in his room that 
night. He did not challenge the accuracy of their report at that time. He was arrested 
and charged with lewd and lascivious exhibition by intentionally exposing his genitals in 
the presence of a victim under 16. The charge was reduced to the misdemeanor charge 
of indecent exposure. He pled nolo contendere on the advice of his attorney, who 
advised him that his plea did not admit guilt to any offense. He decided not to fight the 
charges because such an action was very expensive. His plea to a misdemeanor did 
concern him, but he was employed and did not believe his pleas would affect his 
employment. He was sentenced to probation, and ordered to undergo drug, alcohol, 
and psychological evaluation and treatment if necessary. He does not have to register 
as a sex offender. (Tr. 28, 33-47, 71-82, 86-90; Gov. Ex. 4, Police Report and 
Statements, dated September 3, 2010; Gov. Ex. 5 and 6, Docket, dated September 3, 
2010) 
 
Applicant was evaluated for alcohol problems and was told that he did not have 
an alcohol-related problem. As a routine recommendation, he was advised to take an 
alcohol-awareness class, which he completed. He received a psychological evaluation 
after tests by a psychologist. There was no recommendation for further treatment. 
However, the psychologist's report read: "[Applicant] would consistently rank in the mild 
risk category, particularly if he is alcohol free or at least mindful of his use of an 
intoxicant for any reason." (Gov. Ex. 3, Answers to Interrogatories, dated September 27, 
2010, Psychological Evaluation and Risk Assessment, dated September 22, 2010, at 
16-19; App. Ex. L, Certificate of Completion Alcohol and Drug Awareness Program, 
dated July 7, 2010) 
 
In June 2010, a friend of more than 20 years requested that Applicant assist him 
in a restaurant he was about to open. Applicant became the general manager of the 
restaurant when it opened in October 2010, and his friend continued as the chef. 
Applicant is responsible for the day-to-day operations of the restaurant, and it is his 
primary employment. His employment with the defense contractor was terminated in 
June 2009 shortly after this incident. However, he continues in his position as a 
business development specialist for the university. (Tr. 47-51, 82-87) 
 
Applicant's consumption of alcohol has eased since the incident. He works six 
days a week and cannot be incapacitated for work. He admits still taking a drink 
occasionally after work, but it is no longer fun to spend time recovering from alcohol 
consumption. His consumption now is five to eight drinks a month of beer or hard liquor, 
usually averaging one or two drinks a night one or two nights a week. He may also have 
a glass of wine when they have meetings at the restaurant. He last drank to the point of 
intoxication about April 2010. He admits he continued to drink heavily from June 2009 
until April 2010. He admits a change of lifestyle in April 2010 since he no longer 
considered drinking fun. He would rather be home reading a book. The alcohol 
awareness classes had little effect on his change of dinking habits. He did become 
more aware of the consequences of dinking too much. Applicant notes that the June 
2009 incident was not his usual or typical conduct. He denied exposing himself to the 
 
5 
 
 
girl. If he had to do it again, he would fight the charges rather than plead nolo 
contendere. (Tr. 51-55, 87-96) 
 
A fellow employee, who was with Applicant on temporary duty in June 2009, 
testified that he knew Applicant for over eight years prior to the trip. He has never 
known Applicant to have an alcohol-related problem even though he has seen Applicant 
intoxicated on two or three occasions. He confirmed that the team finished their project 
early and were packing to return home. They had an afternoon free. His family 
accompanied him on the trip, so he was with them and not any team members that 
afternoon. He learned that the family involved in the incident left the facility for fear of 
retaliation about their complaint. The next morning he received a call from Applicant's 
father informing him that Applicant had been arrested the previous evening and to get 
Applicant's belonging from his room and bring them back home. He found the 
allegations about Applicant to be unbelievable and out of character. He would not 
hesitate to hire and work with Applicant again. (Tr. 97-111) 
 
An investor in the restaurant that Applicant manages testified that he has known 
Applicant for about a year. His business partner, Applicant's long-term friend, 
recommended Applicant for the manager's position. He was concerned about his 
business's liability when he first heard the allegations against Applicant. He studied the 
reports and transcripts and talked to Applicant about the incident. They all agreed on a 
set of rules for Applicant to follow. Applicant has followed the agreed rules. He would 
like Applicant to continue to work for him. (Tr. 112-124) 
 
Applicant's friend, the other partner in the restaurant, testified that he has known 
Applicant for over 20 years. They met in middle school and were roommates in college. 
About 25% of the restaurant staff is female and Applicant works well with them without 
issue. He has seen female staff members willing to go to Applicant with problems. Even 
though they were roommates and friends, he has never seen Applicant be a danger to 
himself or others because of drinking or any inappropriate conduct. He sees Applicant 
on a daily basis and has never seen him drink at work, except after hours, when they 
are discussing business issues. He has no concerns about Applicant's trustworthiness 
or judgment. (Tr. 124-134) 
 
Applicant presented evidence to show his excellent work performance. He 
presented certificates of commendation and letters of appreciation from his company, 
supervisor, and Government clients to establish his superior work performance. (App. 
Ex. E through K, Letters and Certificates, various dates) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
6 
 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or protect 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
Analysis 
 
Sexual Behavior, Guideline D 
Alcohol Consumption, Guideline G 
Criminal Conduct, Guideline J 
 
 The security concerns raised against Applicant are from the same incident. The 
gravamen of Applicant's conduct was the excessive consumption of alcohol, which led 
to inappropriate sexual criminal behavior. Security concerns for sexual behavior, alcohol 
consumption, and criminal conduct are the same. The concerns involve questions of 
Applicant's reliability, judgment, and trustworthiness. Excessive alcohol consumption 
often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to control impulses, 
and can raise questions about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. (AG ¶ 21) 
 
7 
 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense indicates a personality or emotional 
disorder, reflecting lack of judgment or discretion which can raise questions about the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. (AG ¶ 
12) Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules, and regulation. (AG ¶ 30) Since the security concerns come 
from the same incident and are similar, the concerns will be discussed together. 
 
 Applicant admits that he was arrested for lewd and lascivious exhibition by 
intentionally exposing his genitals in the presence of a victim less than 16 years of age. 
He was convicted of indecent exposure after pleading nolo contendere on the advice of 
his attorney. He admits he consumed alcohol that day and was intoxicated, but does not 
remember exposing his genitals in the presence of a victim less than 16 years of age. 
He completed an alcohol evaluation and there were no problems raised and no 
treatment was ordered. The Government's evidence concurs with the criminal 
proceedings allegation. The Government's evidence by witness statements establishes 
the inappropriate sexual behavior. The sexual behavior resulting in a misdemeanor 
conviction raises Sexual Behavior Disqualifying Condition AG ¶ 13(a) (sexual behavior 
of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has been prosecuted); and Criminal 
Conduct Disqualifying Condition ¶ 31(a) (a single serious crime or multiple lesser 
offenses). Applicant's admission that he drank alcohol heavily before the incident raises 
Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 22(a) (alcohol-related incidents 
away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or spouse 
abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the 
individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent); and AG ¶ 22(c) 
(habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless 
of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent). 
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence by way of police reports, witness 
statements, court documents, security clearance investigative reports, and Applicant's 
admission and statements to establish the disqualifying condition in AG ¶¶ 13(a), 22(a 
and (c), and 31(a). Applicant admits he was drinking heavily on the day of the incident. 
The witness statement from the young girl's mother and father are detailed and explicit 
in reporting what occurred. They had no reason to fabricate the incident. Because of his 
heavy consumption of alcohol, Applicant's memory of the event is not clear. Based on 
the witness statements and police reports, I find that Applicant did pull down his swim 
trunks in the presence of a five-year-old girl exposing his genitals.  
 
 The burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate the security concerns under sexual behavior, alcohol consumption, and 
criminal conduct. An applicant has the burden to refute an established allegation or 
prove a mitigating condition, and the burden to prove or disprove it never shifts to the 
Government. The alleged security concerns have similar mitigating conditions. These 
mitigating conditions involve the passage of time, the unusual nature of the action 
causing security concerns, the likelihood of recurrence, and whether the actions cast 
doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment. In addition, the 
 
8 
 
 
alcohol consumption mitigating conditions also include the individual's action to 
overcome any alcohol-related issues and establish patterns of responsible use of 
alcohol. 
 
 As noted above, the gravamen of Applicant's conduct causing the security 
concerns is the excess consumption of alcohol. In this regard, Applicant raised Alcohol 
Consumption Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 23(a) (so much time has passed, or the 
behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment); and AG ¶ 23(b) (the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issue of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to over 
come this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) 
or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser). These mitigating conditions do not apply. 
While the incident happened two years ago, Applicant was by himself when he willingly 
drank alcohol to excess. There were no unusual circumstances that would lead him to 
the excess consumption of alcohol. He was not facing any personal problems or 
celebratory circumstances that would led to a need for excessive consumption of 
alcohol. He had just finished a project with coworkers and was on his way home. The 
coworkers went their own way. Applicant was alone and he drank to excess. Applicant's 
alcohol consumption was binge drinking since he had six or seven beers and five or six 
hard liquor drinks in about three hours.  
 
 Even though there are no reports of other incidents of excessive alcohol 
consumption, the circumstances could readily recur where Applicant again excessively 
consumed alcohol. Applicant states he does not have an alcohol-related problem. He 
presented evidence that he successfully completed an alcohol-awareness program. The 
psychological report does provide a caution in that Applicant may be at a mild risk 
category for sexual or criminal conduct if he is alcohol free or mindful of his use of 
intoxicants. Applicant has not established that he is mindful of his alcohol consumption 
and he is certainly not alcohol free. He did not establish that he took any actions to 
understand the nature of and control his alcohol consumption. He still consumes 
alcohol, sometimes to excess. While Applicant states his consumption of alcohol has 
moderated because drinking alcohol is no longer fun, there is nothing in the record to 
establish a pattern of responsible use of alcohol. His conduct of binge drinking and 
heavy alcohol consumption could readily recur because Applicant still consumes 
alcohol.  
 
Applicant raised Sexual Behavior Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 14(b) (the sexual 
behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under such unusual circumstances, 
that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment); and Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition AG ¶ 
32(a) (so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened 
under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment). As noted above, the 
sexual behavior leading to a criminal conviction happened only two years ago. The 
circumstances were not unusual since they resulted from voluntary excess consumption 
 
9 
 
 
of alcohol. The circumstances of inappropriate sexual behavior could recur, especially if 
Applicant consumes alcohol to excess. Applicant has not mitigated the security concern 
for alcohol consumption, sexual behavior, and criminal conduct.  
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s security eligibility by considering the totality of the applicant’s conduct and all 
the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine adjudicative 
process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered the testimony of his 
supervisors, friends, and fellow workers concerning his reputation for honest, condor, 
reliability, judgment, and trustworthiness. I considered his reputation as an excellent 
employee and his record of accomplishments. Applicant drank to excess and exposed 
his genitals in the presence of a five year old girl resulting in a criminal conviction for 
indecent exposure. His consumption of alcohol was reckless and irresponsible and 
showed poor judgment and a failure to control impulses. The failure to control impulses 
led to the inappropriate sexual behavior and criminal conviction. His continued 
consumption of alcohol could again lead to a failure to control his impulses. This raises 
questions concerning his judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Failure to control 
impulses indicates he may not be able to properly safeguard classified information. The 
record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated the alcohol consumption, sexual behavior, and criminal conduct security 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 
10 
 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline D:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 3, Guideline G:   AGAISNT APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
THOMAS M. CREAN 
Administrative Judge 
