 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
   )  ISCR Case No. 10-03430 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Steven Marczeski, Esq. 
 
 
July 1, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is alleged to be 
indebted to nine creditors in the approximate amount of $81,858. Applicant failed to 
mitigate the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 4, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on March 1, 2011. DOHA 
 
2 
 
issued a notice of hearing on March 15, 2011, scheduling the hearing for April 5, 2011. 
Applicant, through his counsel, requested a continuance. On March 16, 2011, the 
hearing was rescheduled for April 14, 2011, based upon good cause. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which 
were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibits (AE) A through C, which 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf. Applicant also 
requested that the hearing record be left open for the submission of additional 
documents. His request was granted and the record was left open until close of 
business May 16, 2011. On April 15, 2011, Applicant submitted four additional pages, 
marked AE D; and on May 16, 2011, Applicant submitted two additional pages, marked 
AE E. Department Counsel indicated he had no objections to AE D or AE E, and the 
exhibits were admitted into the record. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) 
on April 25, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted the SOR allegations 1.a, 1.d, 1.f, 1.g, 1.h, and 1.i. He denied 
allegations 1.b., 1.c., and 1.e. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, 
exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 56-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served in the 
Navy for 25 years and achieved the rank of master chief petty officer. He held a top 
secret clearance in the Navy. After retiring from the Navy in 2001, he went to work for a 
government contractor. He has been employed by several government contractors 
since that time and has held a clearance throughout his civilian career. He has never 
received a security violation or infraction. During his 25-year Navy career, he was never 
tried by court-martial or awarded nonjudicial punishment. (Tr. 26-28, 33-37; GE 1.) 
 
As stated in the SOR, Applicant is alleged to be indebted to 9 creditors in the 
approximate amount of $81,858. His debts were substantiated in the credit reports 
dated December 25, 2009; June 5, 2010; November 6, 2010; and April 13, 2011. He 
attributes his financial problems to a financial downturn in the economy that had a 
significant impact on his wife’s childcare business. Applicant’s wife contributed 
significantly to their income until three-to-four years ago. At that time, payments she 
relied on from the state for childcare for subsidized, low-income families ceased, and 
the number of her self-paying customers declined due to their own job losses. Applicant 
found that they were no longer able to meet their financial obligations. He relied on 
credit cards for a while, hoping that her business would improve. After he had reached 
the credit limit on his credit cards, he realized that he needed to find another way to 
manage his debt. He contacted a bankruptcy attorney. (Tr. 29-31, 39; GE 2; GE 3; GE6; 
GE 7; AE B.) 
 
On February 14, 2011, Applicant filed Chapter 13 bankruptcy. The plan was 
accepted and Applicant agreed to pay $1,863.18 per month for five years to the trustee. 
He has made two payments under this plan. He also had received financial counseling 
as part of the Chapter 13 process. He recently implemented the suggestions from this 
course and focused on ways he could cut his expenditures. He has stopped his monthly 
 
3 
 
subscriptions and reduced services like his phone service to the cheapest plan. The 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy filing also shows that Applicant had gambling losses of $11,500 
in 2010. (Tr. 48-49, 57-60; AE A; AE B; AE D.) 
 
His debts are as follows: 
 
Applicant is indebted to a collection agent for a utility bill in the amount of $184, 
as alleged in 1.a. This debt is being paid through Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy 
plan. (Tr. 51; GE 4; AE A.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a collection agent for an educational loan that he had co-
signed with his son in the amount of $1,036, as alleged in 1.b. He denied this debt in his 
Answer because he thought the debt belonged solely to his son. At hearing, he admitted 
his liability for this debt. It is being paid through Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. 
(Tr. 51; AE A.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a bank for a second student loan that he co-signed for 
his son in the amount of $3,633, as alleged in 1.c. He denied this debt in his Answer 
because he thought the debt belonged solely to his son. At hearing, he admitted his 
liability for this debt. It is being paid through Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. (Tr. 
51-52; AE A.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on his mortgage for his primary residence in the amount of 
$22,113, as alleged in 1.d. Applicant has reaffirmed his mortgage. The arrearage is part 
of his bankruptcy plan. He testified that he is now current on his monthly mortgage 
payments, due since the arrearage was incorporated into the bankruptcy plan. (Tr. 44, 
52-53; AE A.) 
 
Applicant is indebted to a collection agent for vehicle insurance in the amount of 
$145, as alleged in 1.e. Applicant denied this debt in his Answer because he currently 
has an account with this insurance provider, but explained at hearing that the debt was 
incurred when a second account was opened up after his insurance had lapsed. He had 
an unpaid balance on the lapsed account that he was not aware of. This debt is being 
paid through Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. (Tr. 54; AE A.) 
 
Applicant is indebted on a mortgage for unimproved property he purchased in the 
amount of $14,000, as alleged in 1.f.  Applicant received a trustee’s sale notice; 
however, he also received a property tax bill. He is unsure of the status of this property. 
This debt is listed on Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. (Tr. 45-46, 54-55; AE A.) 
 
Applicant is indebted in the amount of $13,805, as alleged in 1.g and duplicated 
in 1.i, for a repossessed vehicle. He testified he leased the vehicle for approximately 
nine months, before his wife experienced the business downturn. When he found he 
could no longer afford the payments on the vehicle, he surrendered the vehicle to the 
dealership. This debt is being paid through Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. (Tr. 
40-42, 46-47, 55-56; GE 5; AE A.) 
 
 
4 
 
Applicant is indebted to a collection agent for a credit card in the amount of 
$14,632, as alleged in 1.h. Applicant used this credit card to pay other debts when he 
fell upon difficult financial times. He testified he reached the card’s limit on expenditures 
in late 2010. This debt is being paid through Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. 
(Tr. 56-57; AE A.) 
 
Applicant is well respected by his colleagues. Applicant presented three letters 
from a colleague that noted he is entirely trustworthy in his allegiance to the United 
States. During his 25 years of military service, Applicant was awarded numerous 
medals and awards, including two Navy and Marine Corps Commendation Medals; 
three Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medals; and six Navy Good Conduct 
Medals. (Tr. 35-37; GE 5; AE C; AE E.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
 
5 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes 
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known 
sources of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds 
from financially profitable criminal acts. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has nine delinquent accounts, which have been past due for a 
significant period of time. Applicant and his wife accumulated these delinquent accounts 
and have been unable to pay these obligations. His financial problems have been 
ongoing since 2008. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
 Four Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
 
6 
 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant’s debt is being managed through his Chapter 13 bankruptcy plan. He 
filed bankruptcy only two months prior to the hearing, and two months after the SOR 
was issued, despite being aware of his financial problems since 2008. He has only 
made two payments under this plan. Therefore, his financial delinquencies are recent 
and he has yet to establish a good-faith effort to resolve these debts. Further, he 
blames his financial difficulties on the downturn of his wife’s daycare business. 
However, he failed to show that he has acted responsibly under the circumstances. He 
has received some financial counseling, required during the filing of Chapter 13 
bankruptcy, but he failed to establish that his financial problems are under control. Not 
enough time has passed since taking the financial course to predict that Applicant will 
act responsibly with respect to his finances in the future. His bankruptcy filing shows 
unexplained gambling losses of $11,500 in the past year. While there was neither an 
allegation of compulsive or addictive gambling in the SOR, nor sufficient evidence in the 
record to establish potential disqualification under AG ¶ 19(g), Applicant’s recent 
unexplained gambling losses indicate that, as late as 2010, he has not acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.  AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) are not 
mitigating.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is well respected by his colleagues. He has served the U.S. honorably 
for over 25 years. Those who know him best report that he has sound judgment and 
high moral standards. His standards are reflected in the numerous awards he received 
during his military service. However, he has failed to act responsibly with respect to his 
finances. He only recently began to address his financial problems by filing bankruptcy 
proceedings that will resolve his debts five years from now if he follows plan 
requirements. Further, his unexplained large gambling losses in 2010, while substantial 
delinquent financial obligations were largely ignored, are of concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:    Against Applicant 
   
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
