 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05381  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Mark J. Carroll, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated financial considerations security concerns. Eligibility for 
access to classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on February 11, 2011, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on May 16, 2011. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on June 16, 2011, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on July 12, 2011. The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which 
 
2 
 
were admitted without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits (AE) A 
through T, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on July 20, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since August 2009. He is applying for a security clearance for the 
first time. He has a bachelor’s degree. He has never been married, and he has no 
children.1 
  
 Applicant was laid off work in 2002. He was out of work for about five to six 
months. His employment and income was sporadic for the next several years. He lost a 
sales job in 2007 because he was unable to make his sales quotas. Applicant worked 
periodically for the family business, but that company was struggling, and his income 
fluctuated. Applicant also lost money that he invested in the company. He was unable to 
pay all his bills and a number of debts became delinquent.2 
 
 The SOR alleges nine delinquent debts. Applicant admitted owing the debts 
alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.c, 1.d, 1.h, and 1.i. He settled four of those debts and has 
been making payments on the fifth. Individual debts are addressed below. 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.a alleges a $3,405 debt to a collection company collecting the debt on 
behalf of a bank. The balance on this debt was $4,393 in January 2011. Applicant 
settled the debt for $878, with payments of $600 and $278 made in January 2011.3 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.c alleges a $9,666 debt to a collection company collecting the debt on 
behalf of a bank. In January 2011, Applicant settled the debt for $1,100, with payments 
of $700 and $400.4 
 
 Applicant settled a $2,188 debt to a collection company collecting on behalf of a 
bank, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, for $624. He made a $312 payment in January 2011, 
and another $312 payment in February 2011.5 
 
 SOR ¶ 1.h alleges a $1,619 delinquent debt owed to a credit union. In January 
2011, Applicant agreed to pay $100 per month until the debt is satisfied. He made $100 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 37, 103; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 33-37, 56-58, 92-96; GE 1, 2. 
 
3 Tr. at 71; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3; AE A, M. 
 
4 Tr. at 71; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE B, C, M. 
 
5 Tr. at 71; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE D-F, M. 
 
 
3 
 
payments in January, February, and April 2011. He made a $300 payment in June 
2011.6 
 
 Applicant settled the $4,967 debt to a credit card company, as alleged in SOR ¶ 
1.i, for $745. He made payments of $600 and $145 in February 2011.7 
 
 SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 1.f, and 1.g allege debts of $2,309, $3,917, and $19,759 owed to 
the same credit card company. Applicant admitted that he had two accounts with the 
credit card company, but he was unable to locate a third. He believes that the $3,917 
and $19,759 debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g are the two debts associated with his 
two cards. The three debts are listed on a combined credit report obtained in April 2010. 
The date of last action on the $19,759 debt is listed as July 2003. The $2,309 debt is 
listed as reported by Experian. It lists the first 12 numbers of the account. It showed the 
date of last action as October 2003. The $3,917 debt is listed on the credit report by 
TransUnion. It lists the first 15 numbers of the account. The first 12 numbers are 
identical to the 12 numbers reported on the $2,309 debt. The report also showed the 
date of last action as October 2003. None of the three accounts with this credit card 
company are listed on any of the later credit reports. Applicant called the credit card 
company and was told they could only locate two accounts associated with his Social 
Security number. The credit card company told Applicant that the accounts were 
transferred to two companies for collection. I find that the debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b 
and 1.f represent the same account.8 
 
 The remaining delinquent debt is a $24,394 debt to a collection company on 
behalf of a bank. This debt is alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. Applicant does not dispute that this 
is his debt. The debt is listed on the combined credit report obtained in April 2010. It is 
not listed on any of the later credit reports. Applicant’s attorney told him that this debt 
and the two debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.f and 1.g are barred from collection by the 
statute of limitations. He nonetheless feels morally obligated to pay the debts. Several 
of the debts that Applicant settled appear to have been barred from collection by the 
statute of limitations, and they were not listed on his credit report when they were paid. 
He stated that he plans to find the current holder of the debts and settle them or set up 
payment plans.9 
 
 Applicant was living with his parents when he obtained his current job. He 
continued to live with them for eight months after he was hired in order to save money 
to pay his debts. He paid several debts that were not alleged in the SOR. His father’s 
business closed, and he is now driving a truck for a living. He gave his father about 
$8,000 to help him pay his mortgage and other bills after his father lost his business. 
Applicant consulted and worked with a financial expert. His credit score improved to the 
                                                          
6 Tr. at 70, 83-84; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE G, M, O, P. 
 
7 Tr. at 71; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2; AE I, M. 
 
8 Tr. at 42-47, 58-63; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 5; AE K-M, Q-S. 
 
9 Tr. at 43-48, 63-65, 81-83; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE2, 5; AE K-M, Q-S. 
 
4 
 
point where he could purchase a home and a good used car. He maintains a budget. 
He contributes to a retirement account at work. He is not accumulating new delinquent 
debt. His annual salary is $69,000, which is more than he has ever earned. His current 
finances are sound. He is able to make payments toward his delinquent debts without 
excessively straining his current financial status. He credibly testified that he intends to 
resolve all his delinquent debts.10 
 
Applicant’s performance evaluations reflect superior job performance and show 
that Applicant is a valued and trusted employee.11 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
                                                          
10 Tr. at 25, 38-39. 49-55, 64-65, 70, 74-80, 84-87, 92-97; GE 3-5; AE K-M, Q-T. 
 
11 AE N. 
 
5 
 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for financial considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to pay his financial obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above 
disqualifying conditions. 
 
Conditions that could mitigate financial considerations security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 20. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
6 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
  The bulk of Applicant’s financial problems happened more than seven years ago. 
He was laid off work in 2002, and he was out of work for about five to six months. His 
employment and income were sporadic until he was hired by his current employer in 
August 2009. Almost all of his delinquent debts have dropped off his credit report 
because they are too old to be reported. His attorney told him that the debts cannot be 
collected because they are past the statute of limitations. Applicant feels morally 
obligated to pay his debts, even those barred from collection. He settled four debts and 
has been making payments on a fifth. He also paid several debts that were not alleged 
in the SOR. He still has debts to be paid. He credibly testified that he intends to settle or 
pay those debts, even though they are no longer on his credit report and are past the 
statute of limitations. Applicant has been working with a financial expert. He has a 
budget, and he is not accruing new delinquent debts. He is now in the position where he 
can pay his current debts, contribute to his retirement accounts, and still pay his 
delinquent debts.  
 
A security clearance adjudication is not a debt collection procedure. It is a 
procedure designed to evaluate an applicant’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
See ISCR Case No. 09-02160 (App. Bd. Jun. 21, 2010). An applicant is not required, as 
a matter of law, to establish resolution of every debt alleged in the SOR. An applicant 
need only establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take significant actions 
to implement the plan. There is no requirement that an applicant make payments on all 
delinquent debts simultaneously, nor is there a requirement that the debts alleged in the 
SOR be paid first. See ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008). 
 
 Applicant’s unemployment and underemployment qualify as conditions that were 
outside his control. I find that he acted responsibly under the circumstances and made a 
good-faith effort to pay his debts. There are clear indications that his financial problems 
are being resolved and are under control. They occurred under circumstances that are 
unlikely to recur and do not cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d) are applicable. AG ¶ 20(e) is 
applicable to the duplicate debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b.  
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I found Applicant to be honest and candid about his finances. I believe he is 
sincere about resolving his remaining financial issues. As indicated above, an applicant 
is not required to establish that he has paid every debt listed in the SOR. All that is 
required is that an applicant establish a plan to resolve the financial problems and take 
significant actions to implement the plan. I find that Applicant has established a plan to 
resolve his financial problems and has taken significant action to implement that plan. 
His finances do not constitute a security concern. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated financial considerations security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
8 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
