 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 10-07079 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 1, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On March 1, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing 
security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on March 29, 2011, and DOHA received his 
answer on April 1, 2011. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on May 3, 
2011. The case was assigned to me on May 20, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of 
 
2 
 
 
hearing on June 3, 2011, scheduling the hearing for June 20, 2011. The hearing was 
held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 5, which were 
received without objection. Accompanying GE 1 through 5 was a List of Government’s 
exhibits, which was marked as Exhibit (Ex.) I. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits 
(AE) A through L, which were received without objection, and he testified on his own 
behalf.  
 
I held the record open until July 5, 2011, to afford the Applicant the opportunity 
to submit additional documents on his behalf. Applicant timely submitted AE M, 
consisting of 50 pages, which was received without objection. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on June 30, 2011. The record closed on July 5, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations with explanations. His answers 
with explanations are incorporated as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old computer support specialist, who has worked for a 
defense contractor since September 2008. He is a first-time applicant for a security 
clearance. Successfully vetting for a security clearance is a condition of his continued 
employment. (GE 1, Tr. 23-25.)  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1992. He was awarded an 
associate’s degree in electronics in September 2001, and was awarded a bachelor of 
science degree in information system security in June 2011. (GE 1, Tr. 25-27.) 
 
Applicant was married from June 2005 to June 2011. That marriage ended by 
divorce. He has no dependents. Applicant’s former wife is a home health aide. 
Applicant did not serve in the armed forces. (GE 1, Tr. 27-28.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
  
Applicant’s SOR alleges 24 debts totalling approximately $32,000. (Tr. 10.) 
These debts consist of one judgment and various collection, past-due, and unpaid 
accounts. In March 2010, Applicant was interviewed by an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator and during that interview, the investigator reviewed 
Applicant’s debts with him in detail. During that interview, Applicant stated that he had 
fallen behind on his bills after he was laid off in 2008 and that he would be contacting 
his creditors to set up payment plans or resolve his debts. (GE 2.) 
 
 
3 
 
 
Since his March 2010 OPM interview, Applicant has made an extraordinary 
effort to pay, set up payment plans, or otherwise resolve all of his debts. By December 
2010 and in response to DOHA interrogatories, he had demonstrated that he had 
made substantial progress in paying down his debts. For those debts he had not 
resolved, he submitted documentation that he had contacted his remaining creditors to 
set up payment plans. (GE 3.) By his hearing date, Applicant was able to demonstrate 
that he had paid off 13 debts, that he is making payments on two debts, that two debts 
are not his, that he is making a good-faith effort to pay off two debts, and that his 
former wife was responsible for paying five debts per their divorce decree. Applicant’s 
former wife also submitted a letter acknowledging that she is responsible for those five 
debts. (AE H - AE M, Tr. 32- ) 
 
Applicant sought financial counselling from an accredited financial counsellor in 
March 2011. His financial counsellor submitted a letter dated May 20, 2011, indicating 
that Applicant “has been very diligent” in attending on-base basic financial 
management classes in budgeting, credit and debt management, and savings and 
investment. Also, Applicant has met individually with his financial counsellor frequently 
since March 2011 to discuss his financial situation. His financial counsellor noted 
Applicant’s overall understanding of budgeting and responsible money management. 
His financial counsellor verified Applicant’s superb efforts in regaining financial 
responsibility and recommended him for a security clearance. (AE B, Tr. 29.) 
 
Applicant attributes his financial problems to being unemployed from May 2005 
to February 2007 and then being underemployed until he began his current job. He 
also went through a divorce, which he reported when he submitted his December 
2010 DOHA interrogatories. (GE 1, GE 3, Tr. 30-32.) 
 
In conclusion, Applicant has paid, settled, made good-faith efforts to repay 
overdue creditors, or resolved all debts alleged. Applicant remains current on the rest 
of his monthly bills. His budget further demonstrates that he maintains a modest 
lifestyle and is living within his means.  (GE 3, AE M.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted five work-related reference letters. The individuals who 
submitted these reference letters represent a cross-section of supervisory and co-
worker personnel. One of the supervisory personnel has known Applicant since they 
attended college over 15 years ago. The overwhelming sense of these letters supports 
the notion that Applicant is hard working, has a tremendous sense of integrity, and is 
contributing to the national defense. All of Applicant’s references are familiar with his 
financial situation and with his efforts to overcome those problems. All references 
enthusiastically and without hesitation support Applicant for a security clearance. (AE 
A – AE B, AE D – AE F.) 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Egan at 528. 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole-person. An administrative 
judge’s adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
5 
 
 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude that a relevant security concern exists under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial 
problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by his admissions and the 
evidence presented. These debts have been in a delinquent state for several years. 
The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) through 
(e) are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. It 
was not until recently that these debts were paid or resolved. Therefore, his debt is “a 
continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). Applicant receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because 
the debt “occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not 
cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”  
Under AG ¶ 20(b), he receives full credit because his unemployment and 
underemployment, as well as his divorce, were largely beyond his control and he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances.1
 
  
AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable because Applicant actively sought financial counseling 
and has demonstrated that his financial problems are under control. He has produced 
evidence that reflects he is living within his means and has regained financial 
responsibility. Furthermore, there is sufficient information to establish full mitigation 
under AG ¶ 20(d).2
                                                          
1“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 
(App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 
99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A 
component is whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial 
payments to keep his debts current. 
 Applicant has paid, is paying, or has otherwise resolved his debts. 
 
2The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive 
does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating 
condition].  
 
7 
 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to several of Applicant’s debts because he successfully 
demonstrated that they belong to his former spouse or to his former employer.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. The SOR lists 24 
debts totally approximately $24,000 that were at one time or another in various states 
of delinquency. For several years, he failed to keep his accounts current. His lack of 
success in resolving his delinquent debt until recently raises sufficient security 
concerns to merit further inquiry.   
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant’s record of good employment and resolving his debt once he had the means 
to do so weighs in his favor. Applicant is a highly trusted and valued employee, who is 
making a contribution to the national defense. He is a law-abiding citizen and 
respected member of the community. All of his SOR debts are paid, resolved, or being 
resolved. His monthly expenses are current. The Appeal Board has addressed a key 
element in the whole-person analysis in financial cases, stating: 
 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’” necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant 
is not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he has paid off each 
and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an applicant 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
 
demonstrate that he has “. . . established a plan to resolve his financial 
problems and taken significant actions to implement that plan.” The 
Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of an applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that applicant’s 
plan for the reduction of his outstanding indebtedness is credible and 
realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, reliable information about 
the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, should be 
considered in reaching a determination.”) There is no requirement that a 
plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts simultaneously. 
Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may provide for 
the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a 
reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
Applicant’s company fully supports him and recommends him for a security clearance. 
He made mistakes, and debts became delinquent. Having sought financial 
counselling, he has regained control over his finances and demonstrated financial 
responsibility and has established a “meaningful track record” of debt payments. 
These factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances in the 
context of the whole-person, I conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1a to 1x:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
