 
1 
 
 
                                                              
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-03998 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
DUFFY, James F., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) on January 28, 2010. On March 1, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline G. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program, dated January 2, 1992, as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after 
September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative 
finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended referral to an 
administrative judge to determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, 
denied, or revoked. Applicant answered the SOR on March 23, 2011, and indicated she 
did not wish to have a hearing. Department Counsel submitted a timely request for a 
hearing. The case was assigned to me on May 18, 2011. DOHA issued the Notice of 
Hearing on June 2, 2011. The hearing was held as scheduled on June 23, 2011. 
Department Counsel offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 4 that were admitted into evidence 
without objection. The Government’s list of exhibits was entered into the record as HE I. 
Applicant testified and offered exhibits (AE) A through D that were admitted without 
objection. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on July 7, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant is a 29-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She has worked for 
that contractor since January 2010. She was awarded a bachelor’s degree in 2004 and 
a master’s degree in 2008. She has never been married and has no children. She is 
engaged to marry. This is the first time that she has applied for a security clearance.1 
 
The SOR alleged two alcohol-related incidents. The first allegation asserted that 
Applicant was arrested in State A for Operating a Motor Vehicle While Intoxicated 
(OMVI) in about 2006. She pled guilty to that offense and was sentenced to 180 days in 
jail (177 days suspended), fined, and had her driver’s license suspended. The second 
allegation asserted she was arrested in State B for Driving Under the Influence (DUI) in 
about 2010 and that charge was still pending. In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted both of the factual allegations, but denied the paragraph that recited the 
Guideline G security concern. Her admissions are incorporated herein as findings of 
fact.2 
 
Applicant estimated that she started consuming alcohol when she was a junior in 
college (approximately 21 years old). In the beginning, she consumed beer and, in 
graduate school, switched to wine. She worked throughout college and graduate school 
and drank alcohol primarily on weekends, but not every weekend. Since then, she 
consumed alcohol in social settings on some weekends or special occasions3 
 
In March 2006, a police officer stopped Applicant while she was driving. She had 
just left a bar and was attempting to find the home of a friend who lived about a quarter 
of a mile from the bar. She intended to stay at the friend’s home that night. She believed 
that the police stopped her because she stopped too long at a stop sign trying to 
                                                          
1 Tr. 5-6, 17-18, 39-40; GE 1. 
2 Tr. 34; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR. 
3 Tr. 17-18, 37-38, 42-43; GE 2. 
 
3 
 
 
determine which way to turn. She reportedly told the police officer that she had one beer 
to drink that evening. In her interview with an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator, she indicated that she thought she passed the field sobriety test. 
Nevertheless, she was arrested. At the police station, she was administered a 
breathalyzer test that indicated her blood alcohol content was .14%. At the hearing, she 
estimated that she had consumed four to six beers over a four or five hour period on 
that occasion. She hired an attorney to represent her in this matter. In March 2007, she 
pled guilty to OMVI, a misdemeanor, and was sentenced as noted above. Her three-day 
jail sentence consisted of spending a weekend at a hotel attending alcohol education 
classes.4 
 
The second alcohol-related incident occurred on January 29, 2010. When she 
went out that evening, Applicant believed she was going to dinner with her sister to 
celebrate her birthday. As it turned out, she was going to a surprise birthday party. 
During the party, she thought that she drank responsibly. Following guidance provided 
at the prior alcohol education classes she attended, she consumed less than one drink 
per hour. She estimated that she consumed two or three glasses of wine over a five to 
six hour period. A police officer stopped her while she was driving home. The police 
report reflects, “[s]ubject stopped for swerving, smelled of alcohol, admitted to having 
been drinking . . . failed [field sobriety] test, arrested for DUI.” She refused a 
breathalyzer test, but later regretted that decision. She refused that test based on 
comments her attorney made during her first case. During this incident, she was 
charged with DUI. In March 2010, she pled no contest to the lesser offense of Driving 
with Unlawful Alcohol Concentration (DUAC), a misdemeanor, and was fined $997, 
required to complete an Alcohol Drug Safety Action Program (ADSAP), and received a 
provisional driver’s license for six months.5  
 
Applicant attended ADSAP classes from February 16, 2010, to April 8, 2010. As 
part of that program, a licensed professional counselor evaluated her and determined 
that she did not require alcohol treatment but needed to follow only low-risk guidelines. 
She successfully completed the ADSAP. She did not consume alcohol during that 
program. Since her second alcohol-related arrest, she has again consumed alcoholic 
beverages, but has not driven after drinking. She indicated that she will not drink and 
drive in the future. She did not consume any alcohol within three weeks of the hearing. 
She indicated that she is not consuming alcohol now because she is planning to start a 
family soon and is monitoring closely what she is eating and drinking. Throughout her 
testimony, she was very open and forthcoming. She was a credible witness.6 
                                                          
4 Tr. 18-20, 33-37, 41-42; Applicant’s Answer to the SOR; GE 1, 2, 4. 
5 Tr. 20-22, 31-33, 35-37, 40-42; GE 2, 3; AE A. 
6 Tr. 33-34, 38-39, 42-45; GE 2; AE A. The licensed professional counselor diagnosed Applicant 
with Alcohol Related Disorder Not Otherwise Specified, Section 291.9 of the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual for Mental Disorders (DSM IV). Section 291.9 is for disorders associated with the use of alcohol 
that are not classifiable as Alcohol Dependence, Alcohol Abuse, Alcohol Intoxication, or other recognized 
alcohol disorders.  
 
4 
 
 
 
Applicant testified that her consumption of alcohol has had no impact on her 
work. She has never missed work or been late to work because of her alcohol 
consumption. Her latest performance appraisal reflects that she exceeds expectations 
in all evaluated categories. Specifically, her attitude and contributions received praise. 
Her previous employers also praised her attitude, empathy, integrity, diligence, and 
dependability. One reference stated, “[s]he is intelligent, resourceful, extremely 
trustworthy, and dedicated to finishing every task she takes on. I have trusted her with 
my business and I would do it again in a second.”7 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable, to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
                                                          
7 Tr. 17-18; AE B-D 
 
5 
 
 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption: 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
  
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 including: 
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving under the 
influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other 
incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as 
an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and  
 
Applicant committed two alcohol-related driving offenses. She pled guilty to 
OMVI in March 2007 and no contest to DUAC in March 2010. I find disqualifying 
condition AG ¶ 22(a) applies.  
 
 Two alcohol consumption mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 23 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
6 
 
 
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).  
 
Applicant’s commission of two alcohol-related driving offenses within a four-year 
period is troubling. Nevertheless, based on the evidence presented, these offenses 
appear to be anomalies. Before her first arrest, she consumed alcohol a couple of times 
a month. Following her OMVI conviction in 2006, she attended mandatory alcohol 
education classes. Since then, she continued her occasional consumption of alcohol, 
doing so primarily on weekends or special occasions. Prior to her arrest in January 
2010, she thought she was going to dinner with her sister to celebrate her birthday. 
Instead, she was going to a surprise birthday party. At the party, she followed the 
guidance provided at the prior alcohol education classes by consuming less than one 
drink per hour. On that occasion, she consumed two to three glasses of wine over a five 
to six hour period. When she was later stopped by the police, she refused a 
breathalyzer test based on comments her attorney made in the earlier court proceeding. 
While she later regretted her decision to refuse the breathalyzer test, she admits that 
she acted improperly by drinking and driving on that occasion. She has accepted 
responsibility for her wrongdoing. Following her DUAC conviction in 2010, a licensed 
professional counselor evaluated her and determined she did not need alcohol 
treatment. She successfully completed ADSAP and did not consume alcohol during that 
program. While she has consumed alcohol following her second conviction, she credibly 
testified that she has not driven after drinking and indicated that she will not do so in the 
future. She did not consume alcohol for three weeks prior to the hearing. In short, she 
has acknowledged her alcohol-related issues, taken action to resolve them, and 
established a pattern of responsible use. Her misuse of alcohol is unlikely to recur. I find 
that AG ¶¶ 23(a) and 23(b) apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
7 
 
 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
whole-person concept analysis. Applicant is a dedicated and hard working individual. 
She was employed throughout undergraduate and graduate school. Her prior and 
current employers speak very highly of her. She has made mistakes by drinking and 
driving. She has accepted responsibility for that misconduct and learned her lesson. 
She has indicated that she will not drink and drive in the future. I found her testimony 
both credible and compelling. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions 
and doubts about Appellant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under the 
guideline for Alcohol Consumption. 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by Section 
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.b:  For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security clearance 
for Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
____________ 
James F. Duffy 
Administrative Judge 
 
