 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 10-02518    
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Philip J. Katauskas, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: William F. Savarino, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
NOEL, Nichole L., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a 
security clearance to work in the defense industry. Applicant has a history of alcohol 
related arrests and has been diagnosed as alcohol dependent. He voluntarily sought 
treatment, which he completed successfully. He last consumed alcohol and his last 
arrest occurred almost 2.5 years ago. He is currently being treated by a clinical 
psychologist, who gives a favorable prognosis for continued sobriety. He did not falsify 
his February 2009 security clearance application. Clearance is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,1 on December 22, 
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a statement of 
                                                          
1 This case is adjudicated under Executive Order (EO)10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry, signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program, dated January 2, 1992, as 
amended (Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to 
Classified Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this 
 
2 
 
reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to 
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR detailed the factual bases for 
the action under the adjudicative guidelines for Alcohol Consumption (Guideline G) and 
Criminal Conduct (Guideline J).  
 
Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was 
assigned to me on April 5, 2011. The hearing proceeded as scheduled on May 17, 
2011.  Government’s Exhibits (GE) 1 through 10 were admitted without objection. 
Applicant’s counsel presented the testimony of three witnesses, including Applicant. 
Counsel also offered Applicant’s Exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted 
without objection. 
 
Based on testimony provided at hearing, I requested that each party submit 
additional information by June 1, 2011. Each party submitted one additional document. I 
admitted the documents, identified as GE 11 and AE F, respectively. I received the 
Transcript (Tr.) on June 26, 2011. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
On February 17, 2011, Department Counsel submitted a written motion to amend 
the SOR, adding a Guideline E allegation based on Applicant’s alleged failure to 
disclose his January and February 2009 arrests on his February 2009 security 
clearance application in response to Question 22 (Police Record). Applicant denied the 
allegation. At hearing, I amended the SOR, without objection from Applicant’s counsel 
as follows:2 
 
3. Guideline E: Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about an 
individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information. Of 
special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers during the security 
clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 a. You falsified material facts on Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), Standard Form 86, that you signed on February 29, 2009, in which 
you were required to answer the following questions: “22. Police Record. a. [For the 
timeframe of the last 7 years.] Have you been issued a summons, citation, or 
ticket to appear in court in a criminal proceeding against you; are you on trial or 
awaiting a trial on criminal charges; or are you currently awaiting sentencing for a 
criminal offense?; and d. have you EVER been charged with any offsense(s) 
related to alcohol or drugs?;” to which you responded, “Yes”, but you deliberately 
failed to disclose your arrests and charges for DWI on January 9, 2009, and on 
February 19, 2009. 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
case. The AG were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). 
The AG replaces the guidelines in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.    
 
2 Tr. 10-12. 
 
3 
 
  At hearing, Department Counsel withdrew SOR allegation ¶ 2.c.3 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old employee of a government contractor. He is single and 
has no children. He completed college in 2008, at age 27, with a degree in computer 
science. He was initially granted a security clearance in 2004 while working for a 
different government contractor. In February 2009, Applicant’s facility security officer 
(FSO) entered an adverse information report into the Joint Personnel Adjudication 
System (JPAS) concerning Applicant’s arrest and subsequent confinement for driving 
while intoxicated (DWI). The adverse information report triggered a new background 
investigation focusing on Applicant’s history of alcohol-related issues.4  
 
The Applicant admits, as alleged in the SOR, that he was arrested seven times 
between 1999 and 2009. His first arrest in 1999 was for possession of marijuana. He 
was acquitted of the charge. Between 2001 and 2009, Applicant was arrested six times 
for alcohol-related offenses, resulting in five convictions.5 
 
In 2001, Applicant was arrested for and pleaded guilty to possession of alcohol 
under 21. He received probation before judgment. For the next five years, Applicant did 
not have any alcohol-related incidents. In May 2006, he was arrested for and pleaded 
guilty to driving while impaired by alcohol (DWIA). The court sentenced him to 30 days 
in jail, with 28 days suspended, and probation before judgment. Less than a year later, 
in March 2007, Applicant was arrested for multiple counts of alcohol-related driving 
offenses after a traffic stop for speeding. Applicant submitted to a breathalyzer test, 
which registered a .08 blood alcohol level. He pleaded guilty to DWIA and was 
sentenced to 60 days incarceration, with 50 days suspended, and two years supervised 
probation.  Three months after pleading guilty to the March 2007 DWIA, he had another 
alcohol-related arrest. He was charged with driving while intoxicated, rogue and 
vagabond, and theft less than $100. These charges were nolle prossed.6  
 
In January 2009, one month before the end of his probation on the March 2007 
arrest, Applicant was again arrested and charged with multiple alcohol-related driving 
offenses. In exchange for serving 30 days in jail, with work release, the case was placed 
on the stet docket. The prosecutor dismissed the charges after Applicant completed his 
jail term. His final arrest occurred February 19, 2009. During a routine traffic stop for 
speeding, the officer smelled alcohol on Applicant’s breath. Applicant refused to take 
field sobriety tests, but agreed to take a breathalyzer, which registered a .08 blood 
                                                          
3 Tr. 14. 
 
4  Tr. 108-110; Incident Report, dated February 26, 2009. 
 
5 SOR, Answer. 
 
6 GE 1; GE 5-7; GE 10. 
  
 
4 
 
alcohol level. Ultimately, he pleaded guilty to a reduced charge of reckless driving and 
received probation before judgment.7  
 
At hearing, Applicant testified that he hit his “rock bottom” during the ride home 
with his mother after his February 2009 arrest. Usually, his friends picked up him up 
from jail as he avoided his parents during the time he was drinking heavily. During the 
car ride, Applicant watched his mother cry and blame herself for his problems with 
alcohol. Although not a drinker herself, alcoholism runs in her family. Applicant testified 
that seeing his mother so distraught touched him in a way nothing else had before. 
Even as his mother recalled that day during her testimony, Applicant became teary-
eyed. He testified that night he realized that something needed to change. In April 2009, 
after being put on a wait-list, he voluntarily entered a 28-day inpatient alcohol treatment 
program.8  
 
Applicant reported that he began drinking at age 15, usually in social settings, but 
not to intoxication. He began drinking more when he went off to college, where he 
consumed alcohol to the point of intoxication almost every weekend. Upon entering the 
workforce after college, Applicant reined in his drinking. He continued to drink on 
weekends, often to intoxication. In 2006, however, his drinking habits escalated 
substantially. He would drink alcohol three to four times a week, consuming eight or 
more beers at a time. During treatment Applicant was diagnosed as being alcohol-
dependent by a licensed clinical alcohol and drug counselor.9  
 
He successfully completed the 28-day program. His discharge summary included 
five “special recommendations” as part of his continuing care plan. Those special 
recommendations were that Applicant: (1) abstain from drugs and alcohol; (2) complete 
outpatient addictions counseling; (3) see a psychiatrist to help him manage his anxiety 
issues; (4) attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) three times per week and obtain a 
sponsor; and (5) submit to random urinalysis and breath analysis. Applicant testified 
that he took the list as a set of suggestions, not a rigid plan for him to follow. He left 
treatment with the understanding that the underlying purpose of the recommendations 
was to help him maintain sobriety by developing a sobriety support network.10  
 
Applicant attended AA for one month after he left treatment. While he 
appreciated the lessons he learned in the program, he did not feel AA was a good fit for 
him. After consulting his primary care physician, Applicant decided not to see a 
psychiatrist because he did not want to be medicated for his anxiety issues. Instead, he 
opted to create a sobriety support network more suitable to him. His network consists of 
his family, his girlfriend and a few other friends, his co-workers, his church, and a 
clinical psychologist, Dr. M. Applicant talks to his mother on the telephone regularly, at 
                                                          
7 GE 1; GE 5-6; GE 8.  
 
8 Tr. 114-118.  
 
9 GE 6; GE 9; AE 11. 
 
10  Tr. 118-120, 148-149; AE F. 
 
 
5 
 
least every three to four days. He sees his father at work. The two have lunch together 
each week. They also check-in with each other during the work week, visiting each 
other’s work area. Applicant knows that his parents compare notes on his behavior and 
progress. He also attends family gatherings at his parent’s house, something he did not 
do while he was drinking. He has cultivated new friendships, as well as a romantic 
relationship that support his sobriety. His co-workers also support him in maintaining his 
sobriety. He also attends church regularly.11  
 
Applicant has been seeing Dr. M since March 2011. Dr. M has 27 years of 
experience as a clinical psychologist. In private practice since 1991, her practice 
focuses on holistic healing. Although alcohol dependency issues constitute a small 
percentage of her current practice, she does have significant experience with the 
condition. As a doctoral candidate, she completed an internship at an alcohol 
rehabilitation center for the Navy. Her dissertation focused on the use of group therapy 
in the treatment of alcohol dependency. Post-doctorate, she worked with two police 
departments counseling officers and their families, at times dealing with alcohol 
dependency. In her current practice she continues to treat patients, like Applicant who 
have been diagnosed as being alcohol dependent. She also does some peer 
supervision in this area.12  
 
Applicant sought Dr.M’s help after having an anxiety attack. He was also 
experiencing relationship and anger issues. Applicant reported his issues with alcohol 
and his recent treatment for alcohol dependency. In their initial session, Dr. M 
completed a personality assessment of Applicant. The assessment revealed that 
Applicant is extremely introverted and does not openly share his feelings. In the months 
Applicant has worked with Dr. M, the two have explored his reasons for drinking. As a 
teenager, he drank alcohol to ease feelings of social awkwardness and to fit in with his 
peers. As an adult, Applicant used alcohol to cope with stress. Dr. M has taught 
Applicant techniques to manage his trigger emotions: stress, anger, and anxiety.13  
 
Dr. M is aware of the continuing care recommendations that Applicant received 
when he was discharged from his treatment program. She does not view the 
recommendations as a set of hard rules that Applicant must follow to ensure his 
sobriety. Because Applicant is introverted, Dr. M was not surprised when Applicant 
reported that he stopped participating in AA. Because AA requires participants to talk 
openly about their personal experiences in a group setting, it does not mesh well with 
Applicant’s introverted personality type. Participation in AA, Dr. M testified, is not a 
requirement for an alcoholic to maintain sobriety because the program does not work for 
everyone. The key to maintaining sobriety, she explained, is to develop a strong support 
system. She believes that Applicant has done so and has adhered to the spirit of the 
suggestions provided to him by the treatment program. She believes the adjudication of 
                                                          
11 Tr. 92-93, 99, 111-112 123-126, 135-141.  
 
12  AE A; Tr. 33-34. 
 
13 Tr. 35-42, 130-135. 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant’s security clearance has been a very revealing event. Instead of turning to 
alcohol to deal with the stress associated with the process and its potential results, 
Applicant has leaned on his support network. Dr. M is very pleased with Applicant’s 
progress and gives him a favorable prognosis. The two plan to continue their work 
together for the foreseeable future.14  
 
Today, Applicant admits that he is an alcoholic and has expressed a commitment 
to sobriety. He has been sober for almost 2.5 years. He credits his sobriety support 
network, which he sees as having eight sponsors that he can reach out to at anytime. 
Applicant enjoys sobriety. He feels as if he has gotten his life back.15 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Applicant denied the allegation that he deliberately omitted his January and 
February 2009 arrests from his February 2009 security clearance application in 
response to questions 22(a) and (d). 
  
When he returned to work after his February 2009 arrest, having missed a day 
while he was in jail, he received a call from his (FSO) who had seen news of Applicant’s 
arrest in the local newspaper and discovered that the local police had reported 
Applicant’s latest arrest to base security. She asked Applicant if he had been in trouble. 
Applicant confirmed his arrest. Later, his supervisor told him that he had three days to 
complete a new security clearance application. Applicant testified that in the days after 
his February 2009 arrest he felt as if he was in a haze. He was distracted and 
overwhelmed. When he answered question 22, he reported all of his arrests with the 
exception of the January and February arrests. He completed the security clearance 
application and submitted it on February 25, 2009. The next day, the FSO entered the 
adverse information report in JPAS.16 
 
He did not learn of the omission until his interview with an Office of Personnel 
Management investigator in June 2009. During the interview, he disclosed the details of 
his arrests. He testified that he was able to do so at the interview because he was sober 
and his thought process was much clearer. At the time of the interview he had 
completed treatment and been sober for four months. He was not in the same state of 
emotional turmoil he had been in February 2009 when he completed the security 
clearance application. Applicant testified that he did not have any intent to purposely 
conceal his arrests from the government. Prior to the February 2009, Applicant 
completed two security clearance applications in July and December 2002. He fully 
disclosed his arrest history on each of those applications. He completed another 
security clearance application in August 2010, also fully disclosing his criminal history.17  
                                                          
14 Tr. 37, 46- 51, 65-73, 
 
15 126,128-131,145-146. 
 
16  Tr. 174-177; GE 2. 
 
17 Tr. 166-177; GE 1-2, 4, 6. 
 
7 
 
Policies  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.  
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the 
adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, 
impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a 
conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” 
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the 
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.  
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
8 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption  
 
The security concern about alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:  
 
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness.  
 
The guideline notes several disqualifying conditions that are relevant to 
Applicant’s case:  
 
AG ¶ 22(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while 
under the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, 
or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; 
 
AG ¶ 22(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of 
impaired judgment, regardless of whether the person is diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
AG ¶ 22(e) evaluation of alcohol abuse or alcohol dependence by a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized 
alcohol treatment program. 
 
Applicant has a history of alcohol-related arrests and convictions. He has 
habitually driven a car after consuming alcohol in excess of the legal intoxication limit. 
That he engaged repeatedly in this behavior not only shows impaired judgment, but a 
reckless disregard for the law and the safety of others. After his last arrest in February 
2009, Applicant entered a rehabilitation program where he was diagnosed as being 
alcohol dependent by a licensed clinical alcohol and drug counselor.18  
 
Three of the mitigating conditions available under AG ¶ 23, are applicable: 
 
AG ¶ 23(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, 
or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
AG ¶ 23(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of 
alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this 
                                                          
18 AG ¶ 22(e) is not limited to the specific credentials that are enumerated. Instead, they “contemplate a 
broad range of providers who, by education and by position, are qualified to diagnose and treat alcohol 
dependence and other substance abuse disorders.” ISCR Case No. 07-00558 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 7, 
2008). 
 
9 
 
problem and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
AG ¶ 23(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or 
outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, 
has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified 
consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment 
recommendations, such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics 
Anonymous or a similar organization and has received a favorable 
prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a licensed clinical 
social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program. 
 
Applicant has not consumed alcohol since February 2009, almost 2.5 years ago. 
Because he is no longer consuming alcohol, he no longer engages in the behaviors that 
gave rise to the present security clearance adjudication. He voluntarily entered an 
inpatient treatment program, which he successfully completed. He accepts and readily 
admits that he is an alcoholic and has demonstrated a commitment to sobriety by 
developing a strong sobriety support network. Since March 2011, he has been in 
therapy with Dr. M, a licensed clinical psychologist, who lauds Applicant for the work he 
has done to maintain sobriety. She gives him a favorable prognosis for sobriety in the 
future.  
 
 Applicant’s journey to sobriety has been unorthodox, but successful. While he 
has not followed the special recommendations given to him in his discharge from his 
inpatient treatment, he has, as Dr. M testified, taken the underlying goal of the 
suggestions to heart. Applicant is not required to follow a specific methodology with 
respect to alcohol treatment.19 He has crafted a system that works for him.  He is 
actively and responsibly managing his alcohol dependence. He has mitigated the 
Guideline G concerns. 
 
Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern raised under the criminal conduct guideline is set forth in ¶ 
30 of the Adjudicative Guidelines:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.  
 
Between 1999 and 2009 Applicant was arrested seven times. His arrests and 
resulting five convictions for DWIA is disqualifying under AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious 
crime or multiple lesser offenses.” 
 
The following three mitigating conditions enumerated in AG ¶ 32 are applicable:  
                                                          
19  See ISCR Case No. 02-09608 (App. Bd. Dec 17, 2003). 
 
10 
 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does 
not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
 (c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
Applicant’s last arrest occurred almost 2.5 years ago. Now that he has decided to 
abstain from alcohol, it is unlikely that he will engage in criminal conduct in the future. 
Given that Applicant has been sober, without relapse for 2.5 years; his past criminal 
behavior is not an indication of his current security-worthiness. His 1999 possession 
marijuana arrest is mitigated because Applicant was acquitted. Applicant has shown 
successful rehabilitation as contemplated under AG ¶ 32(d) for the reasons enumerated 
in the discussion mitigating the Alcohol Consumption concerns. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The government alleges that Applicant deliberately falsified his February 2009 
security clearance application by failing to disclose his January and February 2009 DUI 
arrests in response to questions 22 (a) and (d). Applicant claims that his failure to list 
the most recent arrests was not intentional as he listed his entire arrest history save the 
most recent arrests. A statement is false when it is made deliberately (knowingly and 
willfully). An omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person 
genuinely forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or 
genuinely thought the information did not need to be reported. 
 
I conclude that Applicant did not falsify his security clearance application. He 
credibly testified that he inadvertently failed to disclose his January and February 2009 
arrest. He attributes the unintentional omission to his distracted state of mind when he 
completed the security clearance application. In addition to feeling pressured for time, 
he was still sorting through the emotions of his mother’s revelations and his decision to 
get help. Applicant’s lack of intent to falsify his security clearance application is 
 
11 
 
supported by the fact that he fully disclosed his arrest history on the two security 
clearance applications he completed prior to February 2009 and on the security 
clearance application he completed in August 2010. 
 
I have no reservations about Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
ability to protect classified information. In reaching this conclusion, I have also 
considered the whole-person factors at AG ¶ 2. Applicant’s history of alcohol 
dependency and his associated criminal record is extensive. He does not minimize the 
seriousness or extent of his problem. He voluntarily sought in-patient treatment and 
enlisted the help of a clinical psychologist. With this most recent decision he has 
affirmed his commitment to sobriety and shown maturity in recognizing when he needs 
help. Given the nature of alcohol dependency, it is impossible to predict whether or not 
an individual will relapse, but in this case Applicant has surrounded himself with an 
effective support network, which decreases the likelihood. Applicant has mitigated the 
Alcohol Consumption, Criminal Conduct, and Personal Conduct concerns.  
 
Formal Findings  
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a - 1.h:     For Applicant  
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:     FOR APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 2.a -2.b., and 2.d.:   For Applicant  
 
Subparagraph 2.c.:     Withdrawn 
 
Paragraph 3, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 3.a.     For Applicant 
 
12 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
Nichole L. Noel 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
