Item 4.1
Item 1.2
1
                                                                     
                               DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
                DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-06195
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
WHITE, David M., Administrative Judge:
Applicant hit a pedestrian while driving his car, and left the scene without
providing his personal information or rendering assistance as required under state law.
He was charged with this felony offense, and ultimately convicted of misdemeanor hit
and run under a plea bargain. He remains on probation. The evidence is insufficient to
mitigate resulting security concerns. Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits,
eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on April 12, 2010  On1
January 21, 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing security concerns under Guideline J
(Criminal Conduct), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct).  The action was taken under2
Item 3.3
The Government submitted seven Items in support of the SOR allegations. 4
Item 4.5
Item 3. He did not directly respond to SOR ¶ 2.b, but admitted SOR ¶ 1.a, which the former allegation just6
incorporates by reference under a different guideline.
Item 6.7
2
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to
Classified Information, effective within the Department of Defense after September 1,
2006. 
Applicant answered the SOR in writing (AR) on February 3, 2011, and requested
that his case be decided by an administrative judge on the written record without a
hearing.  Department Counsel submitted the Government’s written case on March 7,3
2011. A complete copy of the File of Relevant Material (FORM)  was provided to4
Applicant, and he was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation within 30 days of his receipt of the FORM. 
Applicant signed the document acknowledging receipt of his copy of the FORM
on March 15, 2011, and returned it to DOHA. He provided no further response to the
FORM within the 30-day period, did not request additional time to respond, and
expressed no objection to my consideration of the evidence submitted by Department
Counsel. I received the case assignment on May 12, 2011.
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 25-year-old employee of a defense contractor, where he has
worked since March 2010. He has no military service, and this is his first application for
a security clearance. He has never married, has no children, and lives with his two adult
sisters. Both of his parents are deceased. He attended a community college part-time
for about six years after graduating from high school, while also working.  In his5
response to the SOR, he admitted each allegation.  Applicant’s admissions, including6
his responses to DOHA interrogatories,  are incorporated in the following findings.7
Applicant was arrested on January 5, 2009, and charged with leaving the scene
of an accident resulting in injury to another person; otherwise known as Felony Hit and
Run; or Hit and Run, Death or Injury. He was driving home from work when he turned a
corner and struck a pedestrian. He claims that he stopped and got out of the car to ask
the woman if she was injured, and she replied that she was okay, so he left. The police
were waiting for him when he arrived home, and informed him that the woman had been
Items 5, 6, and 7.8
Item 7.9
Item 6.10
3
taken to the hospital. Since he had not left any contact information or rendered
assistance before leaving the scene, he was arrested and charged.8
Applicant’s case was delayed and continued for several reasons, until November
23, 2009. On that date, pursuant to a plea agreement, a charge of Misdemeanor Hit and
Run (or Hit and Run, Property Damage) was added and Applicant pled Nolo
Contendere to that lesser offense. He was accordingly found guilty of the misdemeanor,
and sentenced to three years of probation, to pay fines and fees totaling $160, to
perform 30 days of community service, and to pay restitution to the victim. At a
restitution hearing on May 28, 2010, the court admitted and considered a 116-page
document detailing the victim’s expenses, medical bills, and medical records. The court
then ordered Applicant to pay restitution in the amount of $46,811 to the victim. On
September 24, 2010, Applicant’s counsel appeared and stated that Applicant’s
insurance company would pay the restitution. The court ordered the original terms and
conditions of Applicant’s probation to remain in full force and effect.   9
At the time of his offense, Applicant had been working at a state-licensed
behavioral health care facility since February 2006. On May 6, 2009, the state’s
department of social services ordered that he be precluded from contacting clients and
excluded from the licensed treatment facility because his felony hit and run offense
constituted conduct inimical to the health, morals, welfare or safety of the people of the
state. By January 2010, when his court records continued to reflect his unresolved
Felony Hit and Run charge, his employer advised him that their policies required that he
be terminated for being charged with a felony. There is no evidence in the record to
show what, if any, work he performed between his exclusion from the facility in May
2009 and his final termination in January 2010.  10
Applicant submitted no other evidence tending to establish good judgment,
trustworthiness, or reliability. I was unable to evaluate his credibility, demeanor, or
character in person since he elected to have his case decided without a hearing. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions (DCs) and mitigating conditions (MCs), which are to be used in
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
4
factors listed in AG ¶ 2 describing the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According
to AG ¶¶ 2(a) and 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of applicable
guidelines in the context of a number of variables known as the whole-person concept.
The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the
person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of the national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “[t]he applicant is
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7
of Executive Order 10865 provides: “[a]ny determination under this order adverse to an
applicant shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense
be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”
A person applying for access to classified information seeks to enter into a
fiduciary relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying. The DCs supported by the evidence in this case are AG ¶ 31:
5
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
Applicant committed the offense of Hit and Run, Death or Injury, which is a
felony. By definition, and under the circumstances of this case involving almost $47,000
in restitution for medical expenses and other damages to the victim; this is a serious
crime. It is also a crime that directly implicates his judgment, reliability, trustworthiness,
and willingness to comply with laws because he sought to avoid responsibility for his
conduct and the resulting injuries to another person. His claim that the victim told him
that she was okay is not credible in light of her almost immediate hospitalization and the
extent of her medical damages. Applicant remains on probation until late November
2012. These three established DCs shift the burden of mitigation to Applicant.
AG ¶ 32 provides conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security
concerns. These are: 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life;
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement.
Applicant’s criminal offense is too recent to support mitigation under AG ¶ 32(a),
especially since it was not shown to have occurred under unusual circumstances. When
confronted with a situation calling for personal accountability and responsibility, he left
the scene hoping to escape the consequences. As for AG ¶ 32(b), he failed to present
any evidence that he was pressured or coerced into committing this offense. He
admitted and was convicted of committing the offense, precluding the applicability of AG
¶ 32(c). Applicant offered no evidence of remorse for his conduct, and restitution to the
victim was made under court order. The only evidence concerning the quality of his
employment record is that he was fired from his last job as a direct result of this
misconduct. Evidence of successful rehabilitation, to establish mitigation under AG ¶
32(d), is accordingly lacking.
FORM at 5.11
ISCR Case No. 06-20964 at 4-7 (App. Bd. Apr. 10, 2008).12
6
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 sets forth potentially disqualifying conditions, none of which are
independently supported by this record according to their plain meaning. Department
Counsel mentioned “whole-person” concerns under AG ¶ 16(c).  The “whole-person”11
analysis will be addressed below. Applicant’s criminal offense is both sufficient for an
adverse determination (AG ¶ 16(c)), and explicitly covered (AG ¶ 16(d)) under Guideline
J. Applicant was fired for “conduct inimical” due to the offense, but the record is devoid
of any evidence of a written or recorded condition of employment as required under AG
¶ 16(f). However, to the extent that Appellant’s criminal conduct involves questionable
judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, as discussed above, it can also be considered to support security concerns
under AG ¶ 15.  Applicant offered no evidence that would tend to support any12
mitigating condition under Guideline E. After careful review of the record, I find that
none of them apply. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
7
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
pertinent facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature,
accountable adult who voluntarily left the scene of an accident after hitting a pedestrian
with his car and causing her substantial injuries. There was no reason for him to have
done so other than to avoid responsibility and accountability for his own conduct. This
demonstrates a lack of the integrity and trustworthiness that are fundamental to
eligibility for being entrusted with national security information and sensitive duties.
Applicant demonstrated neither remorse nor any other indication of rehabilitation. He
remains on probation for another year and a half. He offered no other evidence
concerning his character that could support a conclusion that he would not attempt to
evade personal responsibility in the future, if confronted with potentially adverse
consequences. 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial doubt as to Applicant’s
present eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. He did not meet his burden to
mitigate the security concerns arising from his criminal conduct and personal conduct.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
DAVID M. WHITE
Administrative Judge
