1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 10-03238
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Fahryn E. Hoffman, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se   
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows
he has a history of financial problems or difficulties. He has not made any progress
toward resolving approximately $20,000 in delinquent debts, and it appears that he has
no intention of making any effort to do so. Applicant did not present sufficient evidence
to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns stemming from his history
of financial problems. Accordingly, as explained below, this case is decided against
Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 Exhibit 1. 2
 Exhibits A, B, C, and D. 3
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on October 18,1
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a complaint, and
it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline known as
Guideline F for financial considerations.   
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned
to me February 9, 2011. The hearing took place March 29, 2011. The transcript (Tr.)
was received April 6, 2011. 
Findings of Fact
In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted that he is indebted on five delinquent
debts for a total of approximately $20,505. His admissions are accepted as findings of
fact. In addition, the following findings of fact are supported by substantial evidence.  
Applicant is a 54-year-old employee of a federal contractor. His educational
background includes a bachelor’s degree in engineering. Except for about a six-month
period during 2004–2005, Applicant has been continuously employed in his field since
at least 1994.  He worked as a member of the scientific staff for a communications2
company from 1994 to December 2004, when he was laid off due to company
downsizing. He was then unemployed until June 2005, when he began his current job
as a senior systems engineer. He did not receive unemployment compensation during
2004–2005 because he received a severance package that covered five and a half
months. He was earning an annual salary of about $89,000 when he was laid off. His
current employer hired him at an annual salary of about $90,000, and he is now earning
about $109,000. He has a good employment record as shown by certificates of
excellence or achievement awards, along with cash bonuses, presented to him in 2007,
2009, 2010, and 2011.   3
Applicant’s first marriage ended in divorce in 1996. He has three children. He
adopted two children from his first wife, and the marriage produced one child. He has
 Tr. 54. 4
 Tr. 75. 5
 Exhibits 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. 6
 Exhibit 2. 7
3
regularly paid child support over the years, and he is now paying child support for one
child, a son, who lives with Applicant’s ex-wife but spends considerable time with him.
The other two children are adults living on their own. Since 2003, Applicant has been
married to his common-law wife, and they have no children of their own. His wife was
formerly employed as a paralegal, but she has been unable to work for several years
due to a chronic medical condition. Since about May or June 2008, she has received
disability compensation from the Social Security Administration.  Applicant reports that4
she receives about $1,400 monthly that goes into a separate account controlled by his
wife, and he is not familiar with the details of how she spends the money.5
Applicant is indebted to five creditors for delinquents debts for a total of
approximately $20,505, and they remain unpaid. Three of the debts stem from credit
card accounts that were charged off or are in collection. One debt is from a line of credit
that was charged off. And the fifth debt is an unpaid $23 medical collection account. The
five delinquent debts are established by Applicant’s admissions, his statements, and
three credit reports.  6
In a December 2009 background interview, Applicant attributed the delinquent
debts to not earning enough money to pay his current expenses, his wife’s medical
expenses, and the delinquent debts as well.  At hearing, he stated that he has been7
living paycheck-to-paycheck for some time. Also at hearing, he did not submit any
documentary evidence concerning the debts or any efforts made to repay or otherwise
resolve the debts. He did not submit any documentary evidence concerning out-of-
pocket medical expenses for his wife. And he did not submit any documentary evidence
concerning his overall financial situation or his ability to repay the delinquent debts.  
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a8
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.9
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 10
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 11
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.14
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.15
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 16
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).17
4
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As8
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt9
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An10
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  11
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting12
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An13
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate14
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme15
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.16
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.17
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.18
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 19
 See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an20
applicant is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness
or recurring financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  21
 AG ¶ 19(a).  22
 AG ¶ 19(c). 23
 AG ¶ 20 (a)–(f). 24
5
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it18
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant19
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline20
F is:
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  21
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information within the defense industry.   
The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties, and these matters are ongoing. This raises security concerns
because it indicates inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not22
meeting financial obligations  within the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient23
to establish these two disqualifying conditions. 
There are six mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline F.  Any of the24
following may mitigate security concerns:  
 Tr. 46. 25
 Tr. 91–93. 26
6
¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts;
¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
¶ 20(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
I have considered these mitigating conditions in light of the evidence as a whole,
and none, individually or in combination, is sufficient to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the security concerns stemming from Applicant’s history of financial problems
or difficulties. Although he has had a well-paying job since June 2005—and is currently
earning an annual salary of more than $100,000—he has done virtually nothing to repay
or resolve the delinquent debts totaling more than $20,000. That amount is sizeable, but
it is not so large that it is insurmountable. What is missing here is responsible conduct
coupled with a good-faith effort to repay or otherwise resolve the delinquent debts.
There is no evidence of attempts to negotiate settlements, there is no evidence of a
pattern of payments made as part of a realistic plan to repay the debts, and there is no
evidence of even a token payment in the recent past. Along with a lack of action, at
hearing, Applicant displayed a misplaced focus concerning the matters under
consideration. For example, at the beginning of his direct testimony, he sought to
question Department Counsel about his case.  In his closing argument, he25
characterized Guideline F or the process in general or both as “absurd,” “ridiculous,”
and “unfair,” and that he was undeserving of this level of scrutiny.  His misplaced focus26
did not help his case in mitigation. In addition, Applicant’s case in mitigation suffers from
a lack of supporting or corroborating documentary evidence. 
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).27
 The unpaid $23 medical collection account is decided for Applicant under the mighty legal doctrine of de28
minimis non curat lex (= the law does not concern itself with trifles). Black’s Law Dictionary 496 (Bryan A.
Garner ed., 9  ed., W est 2009).   th
7
To conclude, the evidence as a whole justifies current doubts about Applicant’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan and the clearly-consistent
standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this
conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept  and Applicant’s27
favorable evidence, to include his good employment record and his wife’s medical
condition and resulting disability. Nevertheless, Applicant did not meet his ultimate
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided
against Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: For Applicant  28
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.          
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
