1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 11-00034
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Daniel F. Crowley, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se   
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny his eligibility for a
security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows he has a history
of financial problems or difficulties. He defaulted on first and second mortgage loans
due to a year-long period of unemployment and subsequent employment at a greatly
reduced salary. These were circumstances largely beyond his control, and he acted
responsibly under the circumstances. At present, there are clear indications that his
past financial problems are resolved and under control. Looking at the case as a whole,
Applicant’s financial problems were situational and atypical, and not due to a long-term
pattern of financial irresponsibility or frivolous spending. Accordingly, as explained
below, this case is decided for Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on March 14,1
2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a complaint, and
it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline known as
Guideline F for financial considerations. The SOR alleged a charged-off debt of about
$100,000 stemming from a second mortgage loan, a charged-off debt of about $13,775
stemming from a credit card account, and a pending Chapter 7 bankruptcy case. 
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned
to me April 28, 2011. The hearing took place June 7, 2011. The transcript (Tr.) was
received June 20, 2011. The record was kept open for 30 days, until July 7, 2011, to
provide Applicant an opportunity to submit additional documentary information in
support of his case. He  made a timely submission, and those matters are admitted,
without objections, as Exhibits D and E.   
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He has a bachelor’s
degree in mechanical engineering, awarded in 1985, when he began working in his
field. He began his current employment as a mechanical engineer in January 2008, and
his current annual salary is about $65,000. His job involves the designing and building
of mobile-surveillance equipment, launch platforms, and training modules. He is seeking
an industrial security clearance for the first time.
In approximately late 1999, Applicant accepted a job offer as a project engineer.
The job required him to make a cross-country move. He began the job in January 2000
and worked there to about January 2007. During this time, Applicant had built a custom-
made house that he occupied from September 2001 until he vacated it in about
December 2006. His intent or plan was to live in the house until he retired and then
beyond, although he took into account the possibility of having to sell it. He obtained two
mortgage loans against the property. Earning more than $100,000 annually, Applicant
had no trouble paying the loans and meeting his other financial obligations. This
changed in late 2006, when the company announced plans for a layoff due to a
downturn in the newsprint business. 
 Exhibit A; Tr. 64–66. 2
 Exhibit A; Tr. 66.3
 Exhibit 1. 4
 Exhibit 4. 5
 Exhibits 5, 6, 7, 8, C, and D. 6
3
Initially, the company sought volunteers, and Applicant accepted a buyout that
included $10,000 in severance pay. He did so because he had concerns that the
company’s newsprint business was in jeopardy. In addition, he was engaged to be
married for the first time in February 2007. His bride was located some distance away,
and he reasoned he would move to her location where she was employed instead of
vice versa. His concerns proved correct, as the company’s newsprint business ceased
operations within the next 6 to 12 months. 
Applicant was unemployed from January 2007 to January 2008. He did not
receive unemployment compensation because he accepted the buyout offer. When he
began his current job in January 2008, he did so at a greatly reduced salary from his
previous job, which paid about $120,000 annually. In contrast, his gross income for
2010 was about $60,000. He managed to make timely payments on the first mortgage
loan through November 2008; he caught up and was current for February and March
2009; and he was thereafter unable to make payments.  He did so by withdrawing2
money from a 401(k) account. Likewise, he made timely payments on the second
mortgage loan through July 2009, when he could no longer make the payments.3
Thereafter, he attempted, without success, a short sale and a federal loan modification
program. 
Applicant completed a security clearance application in August 2010.  In4
response to the relevant questions about his financial history, he disclosed the two
defaulted mortgage loans and a past-due credit card account for $13,775. He provided
additional information about these matters during a September 2010 interview as part of
his background investigation.  He disputed the delinquent credit card account for5
$13,775, and explained in great detail the steps he had taken to dispute it, to include
filing a fraud report with the police department. This debt does not appear in his
bankruptcy paperwork discussed below. He also explained he had a second fraudulent
credit card account with a different creditor. 
In about January 2011, his current employer notified Applicant that they had
received a wage garnishment stemming from a default judgment he was unaware of
until then. He sought legal counsel, who advised him that a Chapter 7 bankruptcy case
was prudent in light of his circumstances. The bankruptcy paperwork was filed in
January 2011, and the court granted Applicant a discharge on June 10, 2011.  At6
hearing, Applicant testified that he thought the wage garnishment stemmed from a
judgment on the second mortgage loan, but the bankruptcy paperwork suggests it was
 Tr. 48–52; Exhibit 6 (Schedule F, claim for $11,742). 7
 Exhibit A at 4. 8
 Exhibits 2, 3, and E.9
 Exhibit 6. 10
 Exhibit 7. 11
 Exhibit B. 12
 Exhibits 2, 3, A, and E. 13
 Exhibit E. 14
4
a $11,742 judgment for a debt on a credit card account.  This may be the second7
fraudulent credit card account, although it appears as a credit card account in good
standing, with a balance of $11,742, in a August 2009 credit report.  It does not appear8
in the September 2010 credit report, the January 2011 credit report, or the June 2011
credit report.  Likewise, none of the credit reports reflect a judgment. As a result, I am9
unable to determine the nature of the debt tied to the garnishment.  
Included in the bankruptcy were claims based on the first and second mortgage
loans.  Applicant also reaffirmed a debt associated his vehicle as well as a debt10
associated with a half interest in his current residence, where he and his wife reside.11
He now owns the vehicle outright.12
Of the four credit reports in evidence,  the most recent is from June 30, 2011,13
and it provides up-to-date information about Applicant’s overall financial condition.  In14
addition to reporting the June 2011 bankruptcy discharge, it reports six adverse
accounts, all of which have zero balances. The six accounts include the two mortgage
loans (the second is described as a home-equity loan) and credit card account alleged
in the SOR that he disputes. The fourth account is the loan for the recently paid off
vehicle. And the fifth and sixth accounts are two other credit card accounts. There are
no adverse accounts that reflect a balance due. The credit report also discloses 26
satisfactory accounts, of which 2 accounts have small balances, 24 have zero balances,
and none of the 26 accounts reflect a history of late payments.  
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to15
a security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.16
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 17
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 18
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).19
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.20
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.21
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.22
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 23
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).24
5
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As15
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt16
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An17
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  18
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting19
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An20
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate21
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme22
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.23
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.24
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.25
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 26
 See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an27
applicant is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness
or recurring financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  28
 AG ¶ 19(a).  29
 AG ¶ 19(c). 30
6
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it25
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant26
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline27
F is:
 Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  28
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information within the defense industry.   
The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. This raises security concerns because it indicates inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within29 30
the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish these two disqualifying
conditions. 
There are six mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline F. Any of the
following may mitigate security concerns:  
¶ 20(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
7
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
¶ 20(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
¶ 20(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors
or otherwise resolve debts;
¶ 20(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
¶ 20(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
The most pertinent here are ¶ 20(b)—conditions beyond one’s control, ¶ 20(c)—clear
indications that the problem is resolved or under control, and ¶ 20(e)—reasonable basis
to dispute. 
Applicant’s problematic financial history is due to a year-long period of
unemployment from January 2007 to January 2008, and then his subsequent
employment at a greatly reduced annual salary. These were are conditions largely
beyond his control. He acted responsibly under the circumstances by seeking gainful
employment and using money from his 401(k) account to pay the two mortgage loans.
Although he has not received financial counseling beyond what occurs during
bankruptcy, there are clear indications that the problems are resolved and under
control. Those indications are the recently completed Chapter 7 bankruptcy case
relieving him from liability for the two mortgage loans, which was clearly the gravamen
of the bankruptcy case. In addition, he disputed the $13,775 credit card debt due to
identity theft, which he detailed during his background interview. It appears to be
resolved because the June 2011 credit report shows it has a zero balance. Accordingly,
the three matters alleged in the SOR are resolved and he has no further liability or
exposure on them. Looking at the case as a whole, Applicant’s financial problems were
situational and atypical, and not due to a long-term pattern of financial irresponsibility or
frivolous spending.   
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate the security concerns, and I am persuaded that he will exercise the required
good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. In reaching this conclusion, I gave due
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9). 31
8
consideration to the nine factors of the whole-person concept.  Accordingly, I conclude31
that Applicant met his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance
decision. This case is decided for Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: For Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is clearly consistent with the national interest
to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified
information is granted.           
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
