Consisting of the transcript (Tr.) and Government exhibits (GE) 1-4.1
DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February2
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program  (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines (AG)
effective within the DoD on 1 September 2006. 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 11-00449
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Raashid S. Williams, Esquire, Department Counsel
Richard A. Stevens, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
Decision
______________
METZ, John Grattan, Jr., Administrative Judge:
Based on the record in this case,  Applicant’s clearance is granted.1
On 28 March 2011, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant listing security concerns under Guideline G,
Alcohol Consumption.  Applicant timely answered the SOR, requesting a hearing.2
DOHA assigned the case to me 20 May 2011, and I convened a hearing 30 June 2011.
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) 9 July 2011.
 
The record does not reveal how long he has been employed by the contractor, or in what capacity. The only3
clearance application in the record (GE 1) is a September 2004 periodic reinvestigation while Applicant was
still on active duty in the military.
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant admitted the Guideline G allegations, except for SOR 1.a, claiming that
he last abused alcohol in December 2008 and not March 2010 as alleged. He is a 33-
year-old employee of a defense contractor.  He seeks to retain the clearance he has3
held since October 1994. He also requires his clearance for his military reserve service.
Applicant served 13 years active duty, including deployment to Korea and Iraq, during
which he reached paygrade E-6. In 2½ years in the reserves, he has been promoted to
paygrade E-7.
Applicant has an 11-year history of excessive alcohol consumption, punctuated
by four alcohol-related incidents: a December 1999 non-judicial punishment (NJP) for
DUI, a January 2002 pedestrian-automobile accident where Applicant fell into the street
while drunk and was hit by a car, a December 2006 DWI conviction, and a December
2008 DUI conviction which resulted from Applicant falling asleep behind the wheel and
wrecking his car. Applicant was also charged with DUI in October 2002, but was found
not guilty at trial (GE 4).
Applicant began drinking in 1997 while he was stationed in Korea. After his
December 1999 NJP, the military reviewed his security clearance, which he retained
(GE 3). After his October 2002 DUI arrest, the military ordered him to attend an alcohol
safety action program (ASAP), but his work assignments and a second deployment to
Korea kept him from attending more than the first two sessions. Similarly, the pertinent
portion of his December 2006 sentence was suspended because he was deploying to
Iraq.
After his December 2008 DUI, Applicant completed the state ASAP. He also
attended an addiction counseling program weekly for about seven months between July
2009 and December 2010. During this program, he attended 20 alcoholics anonymous
meetings. He was not diagnosed as alcohol dependent.
Applicant saw his December 2008 accident as a wake-up call for his alcohol
consumption. He describes his current alcohol consumption as one drink per sitting,
whether out with friends or at home. This translates into 4-5 drinks per month. His
girlfriend of three years does not drink; so she drives when they go out, and she also
provides an incentive to limit his alcohol consumption.
Policies
The AG list factors for evaluating a person’s suitability for access to classified
information. Administrative judges must assess disqualifying and mitigating conditions
under each issue fairly raised by the facts and situation presented. Each decision must
See, Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).4
¶22.(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, fighting, child or5
spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent; . . . (c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the
point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol
dependent;
¶23.(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of6
actions taken to overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent)
or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser);
3
also reflect a fair, impartial, and commonsense consideration of the factors listed in AG
¶ 2(a). Any one disqualifying or mitigating condition is not, by itself, conclusive. Still,
specific adjudicative guidelines should be followed when a case can be measured by
them, as they represent policy guidance governing access to classified information.
Considering the SOR allegations and the evidence as a whole, the relevant adjudicative
guideline is Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption).
Security clearance decisions resolve whether it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant or continue an applicant’s security clearance. The Government
must prove, by substantial evidence, controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If it does,
the burden shifts to applicant to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the Government’s case.
Because no one has a right to a security clearance, the applicant bears a heavy burden
of persuasion.
Persons with access to classified information enter into a fiduciary relationship
with the Government based on trust and confidence. Therefore, the Government has a
compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgement,
reliability, and trustworthiness of those who must protect national interests as their own.
The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of any
reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the government.4
Analysis
The government established a case for disqualification under Guideline G, by
demonstrating Applicant’s 11-year history of alcohol abuse, punctuated by alcohol-
related arrests in December 1999, October 2002, December 2006, and December
2008, as well as an alcohol-related injury in January 2002.  However, Applicant5
mitigated the security concerns.
Neither the retention of his clearance after the 1999 NJP nor the favorable
adjudication of his clearance after his September 2004 periodic reinvestigation (which
looked at both the December 1999 and the December 2002 incidents) precludes
reexamination of those incidents in the current adjudication. Nevertheless, Applicant
acknowledged his past problems with alcohol, and took steps to reduce his
consumption.  Limiting the number of drinks, the number of occasions on which he6
4
drinks, and having his non-drinking girlfriend drive whenever they go out with friends
demonstrates a pattern of responsible use. I conclude Applicant is unlikely to abuse
alcohol in the future. Accordingly, I resolve Guideline G for Applicant.
Formal Findings
Paragraph 1. Guideline G: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs a-f: For Applicant
Conclusion
Viewing the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance granted.
                                              
                                             
JOHN GRATTAN METZ, JR
Administrative Judge
