 
1 
 
 
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------   )  ISCR Case No. 12-10564 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance  ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Meg Foreman, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
___________ 
 
Decision 
___________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) includes allegations of four delinquent 
debts, a state tax lien, and unpaid student loans. He failed to make sufficient progress 
resolving his SOR debts. Financial considerations security concerns are not mitigated. 
Access to classified information is denied.      
  
History of the Case 
  
On April 4, 2012, Applicant completed and signed a Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions or security clearance application (SCA). (Government Exhibit (GE) 1) 
On June 10, 2015, the Department of Defense (DOD) Consolidated Adjudications 
Facility (CAF) issued an SOR to Applicant pursuant to Executive Order (Exec. Or.) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry; DOD Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), which became effective on September 1, 2006. 
 
The SOR detailed reasons why the DOD CAF did not find under the Directive that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance 
for him, and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) 
Specifically, the SOR set forth security concerns arising under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). 
 
2 
 
 
On July 15, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR. On November 23, 2015, 
Department Counsel was ready to proceed. On January 4, 2016, the case was 
assigned to me. On February 5, 2015, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued a notice of hearing, setting the hearing for February 25, 2015. (HE 1)  
Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled.  
  
During the hearing, Department Counsel offered six exhibits, and Applicant 
offered two exhibits, which were admitted into evidence without objection. (Tr. 17-20; 
GE 1-6; Applicant Exhibit (AE) A-B) Department Counsel’s letter to Applicant conveying 
GE 1-6 and providing information on his hearing was admitted into the record. (Tr. 12; 
HE 4) On March 1, 2016, DOHA received a copy of the transcript of the hearing.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR response, he did not admit or deny the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 
1.a through 1.f. He also provided extenuating and mitigating information. Applicant’s 
admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 44-year-old supply technician, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since September 2011. (Tr. 6, 16, 20-21; GE 1) From 2001 to 
August 2011, he worked for another corporation as a supply technician. (GE 1)  
 
In 1990, Applicant graduated from high school. (Tr. 6) He has not attended 
college. (Tr. 7-8) He served in the Army National Guard from 1991 to 1992. (Tr. 7) He 
left the Army National Guard because he had medical problems, and he received an 
uncharacterized discharge. (Tr. 7-8, 15) In 2003, he married. In 2012, he separated 
from his spouse. (Tr. 31, 33) He has a 20-year-old son. (Tr. 8, 20) Applicant lives with 
his parents to save money. (Tr. 21, 27-28)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, SCA, 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) personal subject interview (PSI), SOR 
response, and hearing record. In 2001, Applicant’s nonpriority unsecured debts were 
discharged under Chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code. (Tr. 43) Separation from his 
spouse, disputes with her about taxes, and medical debts were circumstances beyond 
Applicant’s control that adversely affected his finances. 
 
 Applicant had some medical issues, and treatments resulted in the two medical 
debts in SOR ¶ 1.a ($354) and ¶ 1.c ($50). (Tr. 23) He believed the $50 medical debt 
was paid, and he was unable to locate the source of the debt for $354. (Tr. 24) I have 
credited him with paying the $50 medical debt. (Tr. 53)  
 
                                            
1Some details have been excluded in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.  
 
3 
 
 
 Applicant contacted the telecommunications creditor in SOR ¶ 1.b ($259). (Tr. 
28) The creditor said the debt was written off; however, Applicant wished to pay the 
debt anyway. (Tr. 28) He intends to contact the creditor holding the debt, and then pay 
it. (Tr. 29) 
 
 The debt in SOR ¶ 1.d ($39) is for a returned check. (Tr. 29) Applicant said he 
paid the debt. (Tr. 29-30) I have credited him with paying the $39 debt. (Tr. 53) 
 
 Applicant said his student loans in SOR ¶ 1.e for about $12,000 were for his 
attendance at barber school, which he completed in May 2008. (Tr. 35) His student 
loans went into collections in October 2010, and he made some payments in 2011. (Tr. 
37; GE 4) On July 15, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR and said “I have spoken 
to creditor on several occasions and set up automatic payment plan.” (HE 3) Applicant 
currently owes about $12,000 on his student loans. (Tr. 46) He has not made any 
payments on his student loans in the previous 12 months. (Tr. 53)   
 
  The debt in SOR ¶ 1.f ($1,778) is for a state tax lien for tax year 2013. (Tr. 30) 
On July 15, 2015, Applicant responded to the SOR, and he said “Payment arrangement 
is being made and set up to be resolved.” Applicant said he had a payment plan with 
the state where he agreed to pay $100 monthly. (Tr. 31) He did not have a copy of a 
payment agreement with the state; however, he did include the payment in his new 
budget. (Tr. 31; AE A) He was unsure about whether his federal and state tax returns 
for 2013 and 2014 were filed, and he did not know whether he had made a payment of 
$100 under his payment plan. (Tr. 33-34, 48-50) Someone at the IRS advised Appellant 
that he owed $5,208 possibly for tax years 2013 and 2014. (Tr. 48-51; AE B) (HE 2) 
Applicant objected to amendment of the SOR to include his federal tax issues, and I 
decided not to amend the SOR because of lack of notice to Applicant. (Tr. 51-52)2    
 
Applicant is employing a financial planner to help him resolve his debts. (Tr. 26-
27) He contacted the financial planner about two weeks before his hearing. (Tr. 27) His 
financial planner helped Applicant generate a payment plan to address his debts. (Tr. 
27; AE B) 
 
 Applicant’s monthly net pay is about $1,900. (Tr. 39) He pays his parents $200 
monthly for rent, and his car payment is $574 monthly. (Tr. 41) He has about $250 left 
                                            
2Applicant’s SOR does not allege that he failed to file federal or state tax returns or that he owed 
federal income taxes. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006), the Appeal Board listed 
five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
Id. (citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). The non-SOR evidence of tax problems will not be considered, except for the purposes 
outlined in the quoted provision. 
 
4 
 
 
over at the end of the month to address his delinquent debts. (Tr. 39) As for his budget, 
he planned to make the first payment to the creditors, which he listed on his budget for 
February, the week after his hearing. (AE A)  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.  
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
Thus, nothing in this decision should be construed to suggest that it is based, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance.  
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
5 
 
 
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 provides three disqualifying conditions that could raise a security 
concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy 
debts;” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” Applicant’s history of 
delinquent debt is documented in his credit reports, SCA, OPM PSI, SOR response, 
and hearing record. His records document evidence of a delinquent student loan, one 
delinquent medical debt, one delinquent telecommunications debt, and a state tax lien 
for $1,778. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a), 
and 19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions. 
  
Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
  
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;  
 
 
6 
 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts;3 and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
The Appeal Board concisely explained Applicant’s responsibility for proving the 
applicability of mitigating conditions as follows:  
 
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance 
eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or maintenance 
of a security clearance. See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913 F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th 
Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991). After the Government 
presents evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the 
applicant to rebut or mitigate those concerns. See Directive ¶ E3.1.15. The 
standard applicable in security clearance decisions is that articulated in 
Egan, supra. “Any doubt concerning personnel being considered for 
access to classified information will be resolved in favor of the national 
security.” Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b).  
 
ISCR Case No. 10-04641 at 4 (App. Bd. Sept. 24, 2013).  
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his delinquent debt does not warrant full 
application of any mitigating conditions to all of his SOR debts; however, he presented 
some important mitigating information. Three circumstances beyond his control 
adversely affected his finances: (1) he became separated from his spouse; (2) he had 
some disputes with his spouse on tax issues; and (3) he had medical debts. He 
                                            
3The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts:  
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term “good-faith.” However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith “requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.” Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition]. 
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)).   
 
7 
 
 
received some financial counseling from the person helping him with his budget. 
Applicant is credited with mitigating the two debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.c for $50 and 1.d for $39.     
 
Applicant said he did not make any payments on his student loans in the 
previous 12 months. He was unsure about how much he owed on his federal taxes for 
2013 and 2014. He was unsure whether his 2013 and 2014 tax returns were filed by the 
IRS or filed at all. He indicated he may owe the federal government $5,208 possibly for 
tax years 2013 and 2014, which would indicate tax returns were filed for those two 
years, either by Applicant or by the IRS on his behalf. He did not establish that he made 
any payments to address his state tax lien for $1,778, his medical debt for $354, and his 
telecommunications debt for $259.    
 
Applicant did not establish mitigation under AG ¶ 20(e) because he did not 
provide copies of any letter to the SOR creditors and credit reporting companies 
disputing his responsibility for any debts. 
   
Applicant’s failure to make greater progress addressing his delinquent debts 
shows a lack of judgment and responsibility that weighs against approval of his security 
clearance. There is insufficient evidence about why he was unable to make greater 
documented progress resolving more of his SOR debts. There is insufficient assurance 
that his financial problems are being resolved, are under control, and will not recur in 
the future. Under all the circumstances, he failed to establish that financial consideration 
security concerns are mitigated. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
 
8 
 
 
There is some evidence supporting approval of Applicant’s clearance. Applicant 
is a 44-year-old supply technician, who has been employed by a defense contractor 
since September 2011. From 2001 to August 2011, he worked for another corporation 
as a supply technician. Applicant served in the Army National Guard from 1991 to 1992.  
He left the Army National Guard because he had medical problems, and he received an 
uncharacterized discharge. In 2003, he married, and in 2012, he separated from his 
spouse. Separation from his spouse, disputes with her about taxes, and medical debts 
were circumstances beyond his control that adversely affected his finances. He is 
credited with disclosure of some of his financial problems on his SCA, and he 
volunteered some negative financial information during his OPM PSI. There is no 
evidence of criminal offenses, abuse of alcohol, use of illegal drugs, or security 
violations.  
 
The financial evidence against approval of Applicant’s clearance is more 
substantial at this time. Applicant has a history of financial problems. He has the 
following unresolved SOR debts: 1.a is a medical debt for $354; 1.b is a 
telecommunications debt for $259; 1.e is unresolved student loans for about $12,000; 
and 1.f is a state tax lien for $1,778. He also owes the federal government $5,208 for 
taxes. His failure to make greater progress resolving his SOR debts shows lack of 
financial responsibility and judgment and raises unmitigated questions about Applicant’s 
reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect classified information. See AG ¶ 18. 
More documented financial progress is necessary to mitigate financial considerations 
security concerns.   
 
It is well settled that once a concern arises regarding an applicant’s security 
clearance eligibility, there is a strong presumption against the grant or renewal of a 
security clearance. See Dorfmont, 913 F. 2d at 1401. Unmitigated financial 
considerations concerns lead me to conclude that grant of a security clearance to 
Applicant is not warranted at this time. This decision should not be construed as a 
determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of reform necessary for 
award of a security clearance in the future. With more effort towards documented 
resolution of his past-due debts, and a track record of behavior consistent with his 
obligations, he may well be able to demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
clearance worthiness.  
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Egan, Exec. Or. 10865, the 
Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole 
person. I conclude that financial consideration security concerns are not mitigated, and 
it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s 
security clearance eligibility at this time.  
 
  
 
9 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
  
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT  
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.c and 1.d:  For Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.e and 1.f:  Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or reinstate Applicant’s eligibility for 
a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
_________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
