 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-06396  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alicia Z. Aguirre, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated personal conduct and criminal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guidelines E (personal conduct) and J (criminal conduct). The action was taken under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on November 15, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 7, 2011. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 2, 2011, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on March 24, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 13, 
 
2 
 
which were admitted without objection. Applicant testified, called a witness, and 
submitted exhibits (AE) A through E, which were admitted without objection. The record 
was held open until April 8, 2011, for Applicant to submit additional information. 
Applicant timely submitted a document that was marked AE F and admitted without 
objection. Department Counsel’s memorandum forwarding Applicant’s exhibit is marked 
Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 1, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer, or a predecessor contractor, since 2006. He is applying for a 
security clearance. He served on active duty in the U.S. military from 1988 until he was 
discharged in 1990. He has a General Educational Development (GED) high school 
equivalency certificate. He was married from 1989 to 1995. He has been married to his 
current wife since 1997. He has five children, three from his first marriage, and two with 
his current wife.1 
  
 Applicant was arrested in June 1992, after he and his stepbrother burglarized a 
business and stole about $10,000. He was charged with the felony offenses of burglary 
and theft. He pleaded guilty to burglary pursuant to a plea bargain. The plea bargain 
required him to testify against his stepbrother on the burglary and theft charges, and on 
charges against the stepbrother for the sexual assault of a 15-year-old girl. Applicant 
received a deferred sentence and probation for six years, and he was ordered to pay 
costs and $2,000 in restitution. The theft charge was dismissed. Applicant violated the 
terms of his probation on several occasions. The burglary charge was dismissed in 
1999 after Applicant completed his probation.2 
 
 Applicant was separated from his first wife in September 1992. He went to her 
home and found her with a friend. His first wife and her friend reported to the police that 
Applicant became angry, pulled a pistol, pointed the pistol at them, pulled the slide 
back,3 and threatened to kill the friend. Applicant was later stopped in his car by the 
police. Applicant told the police that he did not have a pistol, but that he used a knife 
contained in a black leather sheath to simulate a pistol. There was no pistol found in his 
vehicle, but a knife in a black leather sheath was found in the glove compartment. 
Applicant was arrested for aggravated assault. He was never charged with the offense. 
Applicant testified that he did not have any weapon during the argument.4 I did not find 
his testimony credible. I find that he did threaten his wife and her friend with a weapon. 
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 22-25, 55-58; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 29-31, 38, 59-61; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 4, 10-13; AE B-E. 
 
3 In a semiautomatic pistol, a round is chambered by pulling the slide back, making the weapon 
ready for firing. 
 
4 Tr. at 61-65, 84-85; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 5, 11, 12; AE D. 
 
3 
 
 In April 1993, Applicant was charged with the felony offense of sexual assault by 
accountability. The complaint alleged that Applicant physically removed a 15-year-old 
girl from a bedroom in which his stepbrother and another 15-year-old girl were engaged 
in, or about to engage in, sexual contact. Applicant then prevented the first girl from 
reentering the bedroom by blocking the doorway with his body. The charge against 
Applicant was dismissed pursuant to a plea bargain to testify against his stepbrother, as 
discussed above. Applicant admits that his stepbrother was dating a girl and she was in 
his bedroom. He denies knowing her age, and he denies removing another girl from the 
bedroom and preventing her reentry.5 His testimony was not credible. 
 
 In November 1993, Applicant sold stolen antlers for $52. When questioned by the 
police, Applicant initially stated that he found the antlers. He then admitted that he stole 
the antlers, and that another man was involved. The police questioned the other man. 
The man admitted that he stole the antlers, and then he and Applicant sold them. 
Applicant and the other man were both charged with the misdemeanor offense of petit 
theft. Applicant pleaded guilty and was sentenced to 90 days in jail and court costs. At 
his hearing, Applicant admitted that he sold the antlers, but he denied stealing them. He 
stated the other man was his cousin, and his cousin stole the antlers. He stated that he 
had an idea that the antlers might be stolen when he sold them, but he was not certain.6 
 
 Applicant was arrested in January 1999 and charged with driving under the 
influence of alcohol (DUI), first offense, and operation of a vehicle by a person with 
alcohol concentration of .10 or more. He pleaded guilty to the second charge. He was 
sentenced to 30 days in jail, all suspended; a $320 fine; he was ordered to attend 
alcohol classes; and his driver’s license was suspended for six months. The DUI charge 
was dismissed.7 
 
 Applicant submitted a questionnaire for national security positions (SF 86) in 
September 2006. He listed his 1999 DUI under the question that asked about alcohol 
and drug offenses. He answered “No” to Question 23a of the SF 86, which asked “Have 
you ever been charged with, or convicted of any felony offense? (Include those under 
Uniform Code of Military Justice).” He stated that he misread the question and thought it 
only asked for felony convictions. He stated that he did not know that he was charged 
with felonies, and his burglary conviction was overturned.8 I do not find sufficient 
evidence for a determination that Applicant intentionally falsified the SF 86.   
 
 Applicant was interviewed about the 1992 burglary charge by an investigator 
from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) in December 2006. He told the 
investigator that he had nothing to do with the burglary, and he was arrested as an 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 32-36, 61, 65-67, 79-82; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 6, 11-13; AE D. 
 
6 Tr. at 31-32, 67-71; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3, 7, 11. 
 
7 Tr. at 45-48, 75; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 9. 
 
8 Tr. at 25-29, 41-42, 82-83; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 1. 
 
 
4 
 
accomplice because his stepbrother used his truck and the stolen money was found in 
the truck.9 I find that Applicant intentionally provided false information about the burglary 
to the investigator. 
 
 Applicant provided a signed statement to an OPM investigator in March 2009. He 
wrote that he “knew nothing about the burglary and had nothing to do with it.” He wrote 
that he was not guilty of the burglary, but agreed to plead guilty in order to receive a 
deferred sentence. At his hearing, Applicant initially testified that the statement was 
truthful; he later admitted that it was false.10 I find that Applicant intentionally provided 
false information in the statement about his participation in the burglary.  
 
 In the same statement, Applicant discussed his knowledge of the charges 
against his stepbrother for the sexual assault of a 15-year-old girl. He wrote that he 
knew his stepbrother had a teenage girlfriend, but he “never saw him victimize her and 
did not know what they did behind closed doors.” He also wrote that he “never blocked 
anyone in any room in [stepbrother’s] residence.”11 I do not find sufficient evidence for a 
determination that Applicant intentionally provided false information in the statement 
about the sexual assault of the 15-year-old girl. 
 
 Applicant provided another signed statement to an OPM investigator in May 
2009. He wrote that when he testified against his stepbrother, he knew his stepbrother 
had a girlfriend, but he did not know how old she was. He also wrote that he “did not 
know that [he] was charged with sexual assault and had no involvement or knowledge 
of a sexual assault involving a minor or anyone else.”12 There is insufficient evidence for 
a determination that Applicant intentionally provided false information in the statement 
about the sexual assault of the 15-year-old girl. 
 
 Applicant has received several awards from his employer for his excellent job 
performance. Applicant’s wife testified that he is trustworthy and a “hard-working good 
man.” She also wrote a letter attesting to his honesty and dependability. She wrote that 
he “has learned from his bad choices and shows remorse for what he had done in the 
past.” She believes he “has paid his debt to society and has become a good citizen.” 
There is no evidence that Applicant has been arrested, charged, or convicted of any 
offenses after 1999.13  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 76-79; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2. 
 
10 Tr. at 36, 75-76; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 11. 
 
11 Tr. at 36-44; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 11. 
 
12 GE 12. 
 
13 Tr. at 75, 87-94; AE A. 
 
5 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
 
 In 2006, and again in 2009, Applicant intentionally provided false information to 
OPM investigators about his participation in the 1992 burglary. AG ¶ 16(b) is applicable.  
 
 There is insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant intentionally 
falsified his 2006 SF 86. AG ¶ 16(a) is not applicable. SOR ¶ 1.a is concluded for 
Applicant. There is also insufficient evidence for a determination that Applicant 
intentionally provided false information to OPM investigators about the sexual assault of 
a 15-year-old girl in 1993. SOR ¶¶ 1.c and 1.e are concluded for Applicant.  
 
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. The following 
are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
7 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Applicant intentionally provided false information to OPM investigators in 2006 
and again in 2009. He was not completely candid during his testimony at the hearing. 
There are no applicable mitigating conditions.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant was involved in a burglary and an aggravated assault in 1992, sexual 
assault by accountability and theft in 1993, and DUI in 1999. In 2006, and again in 
2009, Applicant knowingly and willfully made materially false statements to OPM 
investigators, as discussed above. It is a criminal offense under 18 U.S.C. § 1001 to 
knowingly and willfully make any materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or 
representation in any matter within the executive branch of the Government of the 
United States. Security clearances are within the jurisdiction of the executive branch of 
the Government of the United States.1 A violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001 is a serious 
offense as it may be punished by imprisonment for up to five years. The evidence is 
sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
                                                          
1See Egan, 484 U.S. at 527.  
 
8 
 
Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life;  
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant has not been arrested, charged, or convicted of any offenses since 
1999. He has a good job and a stable family life. Had Applicant been completely truthful 
throughout the security process, a number of mitigating conditions would be applicable. 
However, he willfully violated 18 U.S.C. § 1001 in 2006 and again in March 2009. He 
was not completely truthful at his hearing. No criminal conduct mitigating conditions are 
applicable.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
 
9 
 
under Guidelines E and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and his service to this 
country in the U.S. military. For the most part, Applicant has his life in order following a 
turbulent period of criminal activity in the 1990s. However, he failed to provide truthful 
responses about his criminal activity during that period. It is fundamental to the security 
clearance process that applicants provide truthful and candid answers to all questions. 
Applicant chose not to.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated personal conduct and criminal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.f:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
