1
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 08-08570
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance
Appearances
For Government: Julie Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Julie Perkins, Esq.; William Bransford, Esq.
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
LYNCH, Noreen, A. Administrative Judge:
On September 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) alleging security concerns arising under
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct). An amended SOR, dated November 18, 2010, added
security concerns under Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken under
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended
(Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). 
On October 25, 2010, Applicant answered the original SOR and requested a
hearing. DOHA assigned the case to me on December 23, 2010. DOHA issued a
Notice of Hearing on January 26, 2011, and I convened the hearing on February 15,
2011. Department Counsel offered four exhibits, which were admitted as Government
Exhibits (GE) 1-4. Applicant testified, presented two witnesses, and submitted three
exhibits (AE) A through C which were admitted into the record. DOHA received the
transcript on February 28, 2011. Based on a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and
testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
2
Findings of Fact
In his answer to the amended SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegation
under Guideline J (Criminal Activity), and denied the factual allegation under Guideline
E (Personal Conduct).
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He graduated from
college in 1986 and obtained a graduate degree in 2001. Applicant is married and has
no children. He has worked for his current employer since 2006. Applicant served in the
information technology field with defense contractors from 1991 for 15 years. He held a
security clearance from 1994 until 2007, when it was denied by another agency. His
interim security clearance was withdrawn in 2008. (GE 3)
Criminal Conduct
Applicant owns a gun collection, including antique guns such as rifles, shotguns,
and pistols. He began purchasing guns in his late 20s. (Tr. 38) He admitted that he
illegally carried pistols, with varying frequency, (sometimes daily), from 1991 until about
the summer of 2006. Applicant had a permit for a firearm in one state but not for the
states in which he carried the concealed pistols.
Applicant’s explanation for carrying a firearm was because he “started hanging
out with the self-defense crowd” (police officers and “people who were in the concealed
carry movement”). (Tr. 19) He also explained that he taught martial arts and attended
training classes (defensive pistol classes). Everyone he met was carrying a gun and he
decided to do the same thing. He referred to a “lifestyle” and a community of people
who realized how ineffective hands are against a weapon for safety. (Tr. 57) He also
admitted that he knew it was illegal. (Tr. 19) 
At the hearing, Applicant recalled that on September 11, 2001, he was not
carrying a gun, but thought it would be a good day to have one. (Tr. 44) He does not
recall when he actually stopped carrying guns on a regular basis. (Tr. 18) He also
acknowledged that he probably carried a weapon to work on some occasions. (Tr. 47)
Applicant believed that since he was trained and highly proficient with a gun, if there
were a “deadly situation,” he would be better off with a gun. (Tr. 60) He was adamant
that he never touched a gun when he drank alcohol. 
Applicant stated that he stopped carrying a concealed weapon prior to
September 2001, but in 2006 he again carried an illegal firearm. (Tr. 20) He attributes
that action to a mugging that happened to him. He stated that he started to take a gun
to work the next day, but decided to leave the gun in the car. He acknowledged that
was the last time he carried a concealed weapon. Applicant was never arrested or
charged with any crime. (Tr. 22) 
Applicant applied for sensitive compartmented information (SCI) access in
October 2006. During the investigation, Applicant was given a polygraph. In response to
3
a question about any felony offenses, he recalled that he had carried a handgun with
him without having a license to do so, and told the polygraph technician. (GE 2)
At the hearing, Applicant acknowledged that his security clearance is important
to him so that he can keep the job that he enjoys. He stated that he never realized his
behavior was endangering his security clearance. He believes that he is an asset to the
Government. (Tr. 33) When questioned about future intentions concerning illegally
carrying a gun, he thought “how can you ever guarantee anything like that.” He states
that it is not part of his lifestyle anymore, but he also recognizes that it is illegal. (Tr. 34)
He noted that it was wrong to do what he did. He does not want to break the law.
Applicant provided three letters of recommendation from friends and students.
They attest to his responsibility, integrity and judgment. Each characterizes Applicant as
an honest and candid person who is a good role model. (AE A-C)
At the hearing, Applicant’s supervisor testified that she has known him for two or
three years. (Tr. 68) His supervisor describes Applicant as reliable and honest with
good insight. Applicant’s supervisor noted that Applicant has a good reputation in the
company and follows company law.(Tr. 72) She acknowledged that most defense
contractors have a “no weapons” policy.
A retired military officer and friend of Applicant testified that he has known
Applicant since 1994. Applicant taught martial arts, and his friend was once a student of
Applicant. He describes Applicant as an “upright” guy. (Tr. 77) Applicant’s friend knows
about the security concerns at issue and that his clearance was denied. Applicant’s
friend also reported that he has never seen Applicant carry a weapon. He recommends
Applicant for retention of a security clearance. 
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible
rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied
in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision.
Under AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables
known as the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and
unfavorable, in making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      1
 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).      2
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      3
 See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive      4
information), and EO 10865 § 7.
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      5
 Id.      6
4
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
The Government must present evidence to establish controverted facts alleged
in the SOR. An applicant is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by
Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is something less than a1
preponderance of evidence.  The ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant.  2 3
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect classified information. Such
decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation of potential, rather
than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance4
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt5
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  The decision to deny an individual a6
security clearance does not necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is
merely an indication that the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President
and the Secretary of Defense established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its
5
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws,
rules and regulations.”
AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable
conditions;
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted;
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; and
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-
mandated rehabilitation program.
Applicant’s admission that he carried a concealed weapon, without having a
license, from 1991 until the summer of 2006, with varying frequency, is sufficient to
raise AG ¶¶ 31(a) and (c).
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or
good judgment;
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and
those pressures are no longer present in the person's life;
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or
constructive community involvement; and,
After reviewing the mitigating conditions, I find that none of them apply in this
case. Applicant’s illegal carrying of a handgun is behavior that has been longstanding
and continuous. He acknowledged that it may happen again - or that there is no
guarantee that it will not happen again. He knew his behavior was illegal but it did not
stop him. His last incident was in 2006. Based on the record evidence and Applicant’s
testimony, I find that he has not mitigated the security concern under criminal conduct.  
6
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect
classified information.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities;
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative;
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness,
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not
properly safeguard protected information;
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse
determination, but which, when combined with all available information
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment,
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes
but is not limited to consideration of:
(1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior to include breach of
client confidentiality, release of proprietary information,
unauthorized release of sensitive corporate or other
government protected information:
(2) disruptive, violent, or other inappropriate behavior in the
workplace; 
7
(3) a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations; and
(4) evidence of significant misuse of Government or other
employer's time or resources.
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct,
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence
service or other group;
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to
the employer as a condition of employment; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity. 
Applicant’s poor judgment over a period of many years gives rise to disqualifying
condition AG ¶ 16(e). He knowingly broke the law, sometimes on a daily, basis until
2006. He held a security clearance during that time. He admitted that he sometimes
took the weapon to work, which was against company policy. His conduct shows a
pattern of dishonesty and rule violations.
AG ¶ 17 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission,
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts;
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the
individual cooperated fully and truthfully;
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment;
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable,
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur;
8
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable
reliability; and
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules
and regulations.
Applicant admitted that he illegally carried a handgun from 1991 until 2006
during an investigation. He disclosed this information for the first time during a
polygraph test in 2006. This illegal behavior occurred over a long period of time. It was
not a minor offense or an isolated one. His behavior has shown a disregard for laws
and regulations. I have doubts about his judgment and reliability. 
After considering the mitigating conditions outlined in AG ¶ 17, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concern under personal conduct. 
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. As noted above, the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on the applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. Applicant is a contractor who has held a security clearance since 1994. He has
good references and his current employer recommends him. He is an educated, mature
individual. He has letters of recommendation. His security clearance is currently
suspended.
9
Applicant states that the last time he carried a concealed weapon was in the
summer of 2006. He has not had any arrests or incidents of security violation. However,
despite his claim that he will follow the law in the future, I have doubts about his
judgment and reliability. Any doubts must be resolved in favor of the Government.
Applicant has not met his burden in this case. He has not mitigated the security
concerns under criminal conduct and personal conduct. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.
Clearance is denied. 
                                                     
NOREEN A. LYNCH.
Administrative Judge
