KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline C
DIGEST: Given the extent of Applicant’s family and other personal contacts in Estonia, the
Judge’s decision does not explain, and the record does not support his conclusion that Applicant
is not likely to have to choose between the interests of those persons an the interests of the
United States.  Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 08-11969.a1
DATE: 04/22/2011
DATE: April 22, 2011
In Re:
------
 
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-11969
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
William T. O’Neil, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro se
2
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On June 7, 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline C (Foreign Preference) and
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On January 13, 2011, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Thomas M. Crean granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.
Department Counsel appealed pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge erred in his
application of the pertinent mitigating conditions and whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis
was erroneous.  Consistent with the following, we reverse the decision of the Judge.
Facts
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant is the principal systems
engineer for a Defense contractor.  He has a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering and a
master’s in computer science.  He has taken other post-graduate courses in addition to his course
work for his master’s degree.  
Applicant’s parents were Estonian.  They fled that country, and Applicant was born in a
refugee camp in another European country.  When he was three years old, Applicant and his family
moved to the U.S.  He became a U.S. citizen in the early 1960s.
Applicant attended college on a ROTC scholarship.  After graduation he received an
educational delay to pursue graduate work.  Thereafter he served for two years on active duty with
the U.S. military, holding a secret clearance during that period of service.  
After leaving the Air Force Applicant worked for Defense contractors, and his clearance was
upgraded.  Later he began working as a contractor for another Government agency.  In the mid-
2000s that agency denied him a top secret clearance based on security concerns under Guidelines
B and C.
Applicant is a dual citizen of Estonia and the U.S.  He registered to vote in that country in
the early 2000s and has voted in Estonian elections.  He worked for Estonia in the mid-2000s,
having been hired by a friend who was president of a computer company.  
Applicant obtained an Estonian passport in the early 2000s.  He did so in order to work on
a project funded by the European Union, which required Estonian citizenship.  
Applicant owns a condominium in Estonia.  He has paid off the mortgage, and the current
value of the condo is $160,000.  His net worth in the U.S. is around $1,000,000.  
3
Applicant’s wife is a dual citizen of Estonia and the U.S.  She provides freelance translation
services to both governments.  Applicant and his wife frequently attend social events at the Estonian
embassy.  
Applicant and his wife have a daughter who works for the Estonian government in Estonia.
They talk to her frequently and see her when they visit Estonia.  Another daughter is a doctoral
candidate at a U.S. university, and a son recently left active duty with a branch of the U.S. military.
Applicant and his wife speak Estonian at home.
Applicant is friends with persons who serve in high-ranking positions with the Estonian
government.  Applicant reads an Estonian-American newspaper.  He intends to spend time in
Estonia when he retires, although he does not intend to live there because the medical care is not as
good as in the U.S.  His connection to Estonia is based on heritage and culture.
Estonia has been a parliamentary democracy since 1992.  It is a member of NATO and of
the European Union.  It has a stable and constructive relationship with the U.S.
Discussion
Once a concern arises regarding an Applicant’s security clearance eligibility, there is a strong
presumption against the grant or maintenance of a security clearance.  See Dorfmont v. Brown, 913
F. 2d 1399, 1401 (9th Cir. 1990), cert. denied, 499 U.S. 905 (1991).  After the Government presents
evidence raising security concerns, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut or mitigate those
concerns.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  In rendering a final decision, an “agency must examine the
relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation for” the decision, “including a ‘rational
connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United
States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines,
Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  The standard applicable in security clearance
decisions “is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  “Any doubt
concerning personnel being considered for access to classified information will be resolved in favor
of the national security.”  Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 2(b). 
The Judge concluded that Applicant’s circumstances raised security concerns under both
Guidelines alleged in the SOR.  However, the Judge concluded that multiple mitigating conditions
under the Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference Guidelines apply in Applicant’s case.  Similarly,
the Judge’s whole-person analysis concluded in Applicant’s favor.
Department Counsel argues that the Judge’s favorable conclusions regarding mitigation were
not supported by the record.  Specifically, Department Counsel cited (1) the Judge’s application of
Mitigating Condition (MC) 8(a) based on minimal differences between the U.S. and Estonia; (2) the
Judge’s mitigation of Guideline 7(e) without use of 8(f); and (3) the Judge’s conclusions as to
mitigation under Foreign Preference even though the plain language of the mitigating conditions
does not apply to Applicant’s conduct and circumstances.  
1See Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(a): “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group,
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S[.]”
2Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(b): “there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty
or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal or the individual has such deep and
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest
in favor of the U.S. interest[.]”  
3Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 8(c): “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation[.]”  
4Directive, Enclosure 2 ¶ 11(e): “the passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security
authority, or otherwise invalidated[.]” 
 
4
Department Counsel’s arguments are persuasive, given the totality of the record evidence.
The Judge stated, in the Guideline B analysis, that differences between the interests of the U.S. and
Estonia are “minimal” and that there is little likelihood that Applicant will be placed in a position
to have to choose between the interests of the two countries.1  In the first place, the Judge’s
conclusion about the purportedly minimal differences between U.S. and Estonian policy are
speculative at best.  More to the point, the “national security of the United States can be at risk
whether a person with foreign family ties is vulnerable to coercion or blackmail, or is vulnerable to
non-coercive influence,” as might be the case of an applicant with relatives living in a country that
is a U.S. ally.  ISCR Case No. 02-02892 at 10 (App. Bd. Jun. 28, 2004).  Given the extent of
Applicant’s family and other personal contacts in Estonia, the Judge’s decision does not explain, and
the record evidence does not support, his conclusion that Applicant is not likely to have to choose
between the interests of those persons and the interests of the U.S.   
The Judge favorably applied two other Guideline B mitigating conditions, 8(b)2 and 8(c).3
For similar reasons as those stated above, the record viewed as a whole does not support a
conclusion that Applicant met his burden of persuasion that his ties to his friends and relatives in
Estonia, including government officials, are such that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of
interest in favor of the U.S.  Especially of concern are his ties with his daughter there.  
Regarding Guideline C, the Judge noted that Applicant had surrendered his passport.4
However, many of his conclusions are without foundation in the record.  For example, it is not clear
why Applicant’s evidence that he exercised Estonian citizenship rights for business and economic
reasons (Decision at 10), even if true, mitigates the security concerns arising therefrom.  There is
a paucity of record evidence to demonstrate that he will have no further economic interests in
Estonia.  Also, the Judge accepted Applicant’s statement that he voted in Estonian elections simply
to advance U.S. interests.  He does not explain why he finds that statement to be mitigating.
5
In light of the foregoing, the Judge’s decision fails to consider important aspects of the case
and runs counter to the weight of the record evidence.  ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd.
Jun. 2, 2006).  Viewed in light of the record as a whole, the Judge’s decision is not sustainable,
either under the mitigating conditions or the whole-person factors. 
Order
The Judge’s favorable security clearance decision is REVERSED.  
     
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan          
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett               
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody                 
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
