                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 08-10170
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Nichole L. Noel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding his use of information
technology systems and his personal conduct. Eligibility for access to classified
information is denied. 
Statement of Case
On April 23, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs), implemented by the
Department of Defense for SORs on September 1, 2006.
2
Applicant responded to the SOR, undated,  and elected to have his case decided
on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant Material
(FORM) on January 24, 2011, and submitted additional information for consideration in
February 2011, within the 30 days permitted. Applicant’s submissions were identified as
AE’s A through C and admitted. The case was assigned to me on February 28, 2011.  
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline F, Applicant allegedly accumulated nine delinquent debts
exceeding $54,000. The alleged debts are listed as follows: creditor 1.a ($3,986);
creditor 1.b ($10,032); creditor 1.c ($4,200); creditor 1.d ($4,512); creditor 1.e ($5,850);
creditor 1.f ($14,333); creditor 1.g ($2,452); creditor 1.h ($6,148); and creditor 1.i
($3,204).
In his response to the SOR, Applicant denied all of the listed debts with
explanations.  He claimed certain of his accounts had been closed in the past without
identifying any of the creditors.  He also claimed that most of the accounts were joint
accounts that were in dispute with his ex-wife.  And he claimed that a new credit report
will reflect that he is actively paying all of the accounts one by one.  Applicant attached
a January 14, 2010 letter from a credit collection agency that does not appear to match
any of the creditors or accounts covered in the SOR. 
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 46-year-old defense market manager for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. Applicant enlisted in the Air Force (USAF) in February 1984
and served 20 years of active duty. (Item 1) While on active duty with the USAF, he
held a security clearance. He received his honorable discharge in March 2004.  
Applicant married his spouse in December 1993 and divorced her in August
2006. (Item 1)  He has two children (ages 23 and 25) from this marriage. (Item 1)
During their marriage, Applicant and his wife accumulated many debts: some of
them joint and some of them accrued from individual accounts. In August 2006,
Applicant’s divorce from his wife was finalized. (Items 1 and 5) Since their final decree
was entered, they have waged disputes over who should be principally accountable for
the joint bills. Each of the debts listed in the SOR represent accounts opened
individually by Applicant and, as such, debts that belong solely to Applicant.
Credit reports show nine delinquent debts in Applicant’s name that have since
been charged off and not otherwise paid or resolved.  Altogether, there are nine such
debts listed in the SOR that total in excess of $54,000.  See Items 6 through 8.  Of
these listed debts, Applicant is credited with resolving just two: creditors 1.d and 1.h.
(Items 6 through 8) While Applicant claims to have paid off most of the listed debts, his
furnished documentation does not corroborate his claims.
  
3
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and impartial
commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent guidelines
within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed to examine
a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be made
about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines are to be
considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the nature, extent, and
seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following  individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
Financial Considerations
The Concern: Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy
debts and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of
judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and
ability to protect classified information.  An individual who is financially
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds.  Compulsive gambling is a concern as it may lead to financial crimes
including espionage. Affluence that cannot be explained by known sources
4
of income is also a security concern. It may indicate proceeds from
financially profitable criminal acts. AG ¶ 18.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation. Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a defense market manager of a defense contractor who
accumulated a number of delinquent debts during an extended period of marital
estrangement and contentious divorce proceedings. He denied being delinquent on
any of the accounts listed in the SOR and claimed he paid off most of his accrued
debts and is committed to paying off the remaining ones. 
 Each of Applicant’s listed debts are documented in the produced credit reports
and reflect debts opened individually by Applicant and provide corroboration of his
debts. His accumulation of delinquent debts and his past inability and unwillingness to
address all but two of them (creditors 1.d and 1.h) warrant the application of two of the
5
disqualifying conditions (DC) of the Guidelines: DC ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness
to satisfy debts,” and ¶19(c) “a history of not meeting financial obligations.”
Moreover, some judgment problems persist over Applicant’s unexplained
individual delinquencies and his failure to demonstrate he acted responsibly in the
past in addressing these listed debts that he never claimed to belong to his ex-wife.
See ISCR Case 03-01059 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 24, 2004). Not only are most of his
listed debt delinquencies still outstanding, but he has failed to address them in any
tangible way that can be verified in the developed record. 
Holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between the
Government and the clearance holder. Quite apart from any agreement the clearance
holder may have signed with the Government, the nature of the clearance holder’s
duties and access to classified information necessarily imposes important duties of
trust and candor on the clearance holder that are considerably higher than those
typically imposed on Government employees and contractors involved in other lines of
Government business.  See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980).
Failure of the applicant to make concerted efforts to pay or resolve his debts when
able to do so raises security-significant concerns about whether he has demonstrated
the trust and judgment necessary to safeguard classified information.
 
Applicant’s debts are attributable in part to his contentious separation and
divorce proceedings which deprived him of the joint spousal income he historically
relied on to satisfy his marital and individual bills. All but two of the listed debts in the
SOR are either unpaid or unresolved. In his most recent correspondence, he pledged
to pay off his listed debts, one at a time. (Item 2 and AE A-C)  
Based on the evidence, some extenuating circumstances are associated with
Applicant’s inability to pay off or otherwise resolve his debts. Available to Applicant in
part is MC ¶ 20(b), “the conditions that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond
the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected
medical emergency, or a death, divorce, or separation, and the individual acted
responsibly.” But this mitigating condition has only partial application to Applicant’s
circumstances. For Applicant has been fully employed for the past two and one-half
years, and by all written accounts, he has been fully able to address his individual
debts and document his progress.  
                                     
Whole-person assessment does not enable Applicant to surmount the
judgment questions raised by his accumulation of delinquent debts and failure to
address all of them responsibly with the resources at his disposal during the two plus
years he has been gainfully employed by his current employer. 
While ongoing divorce proceedings and the absence of spousal cooperation in
addressing his debts might have played a considerable role in his accumulation of his
debt delinquencies, his continuing failure to take more documented steps to pay or
otherwise resolve his individual delinquent debts remains a continuing source of
security concern. Supervisory endorsements and performance evaluations might have
been helpful, too, in making a whole-person assessment of his overall clearance
6
eligibility, but were not provided.  Overall, clearance eligibility assessment of Applicant
based on the limited amount of information available for consideration in this record
does not enable him to establish judgment and trust levels sufficient to overcome
security concerns arising out of his accumulation of delinquent debts.
Taking into account all of the documented facts and circumstances surrounding
Applicant’s debt accumulations and his lack of any acceptable explanations for his
declinations to address his remaining delinquent debts after his wife declined to help
him, it is still too soon to make safe predictive judgments about Applicant’s ability to
repay his debts and restore his finances to stable levels commensurate with the
minimum requirements for holding a security clearance. Unfavorable conclusions
warrant with respect to the allegations covered by subparagraphs 1.a through 1.c, 1.d
through 1.g, and 1.i. Favorable conclusions are warranted with respect to
subparagraphs 1.d and 1.h.   
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR and ensuing conclusions reached in the
context of the findings of fact, conclusions, conditions, and the factors listed above, I
make the following formal findings:
GUIDELINE F (FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS): AGAINST APPLICANT
   
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c, 1.e-1.g, and 1.i      Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.h:                 For Applicant
Conclusions
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
                                        
7
  
