 
1 
 
 
                                                          
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 08-11467 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline B (foreign 
influence). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 1, 2004, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP).1 On April 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence) for Applicant. On August 11, 2010, 
DOHA issued Applicant an Amendment to the Statement of Reasons adding 
additional allegations under Guideline B. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
after September 1, 2006.  
1 Applicant had previously submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF-86) on October 6, 2003. (GE 
1.) 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 25, 2010 and answered the Amendment 
to the SOR on August 20, 2010. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on 
August 31, 2010. The case was assigned to me on September 1, 2010. DOHA issued 
a notice of hearing on September 20, 2010, scheduling the hearing for October 5, 
2010. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 3, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through I, 
which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 25, 2010.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative 
notice of certain facts relating to Jordan contained in Ex. I(1-6). Without objection from 
the Applicant, I took administrative notice of the documents offered by Department 
Counsel, which pertain to Jordan. (Tr. 13-14.) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)); McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). The most common basis for 
administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice facts that are either well known 
or from government reports. See Stein, Administrative Law, Section 25.01 (Bender & 
Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Various facts 
pertaining to Jordan were derived from Ex. I(1-6) as indicated under subheading 
“Jordan” of this decision, infra.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant denied the allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1a – 1f, and admitted the 
allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1g – 1i. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old Arabic linguist, who is employed by a defense 
contractor and is currently deployed to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Before deploying to 
Guantanamo Bay, he successfully completed his counterintelligence (CI) screening in 
September 2010. He seeks a secret security clearance, which is a condition of his 
continued employment. (GE 1, AE G, Tr. 44, 53, 59, 76.)  
 
Applicant’s parents, his two brothers, and three sisters are originally from 
Jordan. His father was a career noncommissioned officer in the Jordanian Army and 
 
3 
 
 
his mother was a homemaker. After Applicant’s father retired from the Jordanian Army 
in 1977, he worked in the private sector. From about 1985, Applicant’s parents made 
periodic trips to visit Jordanian family members living in the United States. These visits 
continued until Applicant’s father passed away in September 2000. (GE 3.)  
 
Applicant immigrated to the United States in March 1990 when he was 16 years 
old. His older brother had preceded him in 1987 and was already living in the United 
States. (GE 3, Tr. 33.) Two reasons prompted Applicant’s family to immigrate to the 
United States – (1) as Christians, they were a minority in a predominantly Muslim 
country; and (2) the rise of extremism in the Middle East. (Tr. 33-34.) After arriving in 
the United States, Applicant attended high school and graduated in 1992. He attended 
community college from 1992 to 1995 and was awarded an Associate in Science 
degree in Automotive Technology. (Tr. -34-35.) After high school, Applicant held part-
time and full-time jobs in the restaurant or automotive industry. (GE 1, GE 2.) 
 
In April 1997, Applicant enlisted in the U.S. Navy. He served in the Navy from 
April 1997 to January 2001, and was honorably discharged as an Aviation Structural 
Mechanic Safety Equipment Second Class (pay grade E-5). (AE H, Tr. 26-27, 35-36, 
74.) Applicant was in the active Navy reserve from 2002 until 2003, and was in the 
inactive naval reserve from 2003 to 2005. (Tr. 36, 38-39.) Applicant successfully held 
a secret security clearance during his Navy service. (Tr. 60.)  
 
While on active duty, Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in October 
1998, and was issued a U.S. passport in November 1998. (GE 1 – GE 3.) While on 
active duty, he continued to earn college credit part-time. After his release from active 
duty, he attended college from September 2001 to December 2002, and was awarded 
a Bachelor of Arts degree in History. (GE 1, GE 2, Tr. 37.) He has since completed all 
of his course work for a Master’s Degree in History with a concentration in Islamic 
Studies. (Tr. 43, 73-74.) 
 
Applicant married in June 2002. His wife and her family, like Applicant, were 
from Jordan. They divorced in September 2008. Since his divorce, Applicant has not 
had any contact with his former spouse or her family residing in Jordan. No children 
were born during this marriage and Applicant has no dependents. Two SOR 
allegations dealt with Applicant’s connections with his former spouse and his mother-
in-law. (SOR ¶¶ 1c and 1d.) In light of Applicant’s divorce and non-contact with his 
former spouse and her family, these concerns are no longer applicable. (GE 1, GE 2, 
Tr. 31-32, 63.) 
 
Since Applicant’s release from active duty, he has held several jobs to include 
two terms of employment as an Arabic linguist for defense contractors. From February 
2003 to January 2004, he was employed by a defense contractor to work as an Arabic 
linguist during the Iraq invasion. He accompanied a U.S. Army unit in Iraq and was 
forward deployed and in harm’s way “many times.” (GE 2, Tr. 37-40, 70-72.) From 
March 2004 to August 2005, he was employed by a defense contractor to work as 
Arabic linguist at Guantanamo Bay. His company promoted him to senior linguist and 
 
4 
 
 
project manager. His new duties required him to travel to Iraq, Kuwait, United Arab 
Emirates, and Qatar. He remained with this company until June 2006 and resigned to 
open a restaurant and attend school. It was at this time he completed his course work 
for his Master’s Degree, discussed supra. (Tr. 41-43.) In Iraq, Applicant held a secret 
security clearance, and in Guantanamo Bay, he held a top secret clearance. (Tr. 61.)  
 
Applicant’s mother is 62 years old, and she became a naturalized U.S. citizen 
in April 2002. Contrary to what the SOR alleges, she does not live in Jordan, but lives 
in the United States with Applicant’s older brother, discussed infra. (SOR ¶ 1a.) (GE 2, 
Tr. 45.)  
 
Applicant has a sister (S-1), who is a citizen and resident of Jordan. She retired 
as a major after serving 15 years in the Jordanian Army. (SOR ¶ 1f.) S-1 applied for 
permanent resident status in the United States in 2003. In July 2010, she came to the 
United States for 40 days to establish U.S. residency. During this 40-day period, S-1 
was issued her (1) “green card,” (2) social security card, and (3) driver’s license. She 
also applied to sit for the state nursing examination and opened a bank account with a 
$2,500 deposit. She returned to Jordan to close up her affairs and is now living in the 
United States. Other than receiving a modest pension for her Jordanian Army service, 
she is not affiliated with the Jordanian government. (AE D, Tr. 45-46, 64-65.) 
 
Applicant has a sister (S-2), who is a dual citizen of the United States and 
Jordan and resides in Jordan. (SOR ¶ 1g.) S-2 has been employed by a U.S.–based 
company since October 2006 and is currently serving as deputy chief of party for a 
U.S. Aid funded project in Jordan. S-2 is attempting to secure a company transfer to 
the United States. She is not affiliated with or connected to the Jordanian government. 
Applicant has contact with S-2 “[p]robably three times a year, just Easter, Christmas, 
and her birthday, I call her or, send her an e-mail.” (AE C, Tr. 47-49, 65-66.) 
 
Applicant has a sister (S-3), who is a citizen and resident of Jordan. S-3 is 
employed a high school teacher. (SOR ¶ 1b.) S-3 is married and her husband (S-3H) 
is also a citizen and resident of Jordan. S-3H is neurosurgeon. S-3, like the rest of her 
siblings, plans to move to the United States. She completed her application to move to 
the United States in 2004 and is awaiting further instructions. Apart from S-3 deriving 
her salary from the state, neither S-3 nor S-3H are affiliated with nor do they have any 
connection with the Jordanian government. Applicant has contact with S-3 “probably 
two, three times a year, max.” (GE 3, Tr. 49-51, 66-67.) 
 
Applicant has two brothers (B-1 and B-2), who are naturalized U.S. citizens and 
residents of the United States. B-1 is married to a U.S. citizen and has three U.S. – 
born children. Applicant’s mother lives with B-1. B-2 is unmarried and has no children. 
(Tr. 51-52.) B-1 supports Applicant’s mother. (Tr. 63.) 
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant traveled to Jordan for five family-related visits 
in 1998, 1999, 2000, and 2008. (SOR ¶ 1i.) In 1998, Applicant’s father requested that 
Applicant visit him in Jordan for the purpose of their being baptized. Applicant’s family 
 
5 
 
 
pastor in the United States certified that Applicant and his father were baptized on 
August 28, 1998 in Amman, Jordan. (AE E, Tr. 54.) In December 1999, Applicant’s 
father was diagnosed with a brain tumor. Applicant was on active duty at the time and 
took emergency leave to accompany his father from Jordan to Tel Aviv, Israel for 
medical treatment. (Tr. 55.) In June 2000, his father’s condition deteriorated and in 
June 2000, Applicant returned to Tel Aviv to accompany his father home to Jordan 
because his father’s condition was “hopeless.” (Tr. 56.) 
 
In May 2001, Applicant returned to Jordan to meet with a woman and her family 
he had met on a previous trip. They become engaged, married and subsequently 
divorced, discussed supra. (Tr. 56-57.) In 2008, Applicant and an older brother went to 
Jordan to accompany their sister (S-1) to Tel Aviv for medical treatment. She had 
been diagnosed with breast cancer and later with leukemia. Applicant and his brother 
accompanied her to Tel Aviv for moral support. (Tr. 57.) Not alleged is a trip that 
Applicant and his older brother made to Jordan in June 2010. They again 
accompanied their sister (S-1) to Tel Aviv for a medical checkup and provide her with 
moral support. (Tr. 67-68.) 
 
Applicant testified that if he was approached by someone seeking classified or 
sensitive information, he would report that overture to the authorities. The United 
States is his home. He has no assets in Jordan as opposed to having all of his assets 
in the United States. He owns a home and restaurant business in the United States. 
All of his bank accounts are in the United States. (AE I, Tr. 52-54, 69-70.) Applicant 
does not have any contact with any relatives in Jordan other than the ones mentioned, 
supra. (Tr. 68.) Applicant is current on all of his state and federal income taxes, 
exercises his right to vote, and enjoys all rights and privileges of being a U.S. citizen. 
(Tr. 75.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant was awarded an Honor Certificate for attaining the highest scholastic 
average in his Navy Class “A” School, Aviation Structural Mechanic Safety Equipment 
Common Core Class A1 in October 1977. (AE A, AE B.) He also submitted an 
October 1998 Navy Letter of Commendation, a copy of his Navy Good Conduct 
Award, and a 2000 Navy enlisted performance evaluation reflecting above average 
performance. (AE F.) 
 
Applicant submitted six personal reference letters to include long-time friends, a 
pastor, a neighbor, and a college professor. (AE E.) Applicant also submitted six work-
related reference letters to include former colleagues that worked with him in Iraq and 
at Guantanamo Bay and a former Navy supervisor. (AE F.) These individuals 
collectively express their full support for Applicant and describe him as a person of 
integrity, honesty, and compassion. He was awarded two Certificates of Appreciation 
for his superb performance as an Arabic linguist at Guantanamo Bay. (AE H.) 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
Jordan2 
 
Jordan is a small country located in the Middle East with a constitutional 
monarchy and a developing economy. Jordan is ruled by King Abdullah II, has a 
Council of Ministers selected by the King, and has a partially elected bicameral 
National Assembly. Jordan has followed a pro-Western foreign policy and has had 
close relations with the United States for six decades. 
 
 The State Department notes that Jordan’s human rights record continues to 
reflect some problems. Problems include: torture, arbitrary arrest, prolonged detention, 
poor prison conditions, denial of due process, infringement on citizens’ privacy rights, 
and restrictions on freedom of speech, press, assembly, and association. The United 
Nations reports that torture by police and security forces is widespread based on 
consistent and credible allegations. 
  
 Jordanian law allows any adult male relative to prevent a woman or child from 
leaving Jordan, even if the woman or child only holds U.S. citizenship. Jordanian law 
applies to dual Jordanian-American citizens. Jordanian law subjects dual citizens to 
certain obligations, for example, males under the age of 37 are required to register for 
service in the Jordanian military. Overall, Jordan treats dual citizens as Jordanian 
citizens under law and may not inform the U.S. embassy if a dual Jordanian-American 
citizen has a problem in Jordan. 
 
 Despite Jordan’s aggressive pursuit of terrorists, drafting of counter-terrorism 
legislation, prosecution of terrorism cases, including both Al-Qaida and non-Al-Qaida 
defendants, and investigation and disruption of terrorist plots, the threat of terrorism 
remains high in Jordan. Terrorists in Jordan often do not distinguish between U.S. 
government personnel and private citizens and specifically target areas frequented by 
Westerners. 
 
 In recent years, the Jordanian security forces disrupted numerous terrorist plots 
against U.S. interests. Transnational terrorist groups and local terrorist groups pose 
threats in Jordan. Specifically, Al-Qaida continues to focus terrorist activities against 
both the U.S. and Jordan. Al-Qaida claims responsibility for the November 2005 
bombings of three hotels in Amman, a rocket attack in August 2005, and the 
assassination of an American diplomat in 2002. Jordan’s State Security Court 
convicted and sentenced three individuals, first to death, but then commuted the 
sentences to 15 years each, for plotting to assassinate President Bush during his 
November 2006 trip to Jordan. 
 
 Terrorist organizations currently target the United States for intelligence 
collection through human espionage and by other means. Terrorist groups conduct 
intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services. 
2 This section was taken in whole or in part from Ex. I(1-6.) See  Ex. I(1, p. 6-7), Tr. 14.) 
 
7 
 
 
 Relations between the United States and Jordan have been close for six 
decades, with 2009 marking the 60th anniversary of U.S.–Jordanian ties. A primary 
objective of U.S. policy has been the achievement of a comprehensive, just and 
lasting peace in the Middle East. U.S. policy seeks to reinforce Jordan’s commitment 
to peace, stability, and moderation. The peace process and Jordan’s opposition to 
terrorism parallel and indirectly assist wider U.S. interests. Accordingly, through 
economic and military assistance and through close political cooperation, the United 
States has helped Jordan maintain its stability and prosperity.  
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
 
8 
 
 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude that a relevant security concern exists under Guideline B (foreign 
influence).  
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
[I]f the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 lists two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
9 
 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation 
to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire 
to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is 
not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative 
lives in a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor 
alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially 
result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 
(App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). Applicant 
has periodic contacts with S-2 and S-3, who are citizens and residents of Jordan. 
These close relationships with his relatives create a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.  
 
 The Government produced substantial evidence of these two disqualifying 
conditions as a result of Applicant’s immediate family members living in Jordan, his 
contact with them, and his travel to Jordan. The burden shifted to Applicant to produce 
evidence and prove a mitigating condition. As previously indicated, the burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. 
 
 Two Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under Guideline ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
AG ¶ 8(a) partially applies. S-1 was recently granted permanent resident alien 
status and now lives in the United States. S-2 is a dual U.S.–Jordanian citizen and 
works for a U.S.–based company in Jordan. S-2 is seeking a company transfer to the 
United States. S-3 has a pending application to move to the United States. With the 
exception of S-1, who receives a modest military pension from Jordan, and S-3, 
whose teacher salary is derived from Jordan, Applicant’s family members are not 
associated with or connected with the Jordanian government. On the other hand, 
Applicant has emotional ties with his two siblings living in Jordan as evidenced by his 
contact with them and visits to Jordan. With regard to his two sisters currently living in 
 
10 
 
 
                                                          
Jordan, Applicant did not establish “it is unlikely [he] will be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of [his sisters] and the interests of the U.S.” 
His frequent contacts with his relatives in Jordan could potentially force him to choose 
between the United States and Jordan. On balance, he did not fully meet his burden of 
showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationship with sisters] could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation.” 
 
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen, graduated from 
high school in the United States, received all of his higher education in the United 
States, honorably served in the Navy, and served as an Arabic linguist in Iraq and at 
Guantanamo Bay. He successfully held security clearances in the Navy and during his 
two terms of employment with two separate defense contractors. He successfully 
completed CI screening and is currently serving as an Arabic linguist at Guantanamo 
Bay. Applicant’s mother and two brothers are U.S. citizens and reside in the United 
States. Most notably, Applicant has been in harm’s way in Iraq having placed his life 
on the line accompanying forward deployed Army personnel.  
 
Appellant has developed a sufficient relationship and loyalty to the United 
States, that he can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. 
interest. All of his assets are in the United States. Applicant has been employed by a 
defense contractor and is very highly regarded at work. Applicant’s contacts and 
linkage to the U.S. are greater than his linkage to Jordan. He is heavily vested in the 
United States -- financially and emotionally. 
 
Whole-Person Analysis 
 
 In addition to the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions as 
discussed previously, I have considered the general adjudicative guidelines related to 
the whole-person concept under Directive ¶ E2.2.1. “Under the whole-person concept, 
the administrative judge must not consider and weigh incidents in an applicant’s life 
separately, in a piecemeal manner. Rather, the Judge must evaluate an applicant’s 
security eligibility by considering the totality of an applicant’s conduct and 
circumstances.”3  
 
The directive lists nine adjudicative process factors (APF) which are used for 
“whole-person” analysis. Because foreign influence does not involve misconduct, 
voluntariness of participation, rehabilitation and behavior changes, etc., the eighth 
APF, “the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress,” Directive ¶ 
E2.2.1.8, is the most relevant of the nine APFs to this adjudication.4 In addition to the 
3 ISCR Case No. 03-04147 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 4, 2005) (quoting  ISCR Case No. 02-01093 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 11, 2003)); ISCR Case No. 05-02833 at 2 (App. Bd. Mar. 19, 2007) (citing Raffone v. Adams, 
468 F.2d 860 (2nd Cir. 1972) (taken together, separate events may have a significance that is missing 
when each event is viewed in isolation). 
 
4 See ISCR Case No. 02-24566 at 3 (App. Bd. July 17, 2006) (stating that an analysis under the eighth 
APF apparently without discussion of the other APFs was sustainable); ISCR Case No. 03-10954 at 5 
(App. Bd. Mar. 8, 2006) (sole APF mentioned is eighth APF); ISCR Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. Bd. 
 
11 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
eighth APF, other “[a]vailable, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”  
Directive ¶ E2.2.1. Ultimately, the clearance decision is “an overall commonsense 
determination.”  Directive ¶ E2.2(c).     
 
The Appeal Board requires the whole-person analysis address “evidence of an 
applicant’s personal loyalties; the nature and extent of an applicant’s family’s ties to 
the U.S. relative to his [or her] ties to a foreign country; his or her ties social ties within 
the U.S.; and many others raised by the facts of a given case.” ISCR Case No. 04-
00540 at 7 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007). 
 
 The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
whole-person concept analysis. I have carefully considered Applicant’s family 
connections and personal connections to Jordan. Initial concerns regarding his mother 
residing in Jordan, his spouse being a registered alien from Jordan, his mother-in-law 
being a citizen and resident of Jordan, and S-1 being a retired major from the 
Jordanian Army have been overtaken by events and are no longer applicable. 
Applicant has two sisters living in Jordan. He has frequent, non-casual contact with his 
siblings living in Jordan. Applicant traveled to Jordan six times since 1998 for family-
related visits.  
 
Substantial mitigating evidence weighs towards grant of Applicant’s security 
clearance. Applicant is a naturalized U.S. citizen, who has lived in the United States 
since he was 16 years old or alternatively stated, he has lived in the United States for 
the last 21 years except when serving overseas. His mother and two brothers are 
naturalized U.S. citizens residing in the United States. S-1 was granted her “green 
card” and now lives in the United States. S-2 is a dual citizen and seeks a company 
transfer to the United States. S-3 has a pending application to relocate to the United 
States.  
 
Most compelling, however, is the fact that Applicant honorably served in the 
Navy, served two terms of employment as an Arabic linguist, first in harm’s way in Iraq 
and later at Guantanamo Bay, and he is currently serving as an Arabic linguist at 
Guantanamo Bay. During active duty and his terms of service with defense 
contractors, he has successfully held security clearances and has repeatedly proven 
himself. 
 
Applicant is financially vested in the United States as a home owner and owner 
of a small business with no financial ties to Jordan. The majority of Applicant’s 
immediate family is in the United States and he maintains a close relationship with 
them. In short, Applicant’s life is predominantly U.S.-based. His ties to the United 
States are clearly stronger than his ties to Jordan. There is no evidence that he has 
ever taken any action which could cause potential harm to the United States.   
Apr. 17, 2006) (remanding grant of clearance because Judge did not assess “the realistic potential for 
exploitation”), but see ISCR Case No. 04-00540 at 6 (App. Bd. Jan. 5, 2007) (rejecting contention that 
eighth APF is exclusive circumstance in whole-person analysis in foreign influence cases). 
 
12 
 
 
                                                          
Applicant’s past and present employers have considerable trust in him. His 
personal and work-related references assess Applicant as loyal, trustworthy, 
conscientious, responsible, mature, and of high integrity. He has an excellent 
reputation as a friend, family member, employee, and U.S. citizen. His evidence 
supports him for a security clearance. There is no derogatory record information about 
him. Lastly, Jordan has supported the U.S. war against terrorism and is a country that 
has been and continues to be friendly with the U.S. for more than 50 years.  
 
This case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances, and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis. This Analysis must answer the question whether there is a legitimate 
concern under the facts presented that the Jordanian government or its agents might 
exploit or attempt to exploit Applicant’s immediate family members in such a way that 
this U.S. citizen would have to choose between her pledged loyalty to the United 
States and those family members. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating 
conditions, all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the whole-person, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the security concerns pertaining to foreign influence.   
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole-person factors”5 
and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible 
for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:  
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
  Subparagraphs 1a – 1i:  For Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
_______________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
5See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
13 
 
 
 
