KEYWORD: Guideline J; Guideline D
DIGEST: Applicant failed to rebut the presumption that the Judge based her decision on the
record evidence rather than her own predilections.  Judge not prejudiced by Department
Counsel’s having elicited details of Applicant’s criminal conduct.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASE NO: 09-06406.a1
DATE: 04/13/2011
DATE: April 13, 2011
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 09-06406
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Francis J. Flanagan, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  In March 2010, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and
Guideline D (Sexual Behavior) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as
amended) (Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On January 12, 2010, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Erin C. Hogan denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant
appealed pursuant to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issue on appeal: whether the Judge’s adverse security
clearance decision was arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  For the following reasons, the
Board affirms the Judge’s unfavorable decision. 
The Judge made the following findings of fact: Applicant is married and has two children,
a daughter, age 35 and a son, age 31.  In December 1988, Applicant was arrested and charged with
multiple felony counts of first degree sexual assault and first degree child molestation.  On January
22, 1990, Applicant pleaded nolo contendere to seven counts of first degree child molestation.  He
was sentenced to 25 years in jail, with all 25 years suspended on condition of completion of
probation.  The probationary period expires on January 21, 2015.  
Applicant molested his daughter on numerous occasions between the ages of four and
thirteen.  Applicant would do this after drinking a lot of alcohol and smoking marijuana.  He knew
his actions were inappropriate and illegal.  Applicant had sexual intercourse with his daughter on
one occasion when she was thirteen.  After his arrest, Applicant underwent psychiatric counseling.
Applicant was ordered out of the family residence by the court system for four years.  The no-
contact order was eventually lifted by the court.  Applicant takes full responsibility for his actions.
His daughter is now married and Applicant and his wife see her and her family on a regular basis.
Applicant’s coworkers, supervisor, and friend are aware of his arrest, and are aware of the general
nature of the charges, but do not know the specifics of the case.  Applicant’s wife was angry at
Applicant for a long time, but she has put the past behind her.  The family is doing well. Applicant
has a good relationship with his children and grandson.  Applicant’s wife would trust Applicant to
be alone with their grandson because she believes he has learned his boundaries.  She trusts her
husband and is proud of him.  She feels he learned from his mistake and is trustworthy.
The Judge concluded as follows: The government established a case for disqualification
under Guidelines J and D.  Under Guideline J, while Applicant has a good employment record and
has not been arrested since 1988, he did not self-report his 1988 conduct until after being confronted
by his wife.  He committed serious felonies.  He remains on probation until 2015.  While he and his
wife appear to have moved on since the incident, the serious nature of the criminal conduct
outweighs any progress Applicant has made after the authorities became aware of his offenses.
Questions about Applicant’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment remain because of the
serious nature of his criminal conduct.  Regarding Guideline D, it is unclear whether the jurisdiction
that prosecuted Applicant’s case was aware that Applicant had sexual intercourse with his daughter.
However, his admitted conduct was criminal and considered to be serious felony offenses.  Even
though Applicant’s conduct became known in 1988, he is still vulnerable to coercion, exploitation,
and duress because of the sensitive nature of his past sexual behavior.  While it has been 22 years
since it was discovered that Applicant had been molesting his daughter, he molested his daughter
approximately two to four times a week over a nine-year period.  The sensitive nature of Applicant’s
past sexual behavior still makes him vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or duress regardless of the
passage of time.  Under the whole-person concept, whatever favorable progress Applicant has made
since 1988 does not outweigh the serious nature of the offenses committed on his daughter from age
4 to 13.
Applicant attached two affidavits to his appeal brief and asks that they be considered by the
Board, given the relaxed rules of evidence in administrative hearings.  One is a statement from
Applicant’s wife indicating that through inadvertence, she misstated facts during her hearing
testimony regarding the length of time that Applicant had been abusing their daughter.  The other
is a statement from a family counselor corroborating Applicant’s wife’s statements regarding her
testimony and offering details about the family’s progress in counseling.  The Board declines to
consider these matters on appeal.  The Directive states that the Board may not consider new
evidence on appeal.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.29.  The fact that DOHA administrative hearings are
conducted without strict adherence to formal rules of evidence does nothing to countermand the
explicit prohibition set forth in the Directive.
Applicant argues that the Judge impermissibly substituted her own moral judgments in
deciding the case, instead of applying the applicable mitigating conditions.  He claims that, although
he committed a heinous crime, it occurred in 1988 and the Adjudicative Guidelines do not disqualify
individuals convicted of child molestation from obtaining a security clearance.  Applicant states that,
in applying her own moral code, the Judge ignored rather than weighed evidence.  Applicant’s
assertions do not establish error on the part of the Judge.  
There is a presumption in favor of regularity and good faith on the part of DOHA judges as
they engage in the process of deciding cases.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 99-0019 at 5 (App. Bd. Nov.
22, 1999).  In the context of Applicant’s appeal argument this means there is a presumption that the
Judge decided the case with reference to the applicable Adjudicative Guidelines and not her personal
predilections.  Applicant has failed to overcome this presumption, largely because he has failed to
articulate in any detail precisely how the Judge allowed any personal biases to affect her resolution
of the case.  A review of the Judge’s decision reveals that it is based on a detailed discussion of
applicable disqualifying conditions and potentially applicable mitigating conditions.  Because of the
passage of time since his 1988 convictions, Applicant contends that the Judge has imposed a rule
of absolute disqualification for child molesters.  However, the mere passage of time cannot be
viewed in isolation, and must be evaluated with reference to other facts and circumstances in the
case.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 08-05351 at 8 (App. Bd. Mar. 12, 2010).  In this case, the Judge
noted such factors as the serious nature of the offenses, their duration, and the fact that Applicant
was still vulnerable to coercion owing to the sensitive nature of the offenses.  Given the totality of
the record evidence in this case, the Judge has articulated a rational basis for concluding that
Applicant’s conduct was not mitigated.     
Applicant argues that the Judge ignored evidence.  A Judge is presumed to have considered
all the evidence in the record unless she specifically states otherwise.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-
00196 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2009).  Applicant has not overcome the presumption in this case.  As
the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a whole and decide whether the favorable
evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at
2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  A party’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or
an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the
Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or
contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).  In this case, the
decision makes clear that the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against
the seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant
conditions and factors.  The Judge properly considered the whole pattern of Applicant’s child sexual
abuse, which included an instance of sexual intercourse with his thirteen-year-old daughter and the
fact that those people outside his family who are close to him do not know the details of his abuse
of his daughter. 
Applicant also argues that the Judge was unduly prejudiced by Department Counsel’s
eliciting of details at the hearing about the sexual abuse of the daughter.  Applicant objected to this
line of questioning at the hearing.  The Judge ruled that she felt it important to know something
about the facts supporting the offenses.  Applicant argues that since he pleaded guilty to the
offenses, the charges spoke for themselves and that the addition of details about the offenses was
more prejudicial than probative.  A Judge’s rulings on matters of the admissibility evidence of this
type are reviewed for an abuse of discretion.  The Board concludes that the Judge did not err in this
instance, and, as an administrative judge, she would not be unduly prejudiced by the details
underlying the offenses committed by Applicant. 
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
her decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’”
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43
(1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore,
the Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan       
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairperson, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett            
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields          
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
