                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07066 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline Jeffreys, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s father is a citizen of Pakistan and lives with Applicant. His father has 
worked for another Middle Eastern country for 33 years and holds an important position 
of trust. Applicant’s parents and mother-in-law have close and extended family 
members living in Pakistan. Through no fault of his own, Applicant was unable to 
mitigate the considerable foreign influence security concerns raised. Clearance is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application (SCA) on May 4, 2009. After 
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary 
affirmative finding1 that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  
 
1 
 
 
                                            
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
 
On August 16, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision - security concerns raised under Guideline B 
(Foreign Influence) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 11, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 21, 2010, to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied. DOHA issued a notice of 
hearing on November 3, 2010, convening a hearing on November 30, 2010.  
 
At the hearing, the Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 5. GEs 1 through 
3 were admitted without objection. GEs 4 and 5 were received, without objection, for 
administrative notice purposes only. Applicant testified and presented the testimony of 
one witness. DOHA received the transcripts of the hearing (Tr.) on December 6, 2010 
and January 26, 2011. 
 
Procedural Issue 
 
During the November 30, 2010 hearing, the Government moved to amend the 
SOR to add allegation “1.c. You and your wife have extended family members who are 
citizens and residents of Pakistan.” Applicant objected and I required the Government to 
serve Applicant with the proposed amendment in writing. Applicant was served the 
amended SOR on November 30, 2010, and he answered it on December 24, 2010. The 
notice of continuation of hearing was issued on December 22, 2010, and the hearing 
was reconvened on January 19, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the SOR. He denied, however, 
the Guideline B general policy security concern set forth under SOR ¶ 1. His admissions 
are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, and 
having considered Applicant’s demeanor and testimony, I make the following findings of 
fact.  
 
Applicant is a 31-year-old senior information technology assurance and security 
officer employed by a defense contractor. Applicant and his sister were born, raised, 
and educated in the United States. He attended college in the United States from 1997 
until 2003, and from August 2006 until January 2007, but he did not finish his degree. 
He started working for his current employer, a government contractor, in March 2007. 
Shortly thereafter, he was issued a security clearance at the secret level. In May 2009, 
he was issued an interim top secret clearance. He is considered to be a good 
employee. There is no evidence that he has compromised or caused others to 
compromise classified information. 
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DOD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
 
Applicant’s parents moved to the United States in 1978. His mother was born in 
India, and she is now a naturalized U.S. citizen. She has been a homemaker all of her 
life. His father was born in Pakistan, and he is a Pakistani citizen with permanent 
residence status in the United States. They both live with Applicant in his home.  
 
Applicant’s father worked at the embassy of a Middle Eastern country in the 
United States since he entered the United States in 1978. His father has an important 
position at the embassy. His father testified that he has no diplomatic or governmental 
related duties. Through the years, Applicant’s father and his family visited the embassy 
for festivals and on special occasions.  
 
Applicant’s maternal grandfather worked for the Pakistani ministry of foreign 
affairs and performed duties in a high-level position. (Tr. 71) Applicant’s mother has a 
sister and a stepsister who are residents and citizens of Pakistan. She has contact with 
them approximately six times a year, usually during religious holidays or special family 
occasions.  
 
Applicant considers himself to be a loyal, hardworking American. He loves the 
United States. He has worked in the United States since age 15, and always pays his 
taxes. The last time he visited Pakistan was 12 years ago, around 1995-1996. He was 
approximately 16 years old, and his parents took him and his sister to Pakistan to visit 
with their relatives living in Pakistan. Applicant noted that he has numerous family 
members living in the United States who have been granted access to classified 
information. He averred he has limited personal contact with any of his extended family 
members living in Pakistan. Most of the contacts with family members living in Pakistan 
are maintained by his father and his wife’s relatives. Applicant owns a house in the 
United States and has some investments in the United States.   
 
Applicant’s paternal aunt lives in Pakistan. Applicant averred he only has contact 
with his aunt through his father. His father and his aunt have telephonic contact 
approximately twice a month. They also call each other during religious holidays and 
special family occasions. His father used to send money to his sister, but Applicant 
indicated his aunt is no longer accepting the financial assistance. 
 
Applicant married his wife in January 2006. She was born in Pakistan, but she is 
now a naturalized U.S. citizen. As of the hearing day, Applicant and his wife were 
expecting a child. His parents-in-law were both born in Pakistan, but they are now 
naturalized U.S. citizens living in the United States. Apparently, they travel to Pakistan 
every two years. His mother-in-law has a sister that lives in Pakistan as well as other 
extended family members. His wife’s aunt works in Pakistan as a teacher. She travelled 
to the United States to attend Applicant’s wedding. Applicant’s wife has not visited 
Pakistan since around 2000-2001. Applicant claimed that none of his relatives living in 
Pakistan work for the Pakistani government or any other foreign government. 
 
 
4 
 
 
I take administrative notice of the following facts. Pakistan is a parliamentary 
federal republic with a population of more than 167 million people. After September 11, 
2001, Pakistan supported the United States and an international coalition in Operation 
Enduring Freedom to remove the Taliban from power. Despite this support, members of 
the Taliban are known to be in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of 
Pakistan and in the Balochistan Province, which borders Iran and Afghanistan. The 
leader of the Taliban operates openly in Pakistan, as do extremists from the Pakistani 
Taliban and Al Qaida. Taliban financing has been traced from Pakistan to Afghanistan, 
allowing the insurgency in Afghanistan to strengthen its military and technical 
capabilities. Pakistan has intensified its counterinsurgency efforts, but its record for 
dealing with militants has been mixed. 
 
The U.S. Department of State has defined several areas of Pakistan to be 
terrorist safe havens. The security situation in Afghanistan worsened in 2008, driven in 
part by insurgent access to safe havens in western Pakistan through the porous 
Afghan-Pakistan border. In early 2009, the FATA in Pakistan continued to provide vital 
sanctuary to Al Qaida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based extremist groups. 
Al-Qaida exploits the permissive operating environment to support the Afghan 
insurgency, while also planning attacks against the United States and Western interests 
in Pakistan and worldwide. Together with the Afghan Taliban and other extremist 
groups, Al Qaida uses this sanctuary to train and recruit operatives, plan and prepare 
regional and transnational attacks, disseminate propaganda, and obtain equipment and 
supplies. Al Qaida and its extremists have waged a campaign of destabilizing suicide 
attacks throughout Pakistan. The attacks targeted high-profile government, military, and 
western-related sites. Nearly 1,000 individuals were killed in 2008 due to such attacks. 
In the last three months of 2009, terrorists based in Pakistan conducted at least 40 
suicide terrorist attacks in major cities of Pakistan and killed about 600 Pakistani 
civilians and security force personnel.   
 
The U.S. State Department warns U.S. citizens of the risks of traveling to 
Pakistan in light of terrorist activity. Since 2007, several American citizens present in 
Pakistan have been kidnapped for ransom or other personal reasons. The human rights 
situation in Pakistan remains poor. Extrajudicial killings, torture, and disappearances 
occur. Arbitrary arrests, governmental and police corruption is widespread, and the 
Pakistani government maintains several domestic intelligence agencies to monitor 
politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign 
intelligence agents. Credible reports indicate that authorities use wiretaps and monitor 
mail without the requisite court approval, and also monitor phones and electronic 
messages. In addition, Pakistan continues to develop its own nuclear infrastructure, 
expand nuclear weapon stockpiles, and seek more advanced warhead and delivery 
systems. In the aftermath of Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, the United 
States cut-off military aid to Pakistan for several years.  
 
I also take administrative notice of the following facts concerning the Middle 
Eastern country of X. The government of X sponsors many social welfare programs. X 
is an important partner in the ongoing U.S.-led campaign against international terrorism, 
 
5 
 
 
providing military, diplomatic, and intelligence assistance and supporting efforts to block 
financing of terrorist groups. While X has made progress in combating terrorism, it lacks 
legal provisions that deal specifically with terrorism, and it lacks comprehensive 
legislation that criminalizes terrorist financing. 
 
The government of X engages in human rights abuses which include limits on 
freedoms of speech, press, religion, and movement for certain groups; government 
corruption and trafficking in persons; and violence against women. X placed some limits 
on the rights of free religious practice, and religious minorities experienced some 
discrimination as a result of government policies. It also limits the rights of its citizens to 
change their government and form political parties.  
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
6 
 
 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
  The government’s concern under AG ¶ 6 is that:  
 
 Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, he or she may be 
manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or 
government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to 
pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this 
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in 
which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not 
limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is known to 
target United States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is 
associated with a risk of terrorism.  
 
AG ¶ 7 sets out three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case, including: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
 
7 
 
 
                                           
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.3 Applicant, by himself or through his wife and his 
parents, has frequent contacts (at least twice a month) and a close relationship of 
affection and/or obligation with his aunt, his wife’s aunt, and other extended family 
members who are residents and citizens of Pakistan. These contacts create a risk of 
foreign pressure or attempted exploitation because there is always the possibility that 
Pakistani agents, criminals, or terrorists operating in Pakistan may exploit the 
opportunity to obtain information about the United States.  
 
Moreover, Applicant’s parents live with him in his house. His father is a citizen of 
Pakistan. He has been employed for the last 33 years by another Middle Eastern 
country in an important trust position. Applicant’s connection to his family members in 
Pakistan and with his father in the United States creates a potential conflict of interest 
because his relationships are sufficiently close to raise a security concern about his 
desire to help them by providing sensitive or classified information.  
 
  The Government produced substantial evidence raising these three potentially 
disqualifying conditions, and the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and 
prove a mitigating condition. As previously indicated, the burden of disproving a 
mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
 
  Three Foreign Influence Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 8 are potentially 
applicable to these disqualifying conditions: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
3  See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. 
Bd. Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
 
8 
 
 
                                           
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; and 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
 
After considering the totality of the facts and circumstances in Applicant’s case, I 
conclude that none of the mitigating conditions apply. Applicant has strong feelings of 
affection and a strong sense of obligation to his parents, both of whom live with him. 
Applicant’s father is a citizen of Pakistan and has been employed by the government of 
X for the last 33 years in an important position. Although he claimed not to be involved 
in any political business, Applicant’s father’s Pakistani citizenship and long-term 
employment by the government of X create a heightened risk for foreign influence or 
exploitation not mitigated by Applicant’s favorable evidence.  
 
 In deciding whether Applicant’s family members are in a position to be exploited, 
I considered Pakistan and X’s forms of government.4 The nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion or inducement. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence collection operations against the United States. The relationship 
of Pakistan with the United States places a significant burden of persuasion on 
Applicant to demonstrate that his relationships with his parents and extended family 
members living in Pakistan do not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed 
in a position where he might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States 
and a desire to assist his parents or their relatives living in Pakistan who might be 
coerced by terrorists or other governmental entities in Pakistan or X.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
 
 4 The focus is not the country or its people, but its rulers and the nature of the government they 
impose. This approach recognizes that it makes sense to treat each country in accordance with the level 
of security concern or threat it presents to the United States.  
 
 
9 
 
 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-0317, 
2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives or terrorists from Pakistan 
or X seek or have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant, 
his father, or his relatives living in Pakistan, it is not possible to rule out such a 
possibility in the future. Applicant’s parents live with him and they have siblings in 
Pakistan. Applicant continues to feel an obligation to them and affection for them. 
Applicant’s concern for his father is a positive character trait that increases his 
trustworthiness; however, it also increases the concern about potential foreign 
influence.  
 
Applicant did not establish that it is unlikely he will be placed in a position of 
having to choose between the interests of his family and the interests of the United 
States. Additionally, Applicant’s grandfather (his mother’s father) was also employed by 
the government of Pakistani in a high-level position. Thus, it is more likely that the 
government of Pakistan is aware of his father’s and his family’s whereabouts.  
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by his relationship with his father and other family 
members living in Pakistan. I note the United States’ recent relationship with Pakistan, 
especially Pakistan’s systematic human rights violations, and the ever present danger 
from terrorists and those who seek to damage U.S interests. The conduct of terrorists in 
Pakistan makes it more likely that terrorists would attempt to coerce Applicant through 
his father and his relatives living in Pakistan, if they determined it was advantageous to 
do so. Moreover, Applicant’s father lives with Applicant. His father holds an important 
position with the government of X. His father’s long-term working relationship with 
another foreign country is a security concern. Considering the totality of the 
circumstances, Applicant has failed to mitigate the Guideline B security concerns. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider 
the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
10 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
Applicant was born, raised, and educated in the United States. As such, he has 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S. He has family connections 
to the United States via his sister and extended family members living in the United 
States. His spouse is a naturalized U.S. citizen, and as of the day of the hearing, they 
were expecting a child that likely will be born in the United States. Applicant owns a 
house in the United States and has some investments in the United States.   
There are some facts supporting mitigation of security concerns. Applicant 
considers the United States to be his home. He has strong connections to the United 
States. He was born, raised, and educated in the United States. He is a productive 
member of American society. Since 2007, he has been working for a government 
contractor and received access to classified information at the secret level. He is 
considered to be a good employee. There is no evidence that he has compromised or 
caused others to compromise classified information. His spouse is a naturalized U.S. 
citizen. She and her mother and Applicant’s parents live in the United States. 
Notwithstanding, the circumstances supporting the denial of Applicant’s 
clearance are more significant than the factors weighing towards approval of his 
clearance. Applicant’s parents and his mother-in-law have immediate family members 
that live in Pakistan. His father is a Pakistani citizen who works in an important position 
for the government of X.  
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Pakistan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in Pakistan, as well as the dangers existing in Pakistan. The 
danger of coercion from terrorists in Pakistan is more likely than in many other 
countries. Although Pakistan and the United States are allied militarily, diplomatically, 
and through trade, the Pakistan government has had significant difficulty maintaining 
order within its borders and in the suppression of terrorists. I have continuing doubts 
that Applicant, his parents, or family members living in Pakistan will remain safe from 
terrorist coercion should Applicant receive access to classified information. Moreover, 
his father’s long-term, close relationship with another foreign country is a security 
concern. Through no fault of his own, Applicant was unable to mitigate the considerable 
foreign influence security concerns. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant's eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated foreign influence security concerns. 
 
11 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
 Subparagraph 1.b:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant eligibility for a security clearance to 
Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
