 
1 
 
 
                                                            
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-04954 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Eric Borgstrom, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline B (foreign 
influence). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 19, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline B (foreign influence) for Applicant. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on May 28, 2010, and DOHA received Applicant’s 
answer on June 2, 2010. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 31, 
2010. The case was assigned to two previous administrative judges on August 6, 
 
2 
 
 
2010 and September 3, 2010, respectively, and was assigned to me on September 
10, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of video teleconference hearing on August 30, 2010 
scheduling the case to be heard on September 9, 2010. On September 8, 2010, 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing cancelling the video teleconference. On September 
10, 2010, DOHA issued a notice of hearing scheduling the hearing for September 14, 
2010. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through P, 
which were received without objection, and she testified on her own behalf. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on September 22, 2010.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel requested administrative notice of facts concerning 
Afghanistan. Department Counsel provided supporting documents to show detail and 
context for those facts. Applicant did not object, and I granted Department Counsel’s 
request. (Tr. 15-19, Exhibit I(1-8).) 
 
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for 
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 
2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 
02-18668 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004) and McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization  
Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986)). Usually administrative notice at ISCR 
proceedings is accorded to facts that are either well known or from government 
reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006) (listing 
fifteen types of facts for administrative notice).  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. Her admissions are 
incorporated as findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old linguist, who has been employed by a defense 
contractor since March 2009. She is currently deployed to Afghanistan. Applicant 
speaks three languages – Pashtun, Farsi, and English. After completing a 
counterintelligence screening in March 2009, she was granted an interim secret 
security clearance. (GE 1, GE 4, AE I, Tr. 68, 75-77.) 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
Applicant comes from a large Afghan family. Her parents, six brothers, and two 
sisters, as well as Applicant, were all born and educated in Afghanistan. Her father 
was a prominent local politician and land owner. Her mother was a homemaker. 
Applicant’s father died in Afghanistan in 1984. (GE 4.) 
 
Applicant’s immediate family are dispersed throughout the United States, 
Canada, Europe, and Afghanistan with the vast majority of them residing in the United 
States. She married in January 1974 and divorced in December 1984. She had three 
daughters and one son born during her marriage. Applicant is unsure of her former 
husband’s whereabouts. She attended a teaching academy and received the 
equivalent of an associate’s degree in Afghanistan, and for a brief period, she taught 
at an Afghan middle school. (Tr. 23-24, 26-30.)  
 
In December 1982, Applicant and her four children immigrated to the United 
States. (GE 4, Tr. 23-24, 31, 90-91.) After arriving in the United States, she attended 
cosmetology school from June 1983 to September 1984 and received a certificate in 
cosmetology. Applicant later attended a community college from September 1987 to 
September 1989 and received a certificate in hotel and restaurant management. (GE 
4, Tr.  25-26.) Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in August 1992 and was 
issued her most recent U.S. passport in February 2009. (GE 1, GE 4, AE H.) Before 
becoming a linguist, Applicant worked as a successful hair stylist in a major 
metropolitan area with photographs of her work in major national magazines. (GE 3, 
GE 4, AE G.) 
 
Following, is a summary of Applicant’s immediate family members with 
comments as appropriate: 1
 
 
Mother – She is 92 years old and is a citizen and resident of the United States. 
She lives on social security and additional support provided by Applicant and her 
siblings. Applicant’s mother remained a homemaker after arriving in the United States. 
Applicant speaks to her mother daily. (GE 4, Tr. 31-32.) 
 
B-1 – He, his wife, and four children, are citizens and residents of the 
Netherlands. B-1 is an artist and a school librarian. B-1’s wife is a teacher’s aide. 
Applicant speaks to him by telephone “[o]nce a year, twice a year, not too much.” (GE 
4, Tr. 32-36.) 
 
B-2 – He is a citizen and resident of the United States, as are his wife and four 
children. He is also a linguist and is employed by the same company as Applicant. 
Before becoming a linguist, B-2 was employed as a car salesman and restaurateur. B-
                                                          
1 Applicant’s brothers are depicted as “B,” her sisters are depicted as “S,” her daughters are depicted as 
“D,” her mother as “mother,” and her only son is depicted as “Son.” Groups exceeding one are followed 
by their order of seniority with an Arabic number. E.g. Applicant’s oldest brother is depicted as “B-1.” 
 
4 
 
 
2’s wife works in a bank. Applicant speaks to B-2 every three months.  (GE 4, Tr. 35-
39.) 
 
B-3 – He is a citizen and resident of the United States. He is also a linguist and 
is employed by the same company as Applicant. Before becoming a linguist, B-3 owed 
a cleaning company. He was married and has a daughter, but Applicant is unsure of 
the whereabouts or status of her former sister-in-law or niece. Applicant speaks to B-3 
once every three months. (GE 4, Tr. 39-43.) 
 
B-4 – He is a citizen and resident of the United States, as are his wife and four 
children. He worked as a restaurateur before retiring. Before moving to the United 
States, B-4 was employed as a pilot for an Afghan airline company. His wife was a 
teacher in Afghanistan, but has been a homemaker since moving to the United States. 
Applicant speaks to B-4 once a year. (GE 4, Tr. 43-46.) 
 
B-5 – He is a resident of Canada, as are his wife and two daughters. Applicant 
was uncertain of their citizenship. His wife and two daughters live with him in Canada. 
B-5 owns a cleaning company in Canada. Applicant speaks to B-5 once a year. (GE 4, 
Tr. 47-50.) 
 
B-6 – He is a resident and citizen of Canada, as are his wife and two children. 
He owned a car rental company before retiring. It has been “more than five years” 
since Applicant spoke to B-6. (GE 4, Tr. 50-53.) 
 
S-1 – She is a resident and citizen of the United States, as are her husband 
and two sons. She is also a linguist and is employed by the same company as 
Applicant. Before becoming a linguist, S-1 was a hair stylist. Her husband is a taxi 
driver. Applicant speaks to S-1 once a week. (GE 4, Tr. 60-61.) In the May–April 2002 
timeframe, Applicant traveled to Pakistan with her sister for nine days in an attempt to 
locate their nephew. They were unable to locate him. (GE 3.) 
 
S-2 – She is a resident and citizen of Germany. Applicant thought that S-2 
worked in a clothing-related occupation, but is unsure of her occupation today. S-2’s 
husband was killed while serving in the Afghan Army during the Afghanistan-USSR 
War. S-2 also had a daughter, who died during the war in Afghanistan. Applicant 
speaks to S-2 maybe once a year. (GE 4, Tr. 61-63.) 
 
Son – He is a resident of the United States with a pending application to 
become a U.S. citizen. He currently is a citizen of Afghanistan. Applicant’s son works 
in a bank and is unmarried. She speaks to her son once a week. (GE 4, Tr. 53-54.) 
 
D-1 – She is a resident of the United States with a pending application to 
become a U.S. citizen. She is currently a citizen of Afghanistan. D-1 works in a hair 
salon and lives near the Applicant. D-1 is married and her husband is a citizen of 
Afghanistan and is employed by the German Embassy in Afghanistan. Applicant 
 
5 
 
 
speaks to D-1 every day. Applicant traveled to Afghanistan with D-2 in 2008 to attend 
her wedding. (GE 4, Tr. 54-59.) 
 
D-2 – She is a resident and citizen of the United States. D-2 is a registered 
nurse and worked in a hospital. D-2 is in the process of becoming a linguist in 
Afghanistan like her mother. She is separated from her husband and is pending a 
divorce. Her estranged husband is an Afghan citizen (Applicant’s son-in-law) and lives 
in the United States. D-2 has a son. Applicant speaks to D-2 once a day. (GE 4, Tr. 
63-65.)  
 
D-3 – She is a resident and citizen of the United States. D-3 is a hair stylist and 
works at the same salon as D-1. D-3 is unmarried and has a son. Applicant speaks to 
D-3 once a day. (GE 4, Tr. 64-66.) 
 
Applicant was previously deployed to Afghanistan from July 2009 to August 
2010. Her duties included accompanying U.S. Army Special Forces serving as an 
interpreter in the field and later at a U.S. military hospital in Afghanistan. During this 
deployment, she came under periodic fire while accompanying Special Forces, was 
surrounded by the Taliban for a three-week period, and as a female interpreter had a 
large bounty placed on her by the Taliban. (Tr. 74-81.) 
 
At the time of the hearing, Applicant had two brothers, a sister, and a nephew 
serving as linguists in Afghanistan, and all were employed by the same defense 
contractor. Her nephew is the son of B-4. Also, Applicant’s daughter (D-2) is in training 
to be a linguist and will be joining her mother and the rest of the family in Afghanistan. 
(Tr. 72-74.) Applicant returned to the United States from her deployment to 
Afghanistan for her hearing, and then redeployed back to Afghanistan immediately 
after her hearing. At the time of the hearing, Applicant had received notification that 
she would be assigned as a linguist to a U.S. Army Judge Advocate in Afghanistan. 
(Tr. 88, 90.) 
 
Applicant does not own any real property in the United States. She conducts all 
of her banking in the United States, is registered to vote in the United States, and 
exercises all of her rights of U.S. citizenship. (Tr. 67, 82-83.) Applicant testified that 
although she was born in Afghanistan, she considers the United States to be her 
home. (Tr. 70, 83.)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted numerous reference letters to include a letter from her 
community college instructor. Most notable were reference letters and various awards 
from military personnel that Applicant served with during her 2009 to 2010 deployment 
to Afghanistan. Senior medical staff and combat personnel, who worked with her in 
Afghanistan, commended her competency, dependability, and compassion. 
Applicant’s submitted two certificates of appreciation from military commanders for her 
exceptional performance as a linguist. (AE A – O). She also submitted excerpts from a 
 
6 
 
 
prominent and nationally recognized bride’s magazine with examples of her success 
as a hair dresser. (AE P.) 
 
Afghanistan  
 
Afghanistan is a country in Southwestern Asia. It is approximately the size of 
Texas (249,935 square miles). Pakistan borders it on the east and the south. Iran 
borders it on the west and Russia to the north. It is a rugged and mountainous country 
which has been fought over by powerful nations for centuries. In 2009, the population 
was about 28 million people with about 3,000,000 Afghans living outside Afghanistan.  
 
Afghanistan is presently an Islamic Republic with a democratically elected 
president. Afghanistan has had a turbulent political history, including an invasion by 
the Soviet Union in 1979. After an accord was reached in 1989, and the Soviet Union 
withdrew from the country, fighting continued among the various ethnic, clan and 
religious militias. By the end of 1998, the Taliban rose to power and controlled 90% of 
the country, imposing aggressive and repressive policies.  
 
In October 2001, U.S. forces and coalition partners led military operations in the 
country, forcing the Taliban out of power by November 2001. The new democratic 
government took power in 2004 after a popular election. Despite that election, 
terrorists, including al-Qaida and the Taliban, continue to assert power and 
intimidation within the country. Safety and security are key issues because these 
terrorist organizations target United States and Afghan interests by suicide operations, 
bombings, assassinations, car-jackings, assaults, or hostage takings. At this time, the 
risk of terrorist activities remains extremely high. The country’s human rights record 
remains poor and violence is rampant. According to recent reports from the U.S. 
Department of State, insurgents continue to plan attacks and kidnappings of 
Americans and other Western nationals. Travel warnings are ongoing. No section of 
Afghanistan is safe or immune from violence.  
 
The United States-Afghan relationship is summarized as follows: 
 
After the fall of the Taliban, the U.S. supported the emergence of a 
broad-based government, representative of all Afghans, and actively 
encouraged a [United Nations] role in the national reconciliation process 
in Afghanistan. The U.S. has made a long-term commitment to help 
Afghanistan rebuild itself after years of war. The U.S. and others in the 
international community currently provide resources and expertise to 
Afghanistan in a variety of areas, including humanitarian relief and 
assistance, capacity-building, security needs, counter-narcotic programs, 
and infrastructure projects. 
 
During his December 1, 2009 speech at West Point, President Barack 
Obama laid down the core of U.S. goals in Afghanistan, which are to 
disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al-Qaeda and its safe havens in Pakistan, 
 
7 
 
 
and to prevent their return to Afghanistan. . . . The United States is 
willing to support fully the ambitious agenda set out by the recently re-
elected Afghan president, focusing on reintegration, economic 
development, improving relations with Afghanistan regional partners, 
and steadily increasing the security responsibilities of the Afghan 
security forces. 
 
U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, Mar. 26, 2010 (HE 4, 
enclosure I at 13). The United States has more combat troops deployed to 
Afghanistan than to any other foreign country. This extraordinary commitment to 
Afghanistan is balanced against the inherent dangers of the ongoing conflict in 
Afghanistan to citizens and residents of Afghanistan. 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
 
8 
 
 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline B (foreign influence).  
 
 Foreign Influence 
 
  AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case: 
 
 
9 
 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation 
to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire 
to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; 
and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of 
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
 
AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply. Applicant, her children, her parents and 
siblings, and several of her in-laws were all born in Afghanistan. Two of her children, 
although they have pending applications to become U.S. citizens, are and remain 
citizens of Afghanistan. Applicant’s son-in-law, who is married to D-2, is an Afghan 
citizen and is employed by the German Embassy in Afghanistan. Applicant has four 
siblings who are residents and citizens of countries such as the Netherlands, Canada, 
and Germany. According to Applicant’s March 2009, D-2 (non-citizen daughter) lives 
with Applicant. She has contact with all of her siblings in varying degrees and frequent 
contact with D-2 whose husband is a citizen of and current resident of Afghanistan. 
“[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, the immediate family members of the person’s spouse.” ISCR Case No. 
01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at *8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002). Applicant has not 
rebutted this presumption. Applicant’s relationship with her daughter, and through her 
to her son-in-law in Afghanistan, creates “a heightened risk of foreign inducement, 
manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”   
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a family member living in 
Afghanistan, is not, as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if an 
applicant has a close relationship with even one relative, living in a foreign country, 
this factor alone is sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See Generally ISCR 
Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s 
family members are vulnerable to government coercion or inducement. The risk of 
coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an 
authoritarian government, a family member is associated with or dependent upon the 
government, or the country is known to conduct intelligence collection operations 
against the United States. The relationship of Afghanistan with the United States, 
 
10 
 
 
places a significant, but not insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to 
demonstrate that her relationships with her family members living in Afghanistan do 
not pose a security risk. Applicant should not be placed into a position where she 
might be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and a desire to assist 
a family member living in Afghanistan.  
 
Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004). 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. See ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  
 
While there is no evidence that intelligence operatives from Afghanistan seek or 
have sought classified or economic information from or through Applicant or her 
family, nevertheless, it is not possible to rule out such a possibility in the future. 
International terrorist groups are known to conduct intelligence activities as effectively 
as capable state intelligence services, and Afghanistan has an enormous problem with 
terrorism. Applicant’s relationship with family members living in Afghanistan creates a 
potential conflict of interest because this relationship is sufficiently close to raise a 
security concern about his desire to assist family members in Afghanistan by providing 
sensitive or classified information. Department Counsel produced substantial evidence 
of Applicant’s contacts with her son-in-law vis-à-vis D-2 and has raised the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. Also, there is some overlap of 
Applicant’s immediate family members serving as linguists in Afghanistan at the same 
time. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply, and further inquiry is necessary about potential 
application of any mitigating conditions.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security 
concerns including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a 
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests 
of the U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense 
of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
 
11 
 
 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business 
or are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency 
requirements regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats 
from persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and 
could not be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the 
individual. 
    
AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) have limited applicability. Applicant visited Afghanistan in 
2008 to attend D-2’s wedding. D-2’s husband (Applicant’s son-in-law) is a citizen and 
resident of Afghanistan. Applicant has frequent contact with D-2 and presumably has 
some contact with her son-in-law. She, along with several family members, are 
serving as linguists in Afghanistan. Because of these connections to Afghanistan, 
Applicant is not able to fully meet her burden of showing there is “little likelihood that 
[her relationships with her relatives who are Afghanistan citizens] could create a risk 
for foreign influence or exploitation.”   
 
AG ¶ 8(b) fully applies. A key factor in the AG ¶ 8(b) analysis is Applicant’s 
“deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S.” Applicant has 
established that “[she] can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest.” In 1982, Applicant and her four children emigrated from Afghanistan 
to the United States. Applicant attended cosmetology school and community college in 
the United States and became a U.S. citizen in 1992. Two of her four children as well 
as her mother are naturalized U.S. citizens. Her other two children have pending 
applications to become U.S. citizens. Most importantly, Applicant wants a clearance 
so that she can again assist U.S. Armed Forces in Afghanistan in a combat zone.  She 
has risked her life to support United States’ goals in Afghanistan. She has shown her 
patriotism, loyalty, and fidelity to the United States.  Applicant has already served with 
distinction while serving as a linguist in support of U.S. Armed Forces from 2009 to 
2010. 
 
Applicant has strong family connections to the United States. Her four children, 
her mother, three of her six brothers and one of her two sisters all reside in the United 
States. With the exception of two of her children, her mother and her siblings residing 
 
12 
 
 
in the United States are all U.S. citizens. Currently, Applicant is among five family 
members serving as linguists in Afghanistan.   
 
Applicant’s relationship with the United States must be weighed against the 
potential conflict of interest created by her relationships with her son-in-law living in 
Afghanistan and other family members who are serving as linguists in Afghanistan. 
There is no evidence, however, that terrorists, criminals, the Afghan Government, or 
those conducting espionage have approached or threatened Applicant or her family in 
Afghanistan to coerce Applicant or her family for classified or sensitive information.2
 
 
Applicant and her family serving in Afghanistan are clearly targets for improper 
coercion, exploitation, and violence.    
It is important to be mindful of the United States’ huge investment of manpower 
and money in Afghanistan, and Applicant and as well as her other family members, 
who are linguists working for the U.S. Government, have and are supporting U.S. 
goals and objectives in Afghanistan. Applicant, her family members serving as 
linguists in Afghanistan, and her son-in-law are potential targets of terrorists and the 
Taliban for their own activities and support for the United States, and Applicant’s 
potential access to classified information is unlikely to add significantly to the risk they 
already face from lawless elements in Afghanistan.  
 
AG ¶¶ 8(d) and 8(e) do not apply. The U.S. Government has not encouraged 
Applicant’s involvement with family members living in Afghanistan. Applicant is not 
required to report her contacts with family members living in Afghanistan. 
 
AG ¶ 8(f) has limited application because there is no evidence that Applicant 
has any interest in property or bank accounts in Afghanistan. However, this mitigating 
condition can only fully mitigate the disqualifying condition under AG ¶ 7(e), which 
provides, “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or 
in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual 
to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” All of Applicant’s assets are in 
the United States. 
 
In sum, Applicant’s connections to family living in Afghanistan are less 
substantial than her strong connections and ties to the United States. Her past and 
present personal risk as a translator and linguist serving with U.S. combat forces in 
Afghanistan is greater than the risk her son-in-law (working for the German Embassy) 
and linguist family members face during their service in Afghanistan. Her connections 
to the United States taken together are sufficient to fully overcome the foreign 
influence security concerns under Guideline B.  
 
 
 
 
                                                          
2 There would be little reason for U.S. enemies to seek classified information from Applicant because 
she has not had access to such information.   
 
13 
 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG 
¶ 2(a) were addressed under this guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
There are some facts supporting a foreign influence security concern because 
of Applicant’s connections to Afghanistan. Applicant, her parents, brothers, sisters, 
and children were all born in Afghanistan. D-2 married an Afghan citizen, who remains 
in Afghanistan, as an employee of the German Embassy. Two of Applicant’s children 
are Afghan citizens. Applicant traveled to Afghanistan in 2008 to attend D-2’s 
wedding. She also went to Pakistan in 2002 with her sister in search of a nephew they 
were unable to locate. Applicant and four of her family members are serving as 
linguists in Afghanistan.   
  
A Guideline B decision concerning Afghanistan must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation and dangers there.3
 
 Afghanistan is a dangerous place because 
of violence from the Taliban and terrorists. The Taliban and terrorists continue to 
threaten the Afghan Government, the interests of the United States, U.S. Armed 
Forces, and those who cooperate and assist the United States. Applicant recognizes 
her work with the U.S. Armed Forces will endanger her and expose her to 
considerable risk. The United States and Afghan Governments are allies in the war on 
terrorism. The United States is committed to the establishment of a free and 
independent Afghan Government. Afghanistan and the United States have close 
relationships in diplomacy and trade.      
                                                          
3 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole person discussion). 
  
 
14 
 
 
The circumstances tending to support approval of a clearance for Applicant are 
more substantial than the factors weighing towards denial of her clearance. Since 
1982, Applicant has made the United States her home for her and her family. She has 
embraced her life in the United States, taken advantage of educational opportunities, 
and has enjoyed a successful career as a hair stylist in a major metropolitan area. 
Applicant’s closest family members to include her mother and four children live in the 
United States. Her children have pursued successful careers in the United States. 
Applicant has substantially greater contacts or connections with the United States than 
with Afghanistan. Applicant does not own property in Afghanistan. When she was 
naturalized as a U.S. citizen, she swore allegiance to the United States. 
   
Applicant has returned again to Afghanistan where she is serving with U.S. 
Armed Forces as a linguist and translator. She is willing to risk her life, as she did 
before from 2009 to 2010, as part of her duties on behalf of the U.S. combat forces in 
Afghanistan. She is fully aware of the risks to herself, and she is also aware that other 
family members serving as linguists in Afghanistan are at risk from terrorists and the 
Taliban. All these circumstances demonstrate that Applicant will recognize, resist, and 
report any attempts by a foreign power, terrorist group, or insurgent group to coerce or 
exploit her. See ISCR Case No. 07-00034 at 2 (App. Bd. Feb. 5, 2008). Applicant’s 
strong connections to the United States and especially to her U.S. family, community, 
and her desire for employment as a translator in a combat zone establish “such deep 
and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., [she] can be expected to 
resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” See Discussion of AG ¶ 
8(b), supra at pages 11-12. 
 
After weighing all the facts and circumstances in this decision, including 
Applicant’s demeanor and sincerity at her hearing, I find her statements to be credible, 
and I conclude she has carried her burden of mitigating the foreign influence security 
concerns. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole-person factors”4
 
 
and supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude she is 
eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
4See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
 
15 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
   Subparagraphs 1a to 1f:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
