1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 09-08736
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Gregg Cervi, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Joseph Testan, Esq.
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I grant Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.
Statement of the Case
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF-86) on August 20, 2009 and August
31, 2009. The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on August 31, 2010, detailing security concerns under
Guideline B, Foreign Influence, Guideline C, Foreign Preference, and Guideline E,
Personal Conduct, that provided the basis for its preliminary decision to deny him a
security clearance. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines
For Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) implemented on
September 1, 2006.  
Tr. 7-8.1
2
Applicant received the SOR on September 13, 2010. He answered the SOR in
writing on September 24, 2010. Applicant retained counsel and requested a hearing
before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request, and Department Counsel
was prepared to proceed on November 3, 2010. I received the case assignment on
January 3, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on January 6, 2011 for a hearing on
January 26, 2011. I cancelled the hearing on January 21, 2011. DOHA issued a second
notice of hearing on January 28, 2011, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on
February 16, 2011. The Government offered exhibits marked as GE 1 through GE 4,
which were received and admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified.
He submitted exhibits marked as AE A through AE Q, which were received and
admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing
(Tr.) on February 25, 2011. I held the record open until March 2, 2011 for Applicant to
submit additional matters. Applicant timely submitted AE R through AE Z without
objection. The record closed on March 2, 2011.
Rulings
Motion to Amend
Department Counsel moved to amend SOR allegation 3.a to change the date of
Applicant’s e-QIP from August 1, 2009 to August 31, 2009. Applicant’s counsel agreed
to the change. The Motion was granted  1
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts relating to Jordan. The request and the attached documents were not
admitted into evidence, but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibit 1a-1f. The
facts administratively noticed will be limited to matters of general knowledge and
matters not subject to reasonable dispute, and are set out in the Findings of Fact below.
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in ¶¶ 1.a-1.i,
of the SOR. His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He denied the
factual allegations in ¶¶ 2.a, 3.a, 3.b, and 3.c of the SOR He also provided additional
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete
and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings
of fact.  
Applicant, who is 34 years old, works as a safety engineer for a Department of
Defense contractor. He has worked for this employer for six years. In his most recent
performance assessment, his supervisor rated him as a high contributor. She described
him as an extremely valued employee. He exceeded his objectives, took on additional
GE 1; AE A; AE Q; Tr. 28.2
AE F - AE M.3
GE 1; AE Q; Tr. 24-27. 4
AE E; Tr. 24-25.5
GE 1; AE Q; Tr. 28-29.6
3
assignments, and managed an extremely large workload. He is a great team leader with
excellent interpersonal skills, and he has excellent customer service skills. He received
two cash awards in 2010 for his performance.   2
Applicant submitted eight letters of recommendation from his supervisor, pastor,
friends, coworkers, and family. They all highly praised him as an individual. They
considered him a person of high integrity and described him as dependable, forthright,
honest, religious (Christian Orthodox), fair, ethical, hard worker, trustworthy, and
professional. He is devoted to his family, his church, and his country. He is respected by
his family and his church and would adhere to all security requirements. He loves the
United States and has never compromised confidentiality at work. His letters of
recommendation reflected a high regard for him in numerous areas of his life.3
Applicant was born in Amman, Jordan. He moved to the United States with his
mother in 1991 at age 14. They joined his two older sisters, who were attending college
in the United States. He graduated from an American high school and from an American
university with a bachelor’s degree in 1998 and a master’s degree in 2002. He became
a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1996. He married in 2008.4
Applicant’s wife was born in the United States to Jordanian parents. She is not
only a  citizen of the United States, but she is also a citizen of Jordan because of her
parents. She has lived in the United States since birth. She works in the United States.
She held a Jordanian passport, which expired. She has no intent to renew this
passport.5
Applicant’s mother and father were born in Jordan. They are now U.S. citizens as
well as citizens of Jordan. Applicant’s mother has lived in the United States for 20 years
and does not intend to return to Jordan to live. His father has lived in the United States
for 10 years and does not intend to return to Jordan to live. His parents own a house
and a car in the United States. His parents do not have any connection to the Jordanian
government.6
Applicant’s two sisters are citizens of the United States and Jordan. One sister
lives in the United States with her two children and husband, who are citizens of the
United States only. She has been in the United States for 25 years and has no plans to
return to Jordan to live. His other sister is a dentist and is married to a mechanical
engineer, who is a dual citizen of the United States and Jordan. This sister and her
GE 1; GE 3; AE Q; Tr. 29-31; 92.7
GE 1; GE 3; AE Q; Tr. 32-33, 96.8
GE 1; GE 4; AE Q; Tr. 41-42.9
GE 2; GE 4; AE R - AE Z; Tr. 43-44.10
AE B; AE C; Tr. 35-40.11
4
husband work in private industry and live with their children in Jordan. They do not have
any contacts with the Jordanian government. He thinks they will return to the United
States when their children begin college. He last visited with this sister when she came
to the United States for his wedding in 2008. Until a year ago, he talked with her about
once a month. Since then, he has spoken with her about once every six months. He
changed his level of contacts because of the security process.7
Applicant has aunts, uncles, and cousins who live in Jordan. His contact with
these relatives occurs on special occasions and about once every one to two years. His
mother-in-law and father-in-law were born in Jordan. They have lived in the United
States for over 40 years. They are U.S. citizens and citizens of Jordan. They own
property and cars in the United States and have investments in the United States. They
do not own any property or have any assets in Jordan, nor do they have any connection
with the Jordanian government. His wife does not have any siblings in Jordan.8
After Applicant became a U.S. citizen, he continued to renew and use his
Jordanian passport when he traveled to Jordan. Since becoming a U.S. citizen,
Applicant traveled to Jordan in 1998, 2001, 2002, and 2007. He used his U.S. passport
for other foreign travel, including trips to France and Brazil.9
Applicant used his Jordanian passport for travel convenience in and out of
Jordan. By using this passport, he did not need to obtain a visitor’s visa to enter Jordan.
After his last trip in 2007, he left his Jordanian passport with his sister living in Jordan.
After meeting with the security clearance investigator in October 2009, Applicant
obtained his Jordanian passport and gave it to his facility security officer (FSO) on
March 31, 2010. He believed that by doing this, he had renounced his Jordanian
citizenship. He later understood that his belief was incorrect. After the hearing, he
submitted an application to Jordan to renounce his citizenship and paid the required
$4,004 fee, as he had expressed a willingness to renounce his Jordanian citizenship on
several occasions.    10
Applicant owned an apartment building with his parents and sisters in Jordan.
The family sold this building to a third party in 2004. His two sisters own a vacant piece
of land in Jordan. He does not have interest in this property.11
Applicant and his wife own the house in which they live. He owns one rental
property and an interest in his parents home. He owns two rental properties with his
AE N; AE O; Tr. 35-40.12
Tr. 45-49, 74–88.13
AE P; AE Q, including p. 42. Applicant provided a copy of his August 20, 2009 e-QIP.14
GE 1, including p. 42, 56; AE Q p. 1.15
GE 1; AE Q.16
5
sister who lives in the United States, one rental property with his sister who lives in
Jordan, and an undeveloped piece of land with his sister who lives in Jordan. All these
properties are located in the United States. He owns two cars. His bank account, 401(k)
account, and salaried saving account are with U.S. banks or brokerage houses.12
Applicant recalls accessing the computer system on several occasions to enter
information on his e-QIP. He denies completing two separate e-QIP applications, but he
recalls trying to provide correct information on his Jordanian passport. He denies trying
to hide information about his Jordanian passport. Neither party could explain how two e-
QIPs were submitted for Applicant within 11 days.13
Applicant completed investigation request number 6310911, his e-QIP, on
August 20, 2009. (AE Q) He submitted his signature form for this e-QIP on August 20,
2009, as shown by his transmission report of that date. He transmitted this document at
16:45:42 (4:45 p.m.). His August 20, 2009 e-QIP shows that it was certified on August
20, 2009 at 20:24:20 (8:25 p.m.). The dash code for both documents is the same. When
he completed this document, he listed his Jordanian passport with an issue date of
August 2007 and an expiration date of August 2012. He noted that this passport was
current.14
The Government submitted an investigation request number 6364893, his e-QIP,
with a date of completion as August 31, 2009. (GE 1) All but one signature form show
the date of August 31, 2009. The official archival copy PDF hash code and the dash
code on this e-QIP differs from the official archival copy PDF hash code and the dash
code on the August 20, 2009 e-QIP. All information in this e-QIP is the same as the
August 20, 2009 e-QIP, except the information on his Jordanian passport. The August
31, 2009 e-QIP lists his Jordanian passport with an issue date of August 1992 and
expiration date of August 2002. Applicant noted that it had expired.15
In both e-QIPs, Applicant acknowledged his dual citizenship with Jordan. He
indicated that he had been a dual citizen from 1996, when he became a U.S. citizen, to
the date of the e-QIP. He listed his travels to Jordan and other countries in the last
seven years. He listed all his extended family members in Jordan.16
In response to the questions in e-QIP Section 23 inquiry about his drug use
within the last seven years, Applicant indicated that he had used marijuana from July
2002 until September 2002 at a couple of parties and did not plan to use it in the future.
GE 1; GE 3; AE Q.17
GE 4.18
Tr. 53-58, 63-74.19
6
The Government mailed interrogatories to Applicant seeking further information on his
drug use. The interrogatories sought information about all his past drug use. Applicant
reviewed his e-QIP and provided the same information as he provided in his e-QIP
answers, which limited his information about his past drug use to the last seven years.17
In 2001, Applicant applied to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) for a job
as a contract linguist. The Government submitted an unsigned FBI report, dated
December 31, 2001, which contains information about Applicant’s marijuana use.
Applicant provided information which showed he used marijuana from the summer of
1995 until 1997 on his SF-86 (security application) He later asked to revise his end date
of use to August 2001. He also advised that he used hard drugs in 1996, and that he
had purchased marijuana in the 1990s. He indicated that he stopped using marijuana
because he had applied to the FBI for a job. Between his FBI interview in December
2001 and July 2002, he did not use marijuana. He described his use of marijuana in
2002 as “bad judgment”. In 2002, he decided to concentrate on his career, to find a
wife, to focus on family and his church, and not to party.18
At the hearing, Applicant explained that when he completed the interrogatories,
he reviewed his e-QIP to make sure his answers to the interrogatories were consistent
with his e-QIP answers. He did not think about his use of marijuana and drugs since
high school, but about his answer on the e-QIP, which focused on the last seven years.
He acknowledged at the hearing that the request for all drug use was clear. His brain
did not register the word ”ever” when he answered the interrogatories. He does not
know why, only that he was thinking seven years. He had no intent to hide his past use
from the Government. The answers on his 2009 e-QIPs are correct and reflect his drug
use and purchase for the prior seven years. His estimate to the FBI that he used
marijuana 35 times is correct. He acknowledges that the FBI discontinued his
background investigation because it was concerned about his drug use. He again stated
that he has not used marijuana or any other drug since 2002. He has no future intent to
use illegal drugs. Because it has been more than nine years since his interview with the
FBI, his memory of information provided in that interview is vague.19
Jordan
Jordan is a constitutional monarchy with a developing economy and a modern
infrastructure. Jordan’s population is about 5.9 million. Jordan has followed a pro-
western foreign policy, and has had close relations with the United States for sixty
years. 
The information on Jordan is included in HE 1.a to 1.f.20
7
The Jordanian government respects human rights in some areas, but its overall
record continues to reflect some problems. Torture, arbitrary arrest, prolonged
detention, overcrowded prisons, denial of due process, and restrictions on freedom of
speech are Jordanian human rights problems. Jordan does not have a history of
targeting U.S. or Jordanian citizens for protected information.
The Jordanian government publicly condemned terrorist acts throughout the
world, implemented strict security measures, passed new anti-terror legislation, and
disrupted several terrorist plots. Jordan has placed a strong emphasis on countering
violent extremism, fighting radicalization, and strengthening interfaith coexistence and
dialogue. Jordanian officials, including the King, strongly condemned extremist violence
and the ideology that promotes it. Despite aggressive governmental action against
terrorists, the threat of terrorism in Jordan remains high. Al-Qaida has focused terrorist
activities against Jordan and U.S. interests in Jordan. Terrorists in Jordan target U.S.
interests to exploit and undermine U.S. national security interests. Terrorist groups
conduct intelligence activities as effectively as state intelligence services.20
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
8
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Guideline B, Foreign Influence
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in
AG & 6:
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism. 
Under the potential disqualifying conditions described in AG ¶ 7, the following
conditions could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case:
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual's obligation to
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual's desire to
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and
9
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of
citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of foreign
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.
Applicant’s immediate family, which includes his wife, his parents, his father-in-
law, mother-in-law, and one sister, reside in the United States near him. Thus, no
security concern is raised by these family members. His other sister, a dual citizen of
the United States and Jordan, resides in Jordan with her husband, also a dual U.S. and
Jordanian citizen, and sons. Applicant has aunts, uncles, and cousins who are citizens
of and reside in Jordan. Applicant maintains a normal familial relationship with his sister
in Jordan. He has reduced his contact with her in the last year, but continues to have
contact with her. He does not  provide financial support to her. He contacts his cousins,
aunts, and uncles once a year or less. He has visited his extended family in Jordan. His
family relationships are not per se a reason to deny Applicant a security clearance, but
his contacts with his family members must be considered in deciding whether to grant
Applicant a clearance. The Government must establish that these family relationships
create a risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion by
terrorist or would create a potential conflict of interest between his obligations to protect
sensitive information and his desire to help his family members who may be threatened
by terrorists. 
In determining if such a risk exists, I must look at Applicant’s relationship and
contacts with family members as well as the activities of the Government of Jordan and
terrorist organizations within these countries. The risk that an appellant could be
targeted for manipulation or induced into compromising classified information is real, not
theoretical. Applicant’s relationship and contacts with his sister and other relatives in
Jordan raises a heightened risk of security concerns because of the activities of
terrorists organizations in Jordan as the terrorist threats to safety and security is greater
than concerns that the Jordanian Government will seek classified information. The
information of record fails to show that the Jordanian Government engages in
espionage activities in the United States or that it targets U.S. citizens in the United
States or Jordan by exploiting, manipulating, pressuring, or coercing them to obtain
protected information. 
Under the guidelines, the potentially conflicting loyalties must be weighed to
determine if an applicant can be expected to resolve any conflict in favor of U.S.
interests. In determining if Applicant’s contacts in Jordan cause security concerns, I
considered that Jordan and the United States have a close relationship, and that Jordan
is cooperating with the United States in the fight against terrorism, including taking new
and increased actions against terrorists in Jordan. There is no evidence that the
Jordanian government targets U.S. citizens for protected information. The human rights
issues in Jordan continue to be a concern, and the terrorist organizations, not the
Jordanian government, target U.S. citizens and U.S. interests in Jordan. While none of
these considerations by themselves dispose of the issue, they are all factors to be
considered in determining Applicant’s vulnerability to pressure or coercion because of
his family members in Jordan. Because of the significant activities of terrorist
10
organizations in Jordan, Applicant’s trips to Jordan and contacts with his family in
Jordan raise a heightened risk concern under AG ¶¶ 7(a) and (b). A heightened risk
concern is not raised under AG ¶ 7(d).
In deciding if Applicant has established mitigation under AG ¶ 8(a), I must
consider: 
the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual,
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.,
and under AG ¶ 8(b), I must consider whether Applicant has established:
 
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interests,
and under AG ¶ 8(c), I must consider whether Applicant has established:
contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent
that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence
or exploitation.
Applicant’s normal relationship with his family members is not a basis to deny
him a security clearance; however, his burden of proof on mitigation requires him to
provide information that shows that his family is not subject to coercion from terrorists.
His family members have never held a political position and have not been targeted by
the Jordanian government or terrorists. His family members in Jordan have not suffered
any abuses from the Jordanian government or threatened by terrorists. His immediate
family members are citizens and residents of the United States. He owns no property in
Jordan. He does not have financial assets in Jordan. Balancing these factors as well as
Jordan’s cooperation in counterterrorism, and the lack of evidence that the Jordanian
government targets U.S. citizens for protected information against Jordan’s poor human
rights record, I find that Applicant would resolve any conflict in favor of the U.S.
interests. Likewise, any threats by terrorists organizations against Applicant’s family in
Jordan would be resolved in favor of U.S. interests. His loyalties are to the United
States, not Jordan or terrorist organizations. Applicant has mitigated the Government’s
security concerns as to his family contacts specified in the SOR under AG ¶¶ 8(a) and
8(b). In addition, he has mitigated the Government’s security concerns raised in SOR
allegation 1.i because his contacts with his aunts, uncles, and cousins is casual and
infrequent. AG ¶ 8(c) applies to this allegation.
11
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
Under AG ¶ 9 the security concern involving foreign preference arises, “[W]hen
an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over
the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide information or make
decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United States.”
Under the potential disqualifying conditions described in AG ¶ 10, the following
condition could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: (a)
exercise of any right, privilege or obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S.
citizen or through the foreign citizenship of a family member. This includes but is not
limited to (1) possession of a current foreign passport.
Applicant possessed a Jordanian passport since becoming a U. S. citizen in
1996. He used this passport to enter and exit Jordan when visiting family. The
Government has established a prima facie case under Guideline C.
AG ¶ 11 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns. I have
considered mitigating factors AG ¶ ¶ 11(a) through 11(f), and especially the following:
(b) the individual has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship; and (e) the
passport has been destroyed, surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or
otherwise invalidated.
Applicant filed the paperwork to formally renounce his Jordanian citizenship
along with the $4,004 fee. He also surrendered his Jordanian passport to his facility
security officer on March 31, 2010. He has mitigated the Foreign Preference concerns
under AG ¶¶ 11(b) and 11(e). Guideline C is found for Applicant.
Guideline E, Personal Conduct
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct:
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be
disqualifying:
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment
12
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent
medical authority, or other official government representative. 
For this guideline to apply, Applicant’s omission must be deliberate. The
Government established that Applicant omitted material facts from his August 31, 2009
e-QIP when he failed to list his current Jordanian passport in Section 23. He, however,
listed this information in the August 20, 2009 e-QIP. Both e-QIPs were certified by
Applicant and received an official archive hash code. The most reasonable explanation
for two e-QIPs is that when Applicant re-entered the system to add his expired passport
information, the current passport information was unintentionally substituted for, instead
of added to, the existing passport information which resulted in a new e-QIP, rather than
an updated e-QIP, being submitted. The Government has not established that the
Applicant intentionally omitted any information from his e-QIP or that he intentionally
falsified the August 31, 2009 e-QIP. SOR allegation 3.a is found in favor of Applicant.
For AG ¶ 16(b) to apply, Applicant’s omission must be deliberate. The
Government established that Appellant omitted a material facts from his answers to the
interrogatory questions about his past drug involvement. This information is material to
the evaluation of Applicant’s trustworthiness to hold a security clearance and to his
honesty. In his response, he denies, however, that he had an intent to hide information.
When a falsification allegation is controverted, the Government has the burden of
proving the omission was deliberate. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not
establish or prove an Applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred. An
administrative judge must consider the record evidence as a whole to determine
whether there is direct or circumstantial evidence concerning an Applicant’s intent or
state of mind at the time the omission occurred.
Applicant acknowledged his 2002 drug use when he completed his e-QIP, which
fell within the seven-year parameters of the question asked. When he received the
multiple topic interrogatories from the Government, he reviewed his e-QIP to make sure
he provided the same information in his answers to the interrogatories. He recognized
at the hearing that the Government sought more information about his drug use than the
e-QIP sought and that he did not provide this information. Given his later understanding
about the scope of the Government interrogatories, his explanation that his brain did not
register the word “ever” and his failure to manufacture a reason for his wrong answer
support a finding that he did not intentionally provide false information to the
Government about his past drug use and his purchase of drugs in the 1990s in his
answers to interrogatories. Guideline E is found in favor of Applicant.
13
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
In reaching a conclusion, I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating
conditions in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant
immigrated to the United States as a young teenager. He enrolled in American schools
and eventually became a U.S. citizen. Like many young people, he started smoking
marijuana socially while a high school student. He continued his social marijuana use
while a college student. He also experimented with cocaine for a year in college. After
he graduated from college, he evaluated his future goals and decided to change his
behavior and attitude towards his marijuana drug use. He decided that drugs were not a
part of his future and stopped. He has not smoked marijuana in over eight years. He
acknowledged he used drugs when he completed his e-QIP, but in keeping with the
scope of the e-QIP questions, he only listed his summer 2002 marijuana use. He did not
intellectually absorb the time frame covered by the DOHA interrogatories and thus, did
not provide information about his youthful drug use. In hindsight, he recognized the
interrogatory question asked for his complete history of illegal drug use. Still, he could
not provide any reason for his incorrect interpretation of the scope of the information
sought. Based on his credible testimony at the hearing about his thought process, he
had no intent to hide information from the Government about his past drug. In reaching
this conclusion, I considered the fact that he acknowledged his past drug use to the FBI
and voluntarily updated the extent of his  use to the FBI during his interview. By so
14
doing, he placed himself in a negative light with the FBI. His actions during the FBI
process reflect his honesty described by his friends and coworkers. Given all the
negative family information on his e-QIP and his disclosure of marijuana use in 2002
after completion of the FBI application, his knowledge that the FBI stopped processing
his clearance application because of his drug use is not persuasive to conclude that he
intentionally hid his past drug use when he answered the interrogatories.
Throughout the security clearance process, Applicant has been open about his
and members of his family dual citizenship with Jordan and the United States, as well
as his extended family in Jordan. Except for one sister, his immediate family members
are residents of the United States, have been in the United States for a long time, and
intend to stay in the United States. He owns several properties in the United States and
none in Jordan. All his assets are in the United States. Applicant has been in the United
States for nearly 20 years. While he occasionally visits Jordan, his strongest ties are to
the United States. He provided his FSO with his Jordanian passport over a year ago,
when he realized possessing the passport presented problems for getting a clearance.
More recently, he paid the substantial $4,004 fee to renounce his Jordanian citizen. His
willingness to pay the high fee for renouncing his citizenship indicates a preference for
the United States, not Jordan.
Applicant’s supervisor, pastor, friends, coworkers, and family highly praised him
as an individual. They considered him a person of high integrity and described him as
dependable, forthright, honest, religious (Christian Orthodox), fair, ethical, hard worker,
trustworthy, and professional. He is devoted to his family, his church, and his country.
He is respected by his family and his church and would adhere to all security
requirements. He loves the  United States and has never compromised confidentiality at
work. His letters of recommendation reflected a high regard for him in numerous areas
of his life, including his work and ability to handle proprietary information.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his foreign connections
and personal conduct under Guidelines B (Foreign Influence), C (Foreign Preference),
and E (Personal Conduct).
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.i: For Applicant
15
Paragraph 2, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 3.a-3.c: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
