 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-00776 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations or Personal Conduct 
security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On March 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant initially answered the SOR on May 25, 2010, but failed to address all 
the allegations. He submitted a second answer addressing all the SOR allegations on 
June 18, 2010. He also initially requested an administrative determination, but 
subsequently requested a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was 
 
2 
 
assigned to me on November 2, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 
17, 2010, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on November 30, 2010. The 
Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence 
without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as Hearing Exhibit 
(HE) I. Applicant testified and submitted exhibits (AE) A through B that were admitted 
into evidence at the hearing. The record was held open for Applicant to submit 
additional information. Applicant submitted AE C, which was admitted into evidence 
without objection. Department Counsel’s post-hearing memorandum was marked HE II. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on December 8, 2010.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Applicant was verbally notified by Department Counsel of the November 30, 
2010, hearing date prior to the issuance of the written notice of hearing dated November 
17, 2010. At hearing, I asked Applicant if he was ready to proceed and he stated that he 
was ready.1 Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement imposed by ¶ E3.1.8 of the 
Directive. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 50-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer for three years. He is an engineering technician. He also holds two 
part-time jobs. He has an associate’s degree. He is single, never married and has no 
children.2  
 
 The SOR alleges 11 delinquent debts and falsification of his security clearance 
application. The debts were listed on credit reports obtained on November 12, 2009, 
and October 28, 2008. In his answer, Applicant admitted owing eight debts and denied 
three debts. He also denied making any knowingly false statements in his security 
clearance application.3  
 
 Applicant’s financial difficulties began in 2003 when he was first laid off from his 
job. He was working for a contractor who lost the contract Applicant was working on 
which resulted in his layoff. During the years 2003 through 2008, Applicant was hired 
and laid off four additional times. Each layoff was caused by lack of work or loss of the 
contract by the contractor. It was during this time frame that Applicant accumulated the 
debts at issue. Since 2008 he has worked for his current employer with no further 
layoffs.4  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 11. 
 
2 Tr. at 29-31. 
 
3 GE 1-6. 
 
4 Tr. at 33-38. 
 
 
3 
 
 In September 2010, Applicant contacted a credit counseling service to assist him 
with paying his debts. Although he met with the service, prepared budget information, 
and talked about a payment plan, he did not hire the service. He stated that one of the 
obstacles to hiring the service was that he couldn’t get a current credit report, which the 
service needed before it could assist him with his debts. The Government had no 
trouble obtaining his credit report. Evidently, he abandoned the idea of using a credit 
counseling service because his post-hearing submission included a copy of his January 
2011, Chapter 7 bankruptcy petition filing. No further information was provided about 
the status of the bankruptcy case.5  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is a judgment resulting from a repossessed 
automobile in the amount of $3,693. Applicant acknowledges this debt. It remains 
unpaid and unresolved.6 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a judgment resulting from another repossessed 
automobile in the amount of $3,727. Applicant acknowledges this debt. It remains 
unpaid and unresolved.7   
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is a judgment for $5,950. Applicant acknowledges 
this debt. It remains unpaid and unresolved.8 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is a medical collection debt for $220. Applicant 
acknowledges this debt. It remains unpaid and unresolved.9 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is a consumer collection debt for $691. Applicant 
acknowledges this debt. It remains unpaid and unresolved.10 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is a consumer collection debt for $1,167. Applicant 
acknowledges this debt. It remains unpaid and unresolved.11  
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is a past due consumer debt of $90 on a balance 
of $552. Applicant disputes this debt, but provided no documentation to support his 
dispute. It remains unpaid and unresolved.12 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 78, GE 4-5; AE B-C. 
 
6 Tr. at 39-40; GE 4-5. 
 
7 Tr. at 41; GE 4-5. 
 
8 Tr. at 41-42; GE 4-5. 
 
9 Tr. at 43-44; GE 4-5. 
 
10 Tr. at 44; GE 4-5. 
 
11 Tr. at 45; GE 4-5. 
 
12 Tr. at 45-46; GE 4-5. 
 
 
4 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h is a judgment for $264. Applicant acknowledges 
this debt. It remains unpaid and unresolved.13 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.i is a collection account for $123. Applicant 
acknowledges this debt. It remains unpaid and unresolved.14 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j is a collection account for $287. Applicant 
acknowledges this debt. It remains unpaid and unresolved.15 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k is a collection account for $82. Applicant 
acknowledges this debt. It remains unpaid and unresolved.16 
 
 Applicant also presented evidence that he was paying on a non-SOR related 
student loan debt. Applicant’s student loan document is titled, “US Department of 
Education Debt Collection Bill,” and showed a total balance owed of $18,217.17   
 
 The personal conduct concern arises because of answers Applicant provided to 
two sections on his security clearance application. The SOR allegations state that he 
falsified answers to his security clearance application (e-QIP) on October 18, 2008, by 
answering “no” to the questions concerning whether he had any unpaid judgments 
against him in the last seven years, and whether he had in the last seven years been 
over 180 days delinquent on any debts or whether he was currently 90 days delinquent 
on any debts. When asked directly about these answers, Applicant stated that he was 
aware of the judgments and credit report information, but it did not dawn on him to list 
that information. He further stated that he knew if he listed the information it might 
“mess up my chances” to get a job.18 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
13 Tr. at 46; GE 4-5. 
 
14 Tr. at 47-48; GE 4-5. 
 
15 Tr. at 48-49; GE 4-5. 
 
16 Tr. at 50-51; GE 4-5. 
 
17 AE A. 
 
18 Tr. at 53-54. 
 
 
5 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
 
6 
 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to satisfy his obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, numerous, and there is no indication that they will 
not recur. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant experienced some personal setbacks because of job layoffs from 2003 
through 2008. However, he has been gainfully employed by his current employer for 
three years and works two part-time jobs. Despite his recent steady employment, he 
made no effort to address his past due obligations. While his periods of unemployment 
 
7 
 
were conditions outside his control, he failed to act responsibly under the circumstances 
when he failed to address his debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
 The only evidence of financial counseling is Applicant’s seeking assistance from 
a credit counseling service that he later abandoned. Instead he sought Chapter 7 
bankruptcy relief. Seeking Chapter 7 bankruptcy relief is not a good-faith effort to repay 
his debts.19 AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not applicable.  
 
 Applicant disputed the debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.g. The debt appears on his credit 
report and he failed to document the basis of his dispute. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. 
 
 At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern and the incomplete 
bankruptcy action provides no assistance to his cause. 
 
GUIDELINE E, PERSONAL CONDUCT 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern for personal conduct: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following disqualifying condition is potentially applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire. 
Applicant’s explanation for his false answers on his security clearance application 
is unpersuasive. He clearly was aware of his debts and judgments when he submitted 
                                                          
19 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of Financial Considerations Mitigating Condition 6, an 
Applicant must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue 
creditors or some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the Applicant’s debts. The 
Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the 
concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows 
reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, 
an Applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available 
option (such as bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of Financial Considerations 
Mitigating Condition 6.  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Jun. 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
his security clearance application and contemplated their effect on his job prospects 
prior to falsely answering the questions at issue. The questions on the application are 
unambiguous. I conclude from the evidence that Applicant deliberately provided false 
information concerning these questions. AG ¶ 16(a) applies.   
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating 
conditions under AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 (a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; and 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 The record is absent any evidence that Applicant made any efforts to correct his 
false answers before being interviewed by an investigator. AG ¶ 17(a) does not apply. 
Falsification of material information on a security clearance application is a serious 
offense and calls into question Applicant’s trustworthiness and good judgment. AG ¶ 
17(c) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F and Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of 
 
9 
 
the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s years of service to his employer. I also considered his 
periods of unemployment. Even though he recently filed for bankruptcy relief to address 
his debts, he has not shown a track record of financial stability. Additionally, he 
deliberately falsified his security clearance questionnaire. Therefore, he failed to provide 
sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.k:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.b:  Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
