                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-08470 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Candace Le’i Garcia, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guidelines F (financial 
considerations) and E (personal conduct). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 2, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 17, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). On July 9, 2010, DOHA issued 
Applicant an Amendment to the Statement of Reasons adding additional allegations 
under Guideline E (personal conduct). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs after 
September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on May 27, 2010 and answered the Amendment to 
the SOR on July 16, 2010. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 12, 
2010. The case was assigned to me on July 16, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
1 
 
2 
 
on July 22, 2010, scheduling the hearing for August 17, 2010, and subsequently issued 
an amended notice of hearing on August 13, 2010 rescheduling the hearing for August 
19, 2010. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through E, 
which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf. At Applicant’s 
request, I held the record open until August 31, 2010, to afford him the opportunity to 
submit additional evidence. Applicant timely submitted AE F through J, which were 
received without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on August 27, 
2010. The record closed on August 31, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations alleged in the SOR as well as the 
allegations in the Amended SOR. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old engineer technician, who has been employed by a 
defense contractor since November 1984. He has held a secret security clearance since 
March 2002. Maintaining a security clearance is a condition of his continued 
employment. (GE 1, Tr. 18-21.) 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in May 1978. He has not completed any 
education beyond high school. He married in April 1977 and has three adult children – 
two sons and a daughter. All three adult children live at home. His two sons are 
unemployed and his daughter works as a pharmacy technician. Applicant’s wife has 
also been employed by the same defense contractor as the Applicant since November 
1984. She is a composite technician. Applicant did not serve in the armed forces. (GE 1, 
Tr. 21-28.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR alleges 11 debts totalling $44,204. He was interviewed by an 
Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator on August 6, 2009, regarding his 
financial situation, among other things. The OPM investigator discussed the accounts 
identified in the SOR with Applicant. Applicant attributed his indebtedness to his wife’s 
health problems for the preceding five years, her inability to work because of her health 
problems, and the fact that he had to take unpaid time off from work to care for her. 
Additionally, Applicant encountered a number of uncovered medically-related expenses. 
His wife’s health problems stemmed from complications following her gastric bypass 
surgery in August 2004 to lose weight. (GE 2(I-5).) He reiterated these factors during his 
hearing. (Tr. 28-30.) Applicant’s wife returned to work full-time in 2009. (Tr. 31.) 
 
During that August 2009 OPM interview, Applicant stated that he would never file 
bankruptcy and that he intended to repay all of his creditors. He further stated that he 
3 
 
was going to contact a credit counseling service or debt consolidation company within 
the next few days to straighten out his finances. (GE 2(I-5).) On February 22, 2010, 
when responding to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant stated that he had not yet 
contacted a debt management program and that he was “still trying to find one….” He 
added that he intended to pay his debts off “thr[ough] some legal debt management.” In 
short, he had made no progress in resolving or attempting to resolve his indebtedness 
in the ten months since his OPM interview. After receiving his SOR, he indicated on his 
SOR Response that, “we are getting [a] credit advisor to help me out.” His SOR 
Response also indicated that he had partially addressed two of the eleven debts 
alleged, discussed infra. (GE 3(I-12), SOR Response.) 
 
Applicant appeared at his hearing poorly prepared to discuss his debts, and it 
became clear shortly after the hearing commenced that he had done little if anything to 
make any headway in addressing his indebtedness. He did discuss the limited progress 
that he had made on two debts – the two debts he discussed in his SOR Response. 
The first debt is SOR ¶ 1g -- a past-due account of $6,708 on his $131,000 mortgage, 
which is in foreclosure. Applicant’s July 29, 2010 bank statement indicates that he had 
reduced the past-due amount on this account to $3,185.04. This account remains past-
due. (AE B, Tr. 32-37, 41-44.) 
 
The second debt is SOR ¶ 1h – a credit card collection account in the amount of 
$3,550. This account is being satisfied through involuntary garnishment proceedings 
that commenced in May 2010 -- $695.66 will be deducted from Applicant’s bi-weekly 
paycheck until the debt is satisfied. (AE E, Tr. 48-50.) The remaining nine accounts 
remain in various states of delinquency – states of delinquency that began in 2004. (Tr. 
50.) 
 
When Applicant’s wife became ill in 2004, Applicant took over the responsibility 
of handling the family finances. However, since his wife recovered and returned to work 
full-time in 2009, they handle the family finances together. (Tr. 30-32, 75-76.)  
 
Post-hearing, Applicant forwarded an application form dated August 26, 2010, 
that he submitted to a debt settlement group. His application form listed eight creditors 
and the total amount of unsecured debt for the eight creditors as $29,713. There was 
nothing on his application that reflected the plan had taken effect or that Applicant had 
established a payment plan through the debt settlement group. Applicant did not 
annotate the application form correlating the eight debts listed on the form with the SOR 
debts. At best, what Applicant submitted is the beginning of a plan yet to be executed 
for a portion of his SOR debts. (AE F.) 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
 In April 2009, Applicant was arrested and charged for driving under the influence 
(DUI). In August 2009, he was convicted pursuant to his guilty plea, and sentenced to 
ten days in jail and ordered to pay fines and fees. (GE 7.) In July 2009 when he 
completed his e-QIP, he failed to disclose this arrest when asked whether he had ever 
been charged with any offense related to alcohol. When completing the same e-QIP, he 
4 
 
failed to disclose that he had ever been over 180 days delinquent on any debts and 
whether he was currently over 90 days delinquent on any debt. 
 
 When Applicant was queried why he did not list his DUI on his e-QIP, he stated, 
“I made a mistake. I honestly made a mistake.” (Tr. 62.) This arrest had occurred three 
months before he completed the e-QIP and cost him approximately $5,000 in legal fees. 
(Tr. 63.) 
 
 When Applicant was queried why he did not list any of his adverse financial 
information, he responded that he “didn’t think [he] had any (delinquent debts) over at 
the time [he] did this.” He added that he knew he had debts, but “didn’t know they were 
over 180 days.” He further claimed that he “missed that one” when referring to debts 
over 90 days delinquent. (Tr. 58.) Applicant acknowledged having completed at least 
three previous security clearance applications during the years he held a security 
clearance. (Tr. 70.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
Post-hearing, Applicant submitted his 2010 interim employee evaluation as well 
as his 2009 employee evaluation. These documents reflect solid work performance. (AE 
G.) 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
5 
 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  Under Guideline F, the concern is that an Applicant’s failure or inability to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18.) 
 
 Applicant accumulated 11 debts totaling $44,204 as alleged in the SOR. He 
claims to have made progress on two of those debts. The first debt is his mortgage. 
Although he has made some progress in paying down the arrearage on this account, 
the account remains past-due. The second debt is a credit card account which is being 
satisfied by involuntary garnishment proceedings. The remaining nine debts have not 
been addressed. Applicant’s history of indebtedness is well documented. AG ¶ 19(a): 
6 
 
                                                          
“inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a history of not meeting 
financial obligations” apply. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. Therefore, 
his debt is “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)).  
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant receives partial credit because of his wife’s five-year 
period of unemployment from 2004 to 2009. She was unemployed for medical reasons. 
This misfortune no doubt impacted their household directly and indirectly. However, to 
receive full credit under this mitigating condition, Applicant has to demonstrate that he 
acted responsibly under the circumstances. There is no evidence that Applicant 
remained in contact with his creditors or tried to make minimum payments during this 
time. Nor is there any evidence that Applicant made any meaningful effort to contact his 
creditors after his wife returned to work in 2009 and their income was restored.1  
1 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner 
when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable because Applicant did not seek financial counseling. 
Likewise, there is not sufficient evidence in the record to establish full mitigation under 
AG ¶ 20(d).2 Despite having their income levels restored, Applicant offered little or no 
evidence that he had made or is making a good-faith effort to repay his creditors or 
otherwise resolve his debts. Applicant receives some credit for attempting to pay down 
the arrearage on his mortgage; however, this account remains past-due. One past-due 
credit card account is being paid through involuntary garnishment. This is not indicative 
of a “good-faith” effort. Applicant’s past promises to seek credit counseling ring hollow in 
light of his subsequent actions. Furthermore, completing an application five days before 
the record closed with a debt settlement group that does not include all of his debts 
does not establish “good-faith.”  AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable because Applicant does 
not dispute the validity of the debts alleged. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
Under Guideline E, the concern is that conduct involving questionable judgment, 
lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can 
raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the 
security clearance process. (AG ¶ 15.) 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
 
maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his debts 
current. 
 
2 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option in order to 
claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
8 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing, ….  
 
The SOR alleges that Applicant was arrested for DUI in April 2009 and 
deliberately failed to list his DUI arrest or information pertaining to his indebtedness on 
his July 2009 e-QIP. Having gone through the security clearance application process at 
least three times, Applicant should have been well versed and familiar with what was 
required of him. Applicant’s explanation that he made a mistake or thought that he did 
not have qualifying delinquent debts, or that he “missed” the correct answer is simply 
not credible. He had been arrested and charged with DUI three months before 
completing his e-QIP. This is not an event one easily forgets or misses three months 
after the fact.  
 
With regard to Applicant’s failure to fully disclose his financial situation, I note that 
he was responsible for managing the family finances from 2004 to 2009 and beginning 
in 2009, he and his wife managed the family finances. His explanation that he did not 
think he had any qualifying debts to list suggests a level of situational awareness that is 
not plausible. Additionally, Applicant’s credibility came into question when he 
represented on three occasions that he was going to seek professional help to resolve 
his financial situation and failed to do so. In light of these facts, his explanations are 
insufficient to overcome his obligation to tell the complete truth during the security 
clearance vetting process. The Government established through the evidence 
presented the disqualifying condition in AG ¶¶ 16(a). 
 
Six personal conduct mitigation conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
9 
 
                                                          
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; and 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability. 
 
A statement is false when it is made deliberately -- knowingly and willfully. An 
omission of relevant and material information is not deliberate if the person genuinely 
forgot about it, inadvertently overlooked it, misunderstood the question, or genuinely 
thought the information did not need to be reported. Here, Applicant knew of his DUI 
and his financial problems and chose not to disclose them. Had Applicant’s information 
been relied upon without verification, he may well have successfully vetted for a security 
clearance. Regardless of the reason Applicant chose not to be forthcoming, the process 
does not allow for applicants to pick and choose which answers they will answer 
correctly. When applicants lie on their security clearance applications, they seriously 
undermine the process as Applicant did in this case. I find that none of the mitigating 
conditions fully apply.3  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
3 The Appeal Board has cogently explained the process for analyzing falsification cases, stating:
 
(a) when a falsification allegation is controverted, Department Counsel has the burden of 
proving falsification; (b) proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s intent or state of mind when the omission occurred; and (c) a Judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning the applicant’s intent or state of mind at the time the 
omission occurred. [Moreover], it was legally permissible for the Judge to conclude 
Department Counsel had established a prima facie case under Guideline E and the 
burden of persuasion had shifted to the applicant to present evidence to explain the 
omission.  
 
ISCR Case No. 03-10380 at 5 (App. Bd. Jan. 6, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-23133 (App. Bd. June 9, 
2004)).  
10 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
whole-person concept analysis. Applicant’s financial indebtedness is ongoing. His 
deliberate failure to disclose information on his security clearance application is serious, 
recent, and not mitigated. As such, I have concerns about his current ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. After weighing the disqualifying 
and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances, in the context of the 
whole-person concept, I conclude he has not mitigated security concerns pertaining to 
financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1a – 1k:  Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 2a – 2c:  Against Applicant 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
11 
 
 
