 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ----------------- )  ISCR Case No. 09-06815 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn MacKinnon, Esquire, Deputy Chief Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding foreign influence.  
Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 1, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted an 
Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) Sensitive Positions 
version of a Security Clearance Application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) furnished him a set of interrogatories. 
He responded to the interrogatories on March 6, 2010.2 On an unspecified date, DOHA 
furnished him another set of interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories on 
March 6, 2010.3 On May 17, 2010, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to 
1 Item 4 (SF 86, dated July 1, 2009). 
 
2 Item 5 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated March 6, 2010). 
 
3 Item 6 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated March 6, 2010). 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
him, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended and modified; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended and modified (Directive); and Adjudicative Guidelines 
for Determining Eligibility For Access to Classified Information (effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006) (AG) for all adjudications and other 
determinations made under the Directive. The SOR alleged security concerns under 
Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and detailed reasons why DOHA could not make a 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The SOR 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a clearance 
should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on May 20, 2010. In a sworn 
statement, undated, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and elected to have 
his case decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. A complete copy of the 
Government’s file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to Applicant on August 16, 
2010, and he was afforded an opportunity, within a period of 30 days after receipt of the 
FORM, to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. 
Applicant received the FORM on August 20, 2010, and elected not to make any 
additional submissions. The case was assigned to me on November 3, 2010. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain 
enumerated facts pertaining to the Islamic Republic of Iran (Iran), appearing in 15 
written submissions. Facts are proper for administrative notice when they are verifiable 
by an authorized source and relevant and material to the case. In this instance, the 
Government relied on source information regarding Iran in publications of the White 
House,4 U.S. Department of State,5 U.S. Department of Justice,6 U.S. Department of 
Commerce,7 and the Office of the Director of National Intelligence.8 
 
 
4 The White House, Office of the Press Secretary, Press Release, Continuation of the National Emergency 
with Respect to Iran, dated November 12, 2009. 
 
5 U.S. Department of State, Country Specific Information: Iran, dated June 28, 2010; Bureau of Near Eastern 
Affairs, Background Note: Iran, dated July 23, 2010; U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for 
Counterterrorism, State Sponsors of Terrorism, undated; U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for 
Counterterrorism, State Sponsors of Terrorism, dated August 5, 2010; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of 
Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, 2009 Human Rights Reports: Iran, dated March 11, 2010; U.S. Department of 
State, Press Release, UN Calls on Iran to Address Serious Human Rights Violations, dated November 20, 2009; U.S. 
Department of State, Press Release, Secretary Clinton and Foreign Minister Cannon Express Concern over 
Continued Detention of U.S. and Canadian Nationals in Iran, dated September 25, 2009; U.S. Department of State, 
Press Release, Robert Levinson’s 1,000th Day Missing, dated December 3, 2009; U.S. Department of State, Bureau 
of Consular Affairs, Travel Warning, dated April 20, 2010.  
 
6 U.S. Department of Justice, Press Release, Iranian Pleads Guilty to Attempted Exportation of Arms and 
Money Laundering, dated April 13, 2005. 
 
7 U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release: Pennsylvania Company 
Fined for Export Violations Involving Iran, UAE and Syria, dated December 7, 2007; U.S. Department of Commerce, 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
The various press releases were presented apparently to substantiate that Iran 
actively pursues collection of U.S. economic and propriety information, and, therefore, 
Applicant’s relationships with his two family members in Iran raises suspicion of him. 
None of the cases cited involves Applicant personally or involved espionage through 
any familial relationship. The anecdotal evidence of criminal wrongdoing of other U.S. 
citizens is of decreased relevance to an assessment of Applicant’s security suitability, 
especially where there is no evidence that Applicant, or any member of his family, was 
ever involved in any aspect of the cited cases or ever targeted by any Iranian 
intelligence official. Furthermore, these press releases are public relations products 
issued by public relations offices, with the collateral effect of deterring other criminals 
contemplating possible attacks on our national security. 
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 
201, Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,9 as set 
forth below under the Iran subsection. However, while I do not reject the facts set forth 
in the various press releases, any inference that Applicant or his family participated in 
criminal activity was not argued in the FORM and is specifically rejected.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all of the factual allegations (¶¶ 1.a. 
through 1.c.) of the SOR. Those admissions are incorporated as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 33-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and he is seeking to 
obtain a security clearance, the level of which has not been specified.  He has been 
employed as a software engineer with his current employer, a government contractor, 
since June 2009.10  
 
 
Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release: Singapore Businessman Convicted of Secretly Diverting U.S. 
Military and Civilian Aircraft Parts to the Islamic Republic of Iran, dated May 18, 2006; U.S. Department of 
Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release: New York Man Sentenced for Illegally Exporting Stolen 
NBC Night Vision Lenses for Delivery to Iran, dated August 8, 2005.  
 
8 Office of the Director of National Intelligence, Annual Threat Assessment of the US Intelligence Community 
for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, dated February 2, 2010. 
 
9 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice 
facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 
(Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may 
utilize authoritative information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 548 U.S. 557 (2006) 
(citing internet sources for numerous documents).  
 
10 Item 4, supra note 1, at 17. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
g that 
same day.  
 
                                                          
Applicant was born in 1977 in Iran.11 The record is silent regarding Applicant’s  
early life in Iran. He entered the United States in May 2002, using his Iranian passport, 
with a U.S. visa issued in Abu Dhabi.12 Within one week he was married in the United 
States.13 He and his wife were divorced in July 2006.14 Applicant was unemployed from 
June 2002 until November 2002.15 He obtained an associate’s degree in an unspecified 
discipline from a community college in May 2006,16 and a bachelor’s degree in an 
unspecified discipline from a university in May 2009.17 While in school, he worked in 
various part-time positions.18 Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen in October 
2008.19  
 
In order to enter Iran, Applicant used his Iranian passport on several occasions 
before he became a U.S. citizen.20 He was issued a U.S. passport in November 2008.21 
He also used his Iranian passport to travel to and from Iran on one occasion after he 
became a U.S. citizen, and his U.S. passport to enter the United States.22 Applicant 
used his Iranian passport for convenience for ease of travel to Iran.23 Although 
Applicant contends the U.S. Department of State advised him to retain his Iranian 
citizenship and passport after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen,24 he has offered no 
evidence to support his contention. Applicant surrendered his Iranian passport to his 
facility security officer on October 16, 2009, and it was destroyed by shreddin
25
11 Id. at 6.  
 
12 Item 7 (Iranian passport, with U.S. visa, protected date), at 5. Some details pertaining to Applicant’s 
passport and visa have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is 
available in the cited exhibits. 
 
13 Item 4, supra note 1, at 28-29. 
 
14 Id. at 29. 
 
15 Id. at 24. 
 
16 Id. 15-16. 
 
17 Id. at 14-15. 
 
18 Id. at 18-23. 
 
19 Id. at 8. 
 
20 Item 1 (Applicant’s Response to the SOR, undated), at 1. 
  
21 Item 6 (U.S. passport, dated November 7, 2008, at 3), attached to Applicant’s Answer to Interrogatories. 
 
22 Item 4, supra note 1, at 36; Item 5 (Personal Subject Interview, dated July 24, 2009), at 1, attached to 
Applicant’s Answer to Interrogatories; Id. at 4. Applicant’s U.S. passport contains an entry stamp (with a protected 
date) for one trip he took to Iran, but there is no Iranian entry stamp covering that trip. 
 
23 Item 5, at 1. 
 
24 Id.; Item 4, supra note 1, at 10, 36. 
 
25 Item 5 (Foreign Passport Disposition Certificate, dated October 16, 2009), attached to Applicant’s Answer 
to Interrogatories. An identical copy of the document is attached to Item 6. 
 
5 
                                      
 
n.   
                                                          
Applicant’s Iranian-born mother is deceased.26 His father was born in Iran before 
that country became an Islamic republic.27 He is retired.28 Applicant has one sister, and 
she currently works outside the home she shares with her father.29 Both are citizen-
residents of Iran.30 Neither his father, nor his sister, has ever had any affiliation with the 
Iranian government or intelligence service.31 
 
Applicant calls his father and sister once every week or two.32 He is in the 
process of sponsoring them for permanent entry into the United States.33 Applicant 
does not have any financial, medical, educational, retirement, social welfare, or any 
other benefits or interests in Ira 34
 
When Applicant became a naturalized U.S. citizen, he took an oath of allegiance 
to the United States.  That oath included the words:35 
 
I hereby declare, on oath, that I absolutely and entirely renounce and 
abjure all allegiance and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or 
sovereignty, of whom or which I have heretofore been a subject or citizen.  
 
Iran 
 
Iran has been designated a State Sponsor of Terrorism since January 1984, and 
is a member of what President George W. Bush characterized as the Aaxis of evil.@36 
While there was previously a lengthy period of friendship and cooperation between Iran 
and the U.S., since the fundamentalist Islamic revolution that toppled the Shah in early 
1979, the resulting theocratic government has repressed its people, pursued weapons 
of mass destruction, ignored customary principles of international law, endorsed 
fundamentalist Muslim political movements abroad, and supported international 
terrorism. In fact, Iran has remained the most active state sponsor of terrorism and has 
26 Item 4, supra note 1, at 30-31. 
 
27 Id. at 31-32. Some details pertaining to Applicant’s father have not been included in order to protect his 
right to privacy. Specific information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
28 Item 5, supra note 22, at 1. 
 
29 Item 4, supra note 4, at 32; Id. at 1-2. 
 
30 Item 4, at 31-32. 
 
31 Item 5, supra note 22, at 1-2. 
 
32 Id.  
 
33 Id. 
 
34 Item 4, supra note 4, at 33. 
 
35 8 C.F.R. § 337.1(a) (1995). 
 
36 President George W. Bush=s comments regarding Iran in The President=s State of Union Address, dated 
January 29, 2002, at www.gov.com/union 1 2002.html, at 5. 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
continued to exhort a variety of groups throughout the Middle East, Europe, and Central 
Asia to use terrorism in pursuit of their stated goals. For example, Iran has provided 
weapons, training and funding to Hamas and other Palestinian terrorist groups, 
Lebanese Hezbollah, Taliban in Afghanistan, and Iraq-based jihadists. Iran is 
modernizing its military, acquiring weapons of mass destruction, and continues to seek 
nuclear capabilities. Iran is in non-compliance with its international obligations, and 
flouts the United Nations Security Council restrictions on its nuclear program. Iran has 
the largest inventory of ballistic missiles in the Middle East. The U.S. does not currently 
have diplomatic or consular relations with Iran and cannot provide protection to U.S. 
citizens in that country.  
 
Iran has a poor human rights record, and has been implicated in politically 
motivated violence, including death, torture, beatings and rape; officially sanctioned 
punishments, including death by stoning, amputation, and flogging; arbitrary arrest and 
detention; lack of judicial independence and fair public trials; severe restrictions on civil 
liberties; and the monitoring of the social activities of its citizens, including telephone 
conversations and internet communications, and the opening of mail without court 
authorization. Since 2009, Iranian authorities have, for lengthy periods, prevented the 
departure of a number of Iranian-American citizens, including journalists, who traveled 
to Iran for personal or professional reasons. This is significant as it relates to Applicant, 
for all persons who were at one time Iranian citizens are considered Iranian nationals by 
Iranian authorities and, despite the fact that they may possess U.S. citizenship, they 
must enter and exit Iran with an Iranian passport with an exit visa. Recent mass 
demonstrations throughout Iran were violently suppressed by Iranian authorities, 
resulting in significant deaths. Iran is known to conduct aggressive intelligence 
operations and economic espionage against the United States, and is a nation whose 
interests are inimical to the United States.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”37 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”38   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
37 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
38 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”39 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and it has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.40  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”41 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”42 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
39 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
40 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
41 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
42 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                          
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.43 Applicant’s relationship with his father and sister 
are current security concerns for the Government. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 7(b), “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information” may raise security concerns. I find AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) apply in this case. 
However, the security significance of these identified conditions requires further 
examination of Applicant’s respective relationships with his family members who are 
Iranian citizen-residents, to determine the degree of “heightened risk” or potential 
conflict of interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
43 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                          
may be mitigated where “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.” Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may 
apply where the evidence shows:  
there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual's sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where “contact or communication with foreign citizens 
is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for 
foreign influence or exploitation.” In this instance, Applicant’s relationship with his father 
and sister is neither casual nor infrequent. Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply as it 
pertains to them.  
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances. One such 
factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is 
important to consider the character of the foreign power in question, including the 
government and entities controlled by the government within the relevant foreign 
country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is limited to countries that are hostile to the 
United States.44 In fact, the Appeal Board has cautioned against “reliance on overly 
simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating 
cases under Guideline B.”45 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States may be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it 
controls is likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the 
United States. It is reasonable to presume that because of the nature of the government 
in Iran and the relationship it has with the United States, it may make it more likely that 
Iran would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or associates in Iran. 
 
As noted above, despite the absence of Iranian government contacts or 
attempted contacts with Applicant or his father or sister, or the apparent absence, so 
far, of coercive means to obtain sensitive information, it does not eliminate the 
possibility that Iran would employ some coercive or non-coercive measures in an 
attempt to exploit a relative.  There is no evidence that Applicant’s father or sister are, or 
have been, political activists, challenging the policies of the Iranian government; that 
44 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
45 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
10 
                                      
 
                                                          
terrorists have approached or threatened Applicant or his father or sister; that the 
Iranian government has approached Applicant; or that his father or sister currently 
engage in activities that would bring attention to themselves. Nevertheless, considering 
the Iranian government and its position with respect to human rights, its aggressive 
intelligence operations and economic espionage against the United States, and its 
relationship with the United States, it is foreseeable that Applicant’s father and sister 
could be a means through which Applicant could come to the attention of the regime. 
They could also be the vehicle through which Iran might attempt to coerce Applicant. 
The obscurity of Applicant’s father and sister is not a meaningful basis for concluding 
that they are beyond the reach of the regime. The Appeal Board has consistently held 
that factors such as an applicant’s relatives’ obscurity or the failure of foreign authorities 
to contact those relatives in the past do not provide a meaningful measure of whether 
an applicant’s circumstances pose a security risk, when, for example, the relatives are 
subject to the authority of a regime that is hostile to the United States and has a dismal 
human rights record.46 AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(b) only minimally apply.  
  
It is true that, before becoming a U.S. citizen in 2008, Applicant had taken two 
trips to Iran during which he visited his parents, and one trip to Iran after he became a 
U.S. citizen. The most recent trip has significant security significance which has been 
reduced by his surrender and destruction of his Iranian passport.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant’s “closest family” -- his 
father and sister -- are Iranian citizens residing in Iran, hoping to immigrate to the United 
States. Applicant is not vulnerable to direct coercion or exploitation so long as he 
46 See ISCR Case No. 07-18283, at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 24, 2009); ISCR Case No. 07-13696 at 5 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 9, 2009). 
 
11 
                                      
 
remains outside of Iran. However, should he return to Iran, his vulnerability to direct 
coercion or exploitation rises significantly. His vulnerability to indirect coercion or 
exploitation through his father and sister while they remain in Iran is possible, if not 
highly probable. If Applicant becomes successful in bringing his father and sister to the 
United States, these security concerns will no longer be present, unless they return to 
visit family or friends living in Iran. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning Iran must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in that country, as well as the potential dangers existing there. Iran, 
one of the world’s most active state sponsors of terrorism, is seeking to improve and 
enhance its weapons of mass destruction, is known to conduct aggressive intelligence 
operations and economic espionage against the United States, and is a nation whose 
interests are inimical to the United States. (See AG && 2(a)(1) through 2(a)(9).) 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with significant questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from foreign 
influence concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
