                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07613 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence and Guideline C, Foreign Preference.1 Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 26, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence and Guideline C, Foreign Preference. DOHA acted 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
 
1 
 
 
                                                          
1 Department Counsel withdrew the security concern under Guideline C. Applicant renounced his citizenship with 
Taiwan. He no longer possesses a Taiwanese passport. 
 
2 
 
 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
  
 Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on January 13, 2011, and the case 
was assigned to me on January 25, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 3, 
2011, setting the case for April 5, 2011. I convened the hearing as scheduled. 
Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 7 were admitted in evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified on his own behalf, and submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A through 
C, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing 
(Tr.) on April 12, 2011. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
Evidentiary Ruling—Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts 
relating to Taiwan, set forth in a summary marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) 1, with 
attached documents. The request and its enclosures were not admitted in evidence but 
are attached to the record. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings 
of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations. After a 
thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the 
following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 58-year-old senior system engineer for a defense contractor. He 
was born in Taiwan and attended a college in Taiwan. He immigrated to the United 
States in 1978 to further his education. In February 1980, he earned a bachelor’s 
degree from a U.S. university. In June 1980, he obtained a master’s degree. He 
became a naturalized United States citizen in October 1987. Applicant has been 
employed with various contractors since 1996. (GE 1) He has never had any security 
violations He has worked for his current employer since 2003. Applicant has held a 
security clearance since 1996. (Tr. 26) 
 
 Applicant married in 1979. His wife and two adult children are U.S. citizens. 
Applicant’s wife does not work outside the home. His two children are graduates of 
American universities. Applicant owns a residence in the United States and two rental 
properties. (GE 7) He has been employed with various contractors since 1996. (GE 1) 
He has never had any security violations.   
  
 Applicant admits that his mother is a citizen and resident of Taiwan. Applicant’s 
mother is 82 years of age. She does not work outside her home, and does not have any 
affiliation with the Taiwan government. His mother visited Applicant and his family in 
1997. (GE 7) Applicant calls his mother once every two months. He visited his mother in 
 
3 
 
 
2009 for three weeks. (Tr. 41) While in Taiwan, he stayed with his mother. His mother 
does not speak English and does not know what Applicant does for a living.  
 
 Applicant has three brothers who are residents and citizens of Taiwan. One 
brother is a retired pharmacist. Applicant has not maintained contact with him 
throughout the years. However, he saw this brother last year when he visited his mother 
in Taiwan. (Tr. 32) He has not had any contact with this brother since the visit in 2009. 
 
 Applicant’s second brother is a fortune teller who lives with Applicant’s mother. 
Therefore, Applicant speaks to him when he calls his mother.  Applicant’s third brother 
is retired. He owned a small restaurant. He talks to his brother perhaps once a year. (Tr. 
34) If Applicant is visiting his mother in Taiwan, he also sees or visits his brother. (GE 2) 
 
 Applicant’s brother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Taiwan.  He is a teacher in 
a private university. Applicant does not maintain contact with him, but Applicant sees 
him when he travels to Taiwan.  
 
 Applicant’s travels to Taiwan were for family visits only. Since 1997, he used his 
United States passport to travel to Taiwan. He no longer has a Taiwanese passport. 
(AE B) He renounced his citizenship with Taiwan. (AE A) 
 
 None of Applicant’s family has ever held political office or been employed by the 
Taiwanese government. None of them know about Applicant’s employment.  
 
 Applicant disclosed that at one time he had a bank account in Taiwan. This 
account held Taiwanese currency that he used when he traveled to Taiwan. He closed 
the account last year. (AE C) Applicant also transferred his property (land and home) 
interest to his family members in Taiwan. (Tr. 16) Department Counsel withdrew the 
allegations concerning the bank account and the property in Taiwan (SOR 1.d and 1.e) 
at the hearing). (Tr. 55)  
 
TAIWAN 
 
Taiwan is a multi-party democracy. The United States does not support Taiwan 
independence, in keeping with the “one China” policy. However, it continues to maintain 
strong unofficial relations with Taiwan. The United States supports Taiwan’s 
membership in appropriate international organizations where statehood is not a 
requirement for membership and also supports its meaningful participation in 
appropriate international organizations.  
 
Taiwan and the People’s Republic of China (PRC) have significant economic 
ties, which are attributable to their physical proximity and history. Because of its 
location, Taiwan has a particular interest in information from the United States that 
could aid in its own defense. Taiwan’s primary defense goal is to deter invasion form the 
PRC. The PRC maintains intelligence operations in Taiwan through a bureau utilizing 
 
4 
 
 
PRC nationals with Taiwanese connections. Taiwan has a history of intelligence 
gathering and industrial espionage.  
 
      Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
5 
 
 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 7: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Three are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation. 
 
Applicant’s mother, three brothers, and brother-in-law are residents of Taiwan. 
Applicant has visited Taiwan several times, and he stays with his mother. Such ties do 
not automatically disqualify an Applicant from obtaining a security clearance. However, 
Taiwan both maintains defenses against the People’s Republic of China and has 
economic ties to it based on history and proximity. Family ties in Taiwan raise security 
concerns because of the potential for foreign influence. Applicant’s bank account and 
property in Taiwan also raise a concern.  AG ¶¶ 7(a), (b), and (e) have been raised by 
the evidence. (SOR 1.e was withdrawn at the hearing) 
 
 
6 
 
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
Applicant is a naturalized United States citizen. He came to the United States to 
further his education. He obtained an advanced degree and has worked for a federal 
contractor for many years. He has held a security clearance without any violations since 
1996. He and his wife have two children who are American citizens. They have resided 
in the United States for many years. Their family home and substantial assets are 
located in the United States. They are financially secure and have established well-
grounded lives in this country. There was no evidence to suggest that any of his 
Taiwanese relatives are influenced by the politics of Taiwan. There was no evidence to 
suggest that any of his relatives are influenced by the politics of Taiwan. I find that 
Applicant has deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States. 
None of his relatives have jobs with the Taiwanese government. It is unlikely that 
Applicant would be placed in a position of having to choose between the interest of a 
relative and the United States. It is clear that even in the unlikely event such a situation 
would arise he would choose the interests of the United States. Therefore, I find AG ¶¶ 
8(a) and (b) apply to SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.c. 
 
7 
 
 
Applicant’s property interests in Taiwan do not exist any more. He has no bank 
accounts in Taiwan. Department Counsel concedes that this mitigating factor applies to 
SOR ¶¶1.d and 1.e. and I find the allegations in these two SOR paragraphs to be 
mitigated under AG ¶ 8(f). 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a naturalized U.S. 
citizen. He and his wife, who is also a U.S. citizen, have resided in the United States 
since 1978. He and his wife have two adult children who are U.S. citizens. He obtained 
his graduate school education in the United States. He has been employed with federal 
contractors since 1996 and has held a security clearance without any incidents. He 
does not discuss his work with his mother or siblings in Taiwan. He has travelled to 
Taiwan to visit his family. He has no property in Taiwan. He came to the United States 
to further his education. He remained here and has been a citizen for many years. As a 
good son, he talks to his mother once every two months and visits her periodically. All of 
his visits to Taiwan were for family purposes rather than any connection to the 
Taiwanese government. He has established that his motivation for his contacts and 
activities with his family do not indicate a security risk. He has presented sufficient 
information to mitigate any security concerns under the whole-person concept. I 
conclude Applicant is eligible for access to classified information.  
 
 Applicant’s life, career, substantial assets, and allegiance all lie in the United 
States. After considering all the evidence, including his valuable and highly regarded 
work for his current employer, I am convinced that it is consistent with the national 
interest to grant Applicant a security clearance.  
 
 
8 
 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Foreign Influence security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:   WITHDRAWN  
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C:    WITHDRAWN 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
