 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-07666 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Alan V. Edmunds, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On July 23, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On May 7, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations) for Applicant. The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), 
as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on July 2, 2010. Department Counsel was 
prepared to proceed on July 22, 2010. The case was assigned to another 
administrative judge on July 28, 2010, and was reassigned to me on September 1, 
 
2 
 
 
2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 20, 2010, scheduling the 
hearing for October 13, 2010. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 7, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant offered Applicant Exhibits (AE) A through S, 
which were received without objection, and he testified on his own behalf. DOHA 
received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 21, 2010.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations. His answers are incorporated as 
findings of fact. After a thorough review of the evidence, I make the following 
additional findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
Applicant is a 56-year-old quality inspector, who has worked for a defense 
contractor since April 2009. He seeks a security clearance, which is a condition of his 
continued employment. Applicant has worked as a defense contractor for 
approximately 25 years, and he held a security clearance from October 2002 to April 
2008. (GE 1, Tr. 26, 27-29, 44-45.) 
 
Applicant was awarded his high school diploma in August 1982. He attended 
community college from September 1985 to June 1987, but did not graduate. (GE 1, 
Tr. 27.) He is the youngest of six children. During high school, Applicant showed an 
aptitude for electronics and photography and was selected for trade school. After high 
school, he was offered and accepted a job with a prominent aerospace company. 
While working for this company, he attended community college part time. (AE L.) 
Applicant has never married and has no dependents; however, he had a long-term 
relationship with a woman (W) that ended in 2008, discussed infra. (GE 2, GE 3, AE 
H, AE L, Tr. 19-22.)  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR identified 14 separate debts totalling $40,718. The vast 
majority of these debts are for credit cards. (Tr. 9.) Up until 2008, Applicant maintained 
an excellent credit history. He was financially responsible and paid his bills in a timely 
manner. He always held two jobs, started two different businesses, and invested in 
real estate. (GE 2, AE L.) Two significant events intervened.  
 
First, Applicant fell victim to the current economy and was unemployed two 
times in the last two years. He was laid off from April 2008 to November 2008, was 
employed briefly from November 2008 to February 2009, and was laid off again from 
February 2009 to April 2009. During these two periods of unemployment, he did not 
have the income necessary to remain current on his financial obligations. In April 
2009, he started his current job. (GE 1, Tr. 19.) 
 
3 
 
 
Second, Applicant encountered difficulties when W’s gambling habits spun out 
of control. He had been with W for 18 years and, for the majority of that time, their 
relationship prospered. W was supportive of Applicant’s work and business ventures. 
In 2006, they purchased an investment home together. Around this time, W became 
heavily involved in gambling – slot machines, black jack, and roulette. W began 
diverting Applicant’s and her money, intended for household expenses, to gamble. 
W’s gambling binge lasted from about 2006 to 2007. Applicant expressed his 
disapproval of W’s gambling; however, W was not receptive to his criticism. In 2008, 
Applicant broke up with W and moved in with his parents. (AE H, AE L.) 
 
Since breaking up with W and finding his current job, Applicant has recovered 
from his temporary financial setback. He appeared at his hearing fully prepared to 
discuss the details of his financial history and corrective action taken. Applicant and 
his attorney methodically went through each of the debts alleged. He has settled or 
paid all of the 14 debts alleged. His settlements and payments are complete and fully 
supported by documentation. In short, the SOR debts alleged have been fully 
satisfied. All of his debts were paid before the hearing convened. (AE A – AE N, Tr. 
16-21.) 
 
Applicant completed a credit counselling class on October 12, 2010. (AE S.) 
His current credit report and bank statements reflect that his credit is on the mend and 
that he is financially solvent. (AE B - AE D, AE P, AE Q.)  
 
Character Evidence 
 
Applicant submitted five reference letters. Four letters are work-related and one 
letter is from W. His work-related references are all individuals who see Applicant on a 
daily basis. They represent senior management within Applicant’s company, who 
uniformly support Applicant for a security clearance. The collective sense of these 
letters reflects that Applicant is honest, has superb character, is hard working, and 
contributes to the national defense. W also attests to the fact that Applicant is hard 
working, and she accepts responsibility for her conduct which lead to Applicant’s 
financial problems. (AE F – AE J.) Applicant also submitted evidence of his part-time 
business ventures, which cover a line of high-end head wear, as well as design and 
installation of interiors for upscale automobiles. (AE O, AE R.) 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive 
 
4 
 
 
Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing 
that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for 
issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the 
burden of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 
531.  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” 
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The 
guidelines presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any 
of the criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).  
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should 
err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude that a relevant security concern exists under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial 
problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
  
 AG ¶ 19 provides two financial considerations disqualifying conditions that 
could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or 
unwillingness to satisfy debts,” and “(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” 
Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is established by his admissions and the 
evidence presented. As indicated in SOR ¶¶ 1a to 1n, he had 14 delinquent debts 
totaling $40,718 that were in various states of delinquency until recently. The 
Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c).   
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) to (e) are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
6 
 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because 
there is more than one delinquent debt and his financial problems are not isolated. It 
was not until recently that these debts were paid or resolved. Therefore, his debt is “a 
continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. See ISCR 
Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-03695 
(App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)). He receives partial credit under AG ¶ 20(a) because the 
debt “occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.”   
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), he receives full credit because the downfall in the economy 
and his being laid off two times were largely beyond his control, and he acted 
responsibly under the circumstances.1
 
 AG ¶ 20(c) is applicable because Applicant 
sought financial counseling and there are clear indications that his financial difficulties 
were under control before then. In any event, he made the effort to enhance his 
financial acumen. Applicant produced evidence that clearly indicates that he is living 
within his means and regained financial responsibility. Furthermore, there is sufficient 
information to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).  Applicant has settled, paid, 
or otherwise resolved all of his debts. AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable because Applicant 
did not dispute the legitimacy of any of his debts.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the 
applicant’s conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should 
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the 
motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, 
                                                          
1“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable 
manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 
12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
his debts current. 
 
7 
 
 
exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must 
be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
There is evidence against mitigating Applicant’s conduct. The SOR lists 14 
debts totalling $40,718 that were at one time or another in various states of 
delinquency. For about two years, he failed to keep his accounts current or negotiate 
lesser payments, showing financial irresponsibility and lack of judgment. His lack of 
success in resolving delinquent debt until recently raises sufficient security concerns 
to merit further inquiry.   
 
The mitigating evidence under the whole-person concept is more substantial. 
Applicant was laid off and experienced a sudden loss of income. These events were 
clearly beyond his control. The challenges he faced in dealing with W and her 
gambling problems, and the collateral affects of her spending indiscretions 
significantly contributed to his financial problems. Before 2008, Applicant maintained 
an excellent credit record. Applicant’s excellent employment record also weighs in his 
favor. He is a hard-working and productive member of society. There is no evidence of 
any security violation during the time Applicant may have held a security clearance 
from 2002 to 2008. He is a law-abiding citizen.  
 
Applicant’s company fully supports him and recommends him for a security 
clearance. He made mistakes, and debts became delinquent. He has paid his debts. 
Furthermore, he has established a “meaningful track record” of debt payments. These 
factors show responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. After weighing the 
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts and circumstances in the 
context of the whole-person, I conclude he has mitigated the financial considerations 
security concerns.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the 
SOR, as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1a to 1n:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Robert J. Tuider 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
 
