                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-04459
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
April 29, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIPS), on July 6, 2006, and May 17, 2009.  (Government Exhibits 1 and 2).  On July
27, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of
Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guideline J for Applicant. The
action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information
within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive
5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel; Security Clearance Review Program (January 2,
1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for
SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
The Applicant responded to the SOR on September 15, 2010, and he requested
a hearing before a DOHA Administrative Judge.  This case was assigned to the
undersigned on December 14, 2010.  A notice of hearing was issued January 3, 2011,
and the hearing was scheduled for January 18, 2011.  At the hearing the Government
presented ten exhibits, referred to as Government Exhibits 1 through 10.  The Applicant
presented twenty-three exhibits, referred to as Applicant’s Exhibits A through W.  He
also testified on his own behalf.  The record remained open until close of business on
January 28, 2011, to allow the Applicant the opportunity to submit additional supporting
documentation.  The Applicant submitted five Post-Hearing Exhibits that were admitted
into evidence without objection, and are referred to as Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibits
2
A through E.  The official transcript (Tr.) was received on January 25, 2011.  Based
upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to
classified information is granted.
FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 33 years old.  He has one Masters Degree in Aerospace and
one in Mechanical Engineering.  He is employed by a defense contractor as an
Aerospace Engineer, and is applying for a security clearance in connection with his
employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct).  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he engaged in Criminal Conduct.
The Applicant grew up in a small town with his mother and his stepfather.  He
was estranged from his biological father.  Over the years, a custody battle continued,
and the Applicant was the recipient of guilt and strain associated with his parents’
relationship.  The Applicant was angry, depressed and rebellious.  He was very
intelligent and became bored in school.  As a teenager, he became mischievous, and to
get attention, he started hanging around the wrong kids and getting into trouble.  In
1991, at the age of fifteen, he and some other boys got a master snowmobile key and
went joyriding with the neighbor’s snowmobile. The Applicant was subsequently
charged with (1) UDAA and (2) Joyriding.  He was found guilty to count (2) and was
placed on probation and ordered to make restitution.(Government Exhibit 7.) The
Applicant’s mother felt she could not control him and he was sent to live with his father.  
Applicant’s pranks and immaturity continued. In 1992, while living with his father,
Applicant stole some magazines from a grocery store. A security guard stopped him
and he was charged with three counts of Larceny Over $100.00, Larceny in a Building,
and Retail Fraud Second Degree. Applicant pled guilty and was sentenced to serve 15
days in non-secure detention, ordered to complete 60 hours of community service, and
placed on nine months probation.  (Government Exhibit 8.) Applicant moved back in
with his mother.
In 1993, while Applicant was house-sitting a neighbor’s home, he drove the car to
the grocery store and back.  To hold him accountable, his mother reported this violation
to the probation officer. Applicant was charged with a violation of probation. He pled
guilty and was sentenced to serve 60 days in secure detention, 30 days in non-secure
detention, use of electronic tether for 45 days, his probation was extended an additional
24 months and he was ordered to complete an additional 30 hours of community
service.  
3
In 1993, Applicant was working at a hotel cleaning rooms. He took a thousand
dollars in cash from one of the guests. He was charged with Larceny Over $100.00 and
several other charges.  (Government Exhibit 9.)
       
At this point, Applicant realized that he had caused his mother a significant
financial burden, and in his misguided, warped, sense of logic he felt compelled to
remedy the problem so he decided to rob a bank to get some money to help with the
expenses.  He was sixteen years old.  He accessed the bank through a window that he
had broken, hid in the bathroom, and waited for the teller to arrive. When the teller
opened the door, he stuck a gun in her face and told her to open the bank safe. The
teller did as directed, and gave him money from the safe. Applicant ran to his car and
drove away. He ditched the car in the woods, buried the money ten yards from the car,
and ran to his girlfriend’s house. Applicant indicates that he had taken the gun when he
broke into a store in the nearby town.  The teller recognized him, as the town was small,
and the Applicant was charged with (1) Armed Robbery, (2) Felony Firearm, (3)
Breaking and Entering a Building with Intent, (4) Receiving Stolen Property over
$100.00, (5) Unlawful Driving Away of an Automobile, (6) Larceny in a Building, (7)
Uttering and Publishing and (8) Larceny Over $100.00.  (Government Exhibits 3, 4 , 5
and 6.)  
Based on his past criminal record, Applicant was tried as an adult. In retrospect,
he realizes that he was in desperate need of discipline and guidance.  Emotionally, he
was angry and suicidal.  (Tr. p. 56.)  He pled guilty to (1) Armed Robbery and (2) Felony
Firearms. The remaining charges were dismissed.  He was sentenced to 6 to 25 years
for count (1) to be served consecutive to count (2)   He was sentenced to 2 years as to
count (2) with credit for 323 days served.  He was placed on parole for twenty-four
months in July 2000.  Applicant served six years in the Department of Corrections. His
sentences were served concurrently from August 23, 1993, to January 19, 2000.
(Government Exhibits 3, 4 , 5 and 6.)  Over the course of his prison sentence, he was
sent to 12 different prisons which contained hard core adult criminals.  (Tr. p. 56.)  At
one point, he attempted suicide and was sent to the psychiatric hospital for treatment
and assessment.  He was prescribed Prozac and eventually realized that he had really
messed up, that he was not like the other prisoners, and that he wanted much more for
himself.  
Applicant was a model prisoner during his incarceration. He obtained his GED,
and tutored other inmates to help them obtain their GED.  He completed an automotive
technology program, a construction trade program, several therapy programs, his
college entrance exams, and began his college education through independent study
programs.  Based upon his good behavior, he was released from prison early. Upon his
release from prison, Applicant was admitted to, and attended, one of the select higher
educational institutions in the country where he graduated with high honors with a
Bachelor’s Degree in Aerospace. He subsequently completed  two Master’s degrees
from the top-ranked aerospace and mechanical engineering program in the United
States.  (Applicant’s Exhibit U.)
Applicant is extremely remorseful and regrets his actions in the past and has no
desire to ever return to a criminal life. His life is completely different now.  For the past
seventeen years, he has lived a straight and narrow life.  He has never hidden his past
criminal record from his employers.  He established a non-profit organization to help
4
high school students and at-risk youth through advancements in education.  During
college, he joined the Navy ROTC to make amends and wanted to become a Naval
Officer, to give back to our country, but was denied commission based upon his past
record.  Without a pardon, many opportunities were not open to him. 
On July 4, 2000, the Applicant was erroneously booked in jail on a Warrant for
Obstruction of Justice.  The warrant was mistakenly issued and he was subsequently
released with no action taken.  (Applicant’s Exhibit A.)
Mitigation.
Two of the Applicant’s Managers wrote a letter stating that Applicant’s
contributions have been essential and that the country will better be served by not
limiting his ability to contribute to our country’s defense.  They recommend Applicant for
a position of trust.  (Applicant’s Exhibit C.)
Applicant’s employment performance appraisal for the period from January 2010
through December 2010, reflects that he “meets” or “exceeds” expectations in every
category.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit B.)
A letter from the State Parole and Commutation Board dated February 2, 2011,
indicates that the Applicant’s Application for Pardon was forwarded to the Governor’s
office for consideration that same day.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing Exhibit E.) 
A letter from the Circuit Court Judge who sentenced Applicant in 1994 to prison
for Armed Robbery when he was sixteen years old, stated that if any case cries out for a
pardon, this one does. The Judge indicates that if the information in the Applicant’s
letter is verified, he supports a pardon.  (Applicant’s Exhibit E.) 
The prosecuting attorney who prosecuted Applicant for the Armed Robbery and
felony firearm conviction, and petitioned to have him tried as an adult, has been
communicating with the Applicant since 1995. He indicates that Applicant has kept him
updated concerning his progress in prison, counseling, classes, and educational
accomplishments.  He states that Applicant has consistently shown remorse for his
crime and prior juvenile offenses. He believes that Applicant has honestly changed
since his juvenile years and has made efforts to further his education toward a
promising future.  He supports the Applicant’s pardon.  (Applicant’s Exhibit F.)
Letters from other Circuit Court Judges indicate that they believe the Applicant
has paid the full measure of his debt to society for his serious misjudgments committed
during his youth.  He should be given the opportunity to rehabilitate himself because
Applicant paid the consequences for his actions, expressed regret, and exerted an effort
to make changes. They endorse a pardon for the Applicant.  (Applicant’s Exhibits D and
E.)
A former member of congress wrote a letter in support of the Applicant’s pardon.
He indicates that he is delighted to learn of Applicant’s new accomplishments in his
profession of aeronautical engineering and urges the governor for a full pardon on the
basis of Applicant’s outstanding educational and rehabilitative accomplishments.
(Applicant’s Exhibit G.)
5
A retired FBI agent who has known the Applicant for six and a half years wrote a
letter describing Applicant as honest, trustworthy, and a loyal American.  He
recommends the Applicant for a position of trust.  (Applicant’s Exhibit H.)
Applicant’s probation officer from February 17, 2000, to January 2, 2001,
indicates that he would not hesitate to recommend Applicant for consideration in any
form of leniency which might enable him to pursue a law-abiding and productive life in
the future.  (Applicant’s Exhibit J.)
Applicant’s parole agent from July 25, 2000, to July 25, 2002,  states in a letter
that she has never seen the type of success and accomplishments achieved by the
Applicant since his juvenile felony conviction. The parole agent hopes that Applicant will
be granted a gubernatorial pardon in order to advance his career.  (Applicant’s Exhibit
I.)
A letter from a retired Air Force Lieutenant Colonel indicates that he supports a
recommendation to pardon the Applicant for the felony he committed as a juvenile.
(Applicant’s Exhibit K.)
A professional associate of the Applicant’s who has worked in the field of non-
profit organizations for over ten years wrote a letter on Applicant’s behalf. He has known
Applicant for about a year. Applicant consulted him about non-profit organizations. He
attests that Applicant runs a successful non-profit organization and is passionate about
helping at-risk youth through advancements in education.  (Applicant’s Post-Hearing
Exhibit D.)  
Applicant’s coworker, who is also a former State Trooper with twenty-five years
experience, describes the Applicant as articulate, intelligent, focused, eager to learn,
proactive in offering his assistance, and recommends him as the top candidate.
(Applicant’s Exhibit L.) 
Letters from a number of professional associates and friends recommend
Applicant for a gubernatorial pardon. Each of them have known Applicant for many
years. They witnessed his transition from a self-destructive teenager, to a mature adult
who atoned for his wrongs, and made remarkable accomplishments in self
improvement. (Applicant’s Exhibits  M, N, O and P.)
Letters from the Senior Vice Provost for Academic Affairs, and the Senior
Counselor to the President for the Arts, Diversity, and Undergraduate Affairs, from the
University the Applicant attended, indicate they have observed the Applicant transition
from his mistakes of the past into a productive well-educated citizen. They recommend
Applicant for a gubernatorial pardon.  (Applicant’s Exhibit R.) 
A letter from the clinical psychologist who was the prosecutor’s expert witness in
Applicant’s felony criminal trial for armed robbery, felony firearms, breaking and
entering, and driving away of a motor vehicle, now recommends the Applicant for a
gubernatorial pardon.  (Applicant’s Exhibit Q.)
A Captain in the United States Army, who possesses a DoD Top Secret security
clearance and served in Operation Iraqi Freedom, states he is a friend of Applicant’s
6
and communicates with him regularly. He recommends the Applicant for a security
clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit S.) 
A Sergeant in the United States Marine Corp wrote a letter in support of
Applicant. He holds a DoD Top Secret security clearance and has served combat
missions in Operation Enduring Freedom. He describes the Applicant as an individual
who personifies moral integrity, devotion to the United States, and upstanding
character.  He recommends Applicant for a security clearance.  (Applicant’s Exhibit T.)
In addition to the non-profit organization the Applicant founded to reach out to
troubled youth through science, aviation/aerospace and mathematics, the Applicant is
involved in a number of other volunteer, charitable and civic activities in the community.
He is or has been involved in his company’s Light Speed Foundation, World Relief Inc.,
Tau Beta Pi Academic Mentor, American Red Cross, Habitat For Humanity, Soup
Kitchen, and Relay for life.  (Applicant’s Exhibit W.)  
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 and Section E.2.2. of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies
divided into "Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying
Factors and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct)
30.  The Concern.  Criminal activity creates a doubt about a person’s judgment,
reliability, and trustworthiness.  By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations.
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
31.(a) a single serious crime or multiple offenses;
31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.
31.(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a crime,
sentenced to a imprisonment for a term exceeding one year an incarcerated as a result
of that sentence for not less than a year.
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
32.(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; and
32.(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to
the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job
training or higher education, good employment record, or constructive community
involvement.
7
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19, in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct;
b. The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and 
i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole-person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.”  The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
8
CONCLUSION
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in criminal conduct that demonstrates poor judgment or
unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
continued holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the
burden then shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation
or mitigation, which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The
Applicant bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent
with the national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has engaged in Criminal Conduct (Guideline J).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is normally sufficient to overcome the
Government's case under Guideline J of the SOR.
Under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, Disqualifying Conditions, 31.(a) a single
serious crime or multiple lesser offenses, 31.(c) allegation or admission of criminal
conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or
convicted, and 31.(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and incarcerated as a
result of that sentence for not less than a year apply.  However, given the unique
circumstances of this case, Mitigating Conditions 32.(a) so much time has elapsed since
the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that
it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment, and 32.(d) there is evidence of successful
rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of
criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good
employment record, or constructive community involvement, both apply.
I am not limited to the mitigating conditions delineated in the Directive, in
deciding if Applicant has demonstrated extenuation and mitigation.  Here, those who
know the Applicant speak most highly of his character, credibility and trustworthiness.
The totality of the Applicant’s conduct and circumstances, as set forth at length above,
warrants a favorable decision under the whole-person concept.    
9
While many crimes by adolescents mark the beginning of a predictable criminal
path, this Applicant is very different.  His criminal conduct occurred when he was
sixteen years old and will not likely be repeated.  Admittedly, Applicant was a very
troubled adolescent.  He caused much pain and suffering for his parents, himself and
society.  However, his crimes all occurred within an 18 month period, when Applicant
was fifteen and sixteen years old; and were isolated to a period of time in his life when
he was most vulnerable, stupid and alone.  Applicant has paid the price to society for
violating our laws.  He spent six years of his life in twelve different prisons.  He has
experienced things that none of us will ever know or understand.  Despite this, he has
matured and used his past to become a better person.  
After his release from prison, Applicant rehabilitated himself. He worked hard to
make significant changes in his life and has become a productive citizen in our society
and stands to make even more major contributions to society.  He has many
outstanding accomplishments and achievements.  He obtained an advanced education
and is trying to give back to our society.  He chose to serve our Government and has
demonstrated that he is rehabilitated.  He has shown honesty, integrity, trustworthiness
and respect.  
Given the unique circumstances of this case, it is clear from his past record that
he will not return to his juvenile ways.  He has everything to lose and nothing to gain.
He has worked hard since his criminal conduct occurred to defuse the past and create a
new and sincere persona.  Based upon his credible testimony, his outstanding
accomplishments since prison, the numerous letters of recommendations and his 18
month isolated history of criminal conduct, I find him sufficiently trustworthy to safeguard
classified information.  
I also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  The Applicant is an extraordinary person,
one that rarely comes along in life, who has hit rock bottom and experienced the lowest
and the worst in life, and has been able to use that experience to turn his life around for
the good and rise to the top.  He is commended for his hard work, efforts at
rehabilitation, and remarkable accomplishments.  Under the particular facts of this case,
the totality of the conduct set forth above when viewed under all of the guidelines as a
whole, support a whole-person assessment of good judgement, trustworthiness,
reliability, a willingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other characteristics
indicating that the person may  properly safeguard classified information.  
After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions and evaluating all the
evidence in the content of the whole person, I conclude the Applicant has mitigated the
security concerns based on his Criminal Conduct. 
10
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: For Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: For Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: For Applicant.
                                    Subpara.  1.f.: For Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for the
Applicant. 
Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
