 
 1
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 [Redacted] )  ISCR Case No. 09-06549 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines F (Financial 
Considerations) and E (Personal Conduct). The Guideline E concerns are mitigated, but 
the Guideline F concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted his security clearance application on June 9, 2009. On 
August 27, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) sent him a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his 
application, citing security concerns under Guidelines F and E. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of 
Defense on September 1, 2006.  
  
 
 2
 Applicant answered the SOR on October 27, 2010, and requested a 
determination on the record without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the 
Government’s written case on November 23, 2010. On the same day, a complete copy 
of the file of relevant material (FORM) was sent to Applicant, who was given an 
opportunity to file objections and submit material to refute, extenuate, or mitigate the 
Government’s evidence. He received the FORM on December 7, 2010.  
 
On January 3, 2011, Applicant requested and received an additional 30 days to 
respond to the FORM. He requested and received a second extension of time on 
February 15, 2011. On March 11, 2011, his bankruptcy attorney submitted a copy of a 
draft Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition. The case was assigned to me on April 4, 2011. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
Request for Additional Time to Submit Evidence 
 
 On March 11, 2011, Applicant telephonically asked Department Counsel for 
another extension of time. Department Counsel did not object to Applicant’s response to 
the FORM, but he objected to any further extensions of time for further submissions. 
Applicant’s request for additional time to respond is hereby denied. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of a training 
brochure explaining how to interpret credit reports. (Government Exhibit (GX) 10.) 
Department Counsel’s request is granted. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations in the SOR 
except ¶¶ 1.t, 1.u, and 1.v. His admissions are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 55-year-old electronic technician employed by a federal contractor. 
He has worked for his current employer since February 2009. He worked for the same 
employer from October 1993 to May 2008. In April 2008, he was reprimanded for 
viewing pornographic material on his company computer. In his response to the SOR, 
he explained that he did not know that viewing pornography on a company computer 
was prohibited. On May 2008, he was terminated for sleeping on duty, but he filed a 
union grievance on the ground that his sleeping on duty was caused by a medical 
disorder. He was rehired in February 2009. He has held a security clearance since July 
2006.  
 
 Applicant served in the U.S. Air Force from December 1976 to June 1978 and 
was separated from active duty under honorable conditions. He did not receive any 
awards or decorations. (DD Form 214, attached to Applicant’s answer to SOR.) 
 
 
 3
 Applicant has never married, but he has cohabited with the same woman since 
March 2004. He has no children. 
 
Of the 27 delinquent debts alleged in the SOR, 18 are owed to the same creditor, 
and Applicant has admitted all 18. Twelve of the 18 are for less than $100. Two other 
debts (¶¶ 1.t and 1.u) are home mortgages with balances of $98,789 and $111,000 
respectively, and Applicant has denied them, asserting that they were paid off. In his 
answer to the SOR, Applicant stated that he paid off the two mortgages by refinancing 
to a more affordable mortgage. He did not provide any documentation to support his 
statements. He did, however, reflect the consolidation of his home mortgages in his 
draft bankruptcy petition submitted in response to the FORM. He stated that he 
intended to pay down or pay off all his debts beginning on his next payday, October 29, 
2010. He did not submit any evidence of payments in his response to the FORM. His 
draft bankruptcy petition includes the creditors alleged in the SOR, except for the 
creditors alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.v, 1.x, 1.y, and 1.aa.  
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant disputed the $390 telephone bill alleged in 
SOR ¶ 1.u, but he provided no documentation of the basis for his dispute. He asserted 
that he had made payments on the $5,559 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.w, but he provided 
no documentary proof of payments. 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant attributed his financial problems to the unjust 
firing in May 2008. He submitted a Social Security Administration statement reflecting 
that he earned $73,225 in 2007, but his income declined to $27,105 in 2008 and 
$25,448 in 2009. His draft bankruptcy petition reflects current net monthly income of 
$3,506 and expenses of $3,221, leaving a monthly remainder of $285. 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
“control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the AG. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, 
recognizing the complexities of human behavior, an administrative judge applies these 
guidelines in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative 
judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 
 4
 The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be made “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is merely an indication the 
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense 
have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 92-1106 
at 3, 1993 WL 545051 at *3 (App. Bd. Oct. 7, 1993).   
 
 Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the burden of proving a mitigating condition, 
and the burden of disproving it never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).  
 
An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance.” ISCR Case No. 
01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 The SOR alleges 27 delinquent debts. Applicant admitted 24 of them, and his 
admissions are corroborated by his credit reports. The delinquent debts alleged in SOR 
¶¶ 1.t, 1.u, and 1.v, which Applicant denied, are established by his credit reports and 
are included in his draft bankruptcy petition. 
 
 
 5
The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 18:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Applicant’s financial history, established by his admissions and his credit reports, raises 
two disqualifying conditions under this guideline: AG ¶ 19(a) (“inability or unwillingness 
to satisfy debts”) and AG ¶ 19(c) (“a history of not meeting financial obligations”).  
 
Security concerns based on financial problems can be mitigated by showing that 
“the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual=s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 20(a). This mitigating 
condition is not established because Applicant’s debts are recent, numerous, and did 
not occur under circumstances making them unlikely to recur. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s 
control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical 
emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted responsibly 
under the circumstances.” AG ¶ 20(b). Both prongs, i.e., conditions beyond the person=s 
control and responsible conduct, must be established. Applicant’s unemployment from 
May 2008 to February 2009 was a condition beyond his control. However, this 
mitigating condition is not established because he has not acted responsibly. He has 
been employed for more than two years, but he has taken virtually no action to resolve 
his delinquent debts, even though many are for small amounts, less than $100. 
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are clear 
indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control.” AG ¶ 20(c). This 
mitigating condition is not established because Applicant has not presented evidence of 
any counseling and his delinquent debts are not resolved or under control. Although he 
has retained a bankruptcy attorney, he presented no evidence that he has filed his 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition and no evidence that any debts have been otherwise 
resolved.   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing that “the 
individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve 
debts.” AG ¶ 20(d). Good faith means acting in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation. ISCR Case No. 99-0201, 1999 
WL 1442346 at *4 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 1999). This mitigating condition is not established 
 
 6
because Applicant presented no evidence that his debts have been paid, compromised, 
or otherwise settled. Even if he follows through with his Chapter 13 bankruptcy petition, 
he will need to establish a track record of making the required payments.  
 
Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “the 
individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is 
the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of 
the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” AG ¶ 20(e). Applicant 
denied three debts alleged in the SOR, but he produced no evidence to document the 
basis of the dispute. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 Applicant admitted the allegation under this guideline that he was reprimanded 
for viewing pornography on his company computer. At the time of his violation, he had 
worked for his employer for almost 15 years. I am not convinced that he could work for 
the same employer for 15 years without knowing that viewing pornography on a 
company computer was prohibited. I find his explanation implausible and not believable.  
 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows: “Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.” Applicant’s conduct raises 
the following disqualifying conditions under this guideline: 
 
AG ¶ 16(d): credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered 
under any other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an 
adverse determination, but which, when combined with all available 
information supports a whole-person assessment of questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to 
comply with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that 
the person may not properly safeguard protected information. This 
includes but is not limited to consideration of . . . (3) a pattern of 
dishonesty or rule violations; [and] (4) evidence of significant misuse of 
Government or other employer's time or resources; and  
 
AG ¶ 16(e): personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's 
conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or 
duress, such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the 
person's personal, professional, or community standing.  
 
 There is no evidence that Applicant viewed pornography on his company’s 
computer on any occasions other than the one for which he was reprimanded. Thus, I 
conclude that the “pattern” of rule violations encompassed by AG ¶ 16(d)(3) is not 
established. However, Applicant’s violation of his company’s prohibition against viewing 
 
 7
pornography at work is sufficient to establish the “significant misuse” of his employer’s 
time and resources encompassed by AG ¶ 16(d)(4). 
 
 Although pornography is offensive to many members of society, it is also 
acceptable or at least tolerable to many. There is no evidence that what Applicant 
viewed was illegal, such as child pornography. Based on the limited evidence in this 
record, I conclude that AG ¶ 16(e) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns raised by personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). This 
mitigating condition is established because the evidence shows only a single incident 
that happened three years ago. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated if “the individual 
has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or 
taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that 
caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 17(d). Applicant has admitted his behavior but has attempted to 
excuse it on the basis of being ignorant of the rules regarding use of company 
computers. There is no evidence of measures to change his behavior, but the threat of 
disciplinary action has apparently been sufficient to deter any further violations. I 
conclude this mitigating condition is partially established. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guidelines F and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors 
 
 8
in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional 
comment. 
 
 Applicant is a mature adult with many years of service as a contractor’s 
employee. He has held a security clearance for many years, apparently without incident. 
He has suffered some debilitating illnesses that have interfered with his job performance 
and his personal financial management. His answer to the SOR paints a picture of 
someone who is overwhelmed with his delinquent debts and has been unable to 
formulate a plan to address them. He appears to have moved recently toward filing a 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy, but it remains to be seen whether he will follow through and file 
his petition and whether he will comply with whatever payment schedule is required. My 
ability to assess his sincerity and credibility is limited because of his request for a 
decision based on the record.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines F and 
E, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on personal conduct, but he has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on financial considerations. Accordingly, I 
conclude he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings on the allegations in the SOR: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F (Financial Considerations): AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.aa:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 I conclude that it is not clearly consistent with the national interest to grant 
Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information 
is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
