  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-06611 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O'Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Cheryl L. Meadows, Personal Representative 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant owed approximately $52,000 on an unpaid judgment and 13 charged-
off or placed-for-collection accounts. Applicant has paid three of the debts, which total 
approximately $14,000. He has failed to rebut or mitigate the security concerns under 
financial considerations. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
 
1 
 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
4) 
                                                          
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on July 8, 2010, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, financial considerations. 
  
 On August 16, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
November 15, 2010, I was assigned the case. On November 18, 2010, DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing for the hearing held on December 1, 2010.  
 
 The Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 5, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through E, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. The record was kept open to allow 
Applicant to submit additional documents. (Tr. 20) No documents were received. On 
December 8, 2010, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s SOR Answer, he admitted the factual allegations in SOR ¶¶ 1.b, 
1.c, 1.d, 1.k, and 1.l. He denied the remaining allegations. He admits to owing five 
debts, which total approximately $29,000 and denying nine debts, which total 
approximately $33,000. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations. 
After a thorough review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following 
additional findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 46-year-old over-the-road truck driver who has worked for a 
defense contractor since August 2008, and is seeking to obtain a security clearance. 
Applicant called no witnesses other than himself, and produced no work or character 
references. He has been married since 1995 and has no children. (Tr. 36)  
 
Both Applicant and his wife are truck drivers with a combined annual salary of 
$80,000.2 (Tr. 38) They are away from home 80 percent of the year. (Tr. 37) As an 
over-the-road trucker, Applicant finds it difficult to locate paperwork related to some of 
the SOR debts. (Tr. 34) He does not have access to material he needs, which has led to 
the amount of time he has taken to address some of this debt. (Tr. 3
 
Applicant was working for a custom home builder when downsizing led to his 
unemployment in 2005 or 2006. (Tr.31, 39) His annual salary was $45,000 plus a bonus 
of $1,000 or $2,000 for each house completed. (Tr. 39) In mid-2006, he and his wife 
then attempted self-employment delivering auto parts. (Tr. 31) The work was not 
financially successful and ended after two or three months with a loss of $7,000 to 
$8,000. (Tr. 41) When the auto parts delivery job failed to work out, they started to 
deliver fifth-wheeled vehicles, which lasted until June 2008. (Tr. 42) He grossed 
$40,000 to $50,000 annually, but netted much less due to fuel costs and other 
expenses. (Tr. 43) From 2006 to 2007, his wife, who sold homes, was also unemployed. 
(Tr. 44)  
2 Prior to 2001, when Applicant was building homes and his wife was selling homes, their combined 
yearly income exceeded $80,000. (Tr. 61) 
 
3 
 
In 2008, Applicant and his wife attended a six-week school to obtain their 
commercial driver’s license (CDL). Following school, they were to work for an over-the-
road commercial trucking firm for 18 months. However, the low pay of $600 weekly 
forced them to quit after one or two months. (Ex.2) Had they worked the entire period 
for the company, the school debt would have been forgiven. (Tr. 43) The balance owed 
on the school debt is $5,833 (SOR ¶ 1.c). The original debt was $4,000. (Tr. 51) He 
admitted this debt in his SOR answer.    
 
In the mid-2000s, Applicant had a telephone service account. He asserts he 
completed his contract with the carrier and cancelled his service, but the carrier put him 
on a new contract and charged him $796 (SOR ¶ 1.h) for early termination of that new 
contract. (Tr. 82) He has been disputing this debt since 2005. (Tr. 82) He disputed it 
with the company, but the company claimed it was a valid debt. (Tr. 55) He disputed it 
with the credit bureau six months ago, but has not received the results of his challenge 
to the debt. (Tr. 55)  
 
In the mid-2000s, Applicant obtained a $3,000 loan (SOR ¶ 1.n) for dental work. 
He was unable to continue his monthly payments. In June 2009, Applicant was 
interviewed about his finances in a personal subject interview. (Ex. 2) At that time, he 
intended to set up a repayment agreement on this debt. (Ex. 2)  
 
In 2005, Applicant co-signed on the purchase of his wife’s car. In 2006, they both 
became unemployed and the vehicle was voluntary repossessed. The vehicle was sold 
and Applicant admits owing some amount following the sale, but disputed owing $8,867 
(SOR ¶ 1.k). The creditor offered to settle the debt for $2,864, which Applicant accepted 
and paid. (Ex. D) 
 
In 2001, Applicant purchased a $22,000 camper and financed it. (Tr. 58) In 2005 
or 2006 when he became unemployed, he could no longer afford to make payments. In 
2007, the camper was repossessed and sold. (Tr. 58) He has not made any payments 
on the debt and has not had any recent contact with the creditor. The $13,841 account 
(SOR ¶ 1.l) was charged off.  
 
 During the 2009 interview, Applicant had no knowledge about the $4,366 
judgment or creditor listed in SOR ¶ 1.a ($4,366). He learned of the judgment a few 
months after it was entered. (Tr. 46) He does not know the nature of the debt causing 
the judgment. (Tr. 47) The debt remains unpaid.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged owing some amount to the creditor on the $5,355 credit 
card account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.f). His interest rate went from 9.9% to 23%. 
(Tr. 80) He asserted he disputed this debt. At the personal interview, he did not 
recognize the $279 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.m) or the $135 medical debt (SOR ¶ 1.d). At 
the hearing, he stated at the time he injured his knee, he had health insurance and was 
unaware there was an outstanding amount owed for medical treatment. In his SOR 
answer, he admitted the $135 medical bill which was for an injury in 2007. (Tr. 76)  
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant disputes the $4,861 charged-off credit card debt (SOR ¶ 1.e). He never 
had a credit card with this company. He alleged he had disputed the debt with the credit 
bureau. He provided no documentation supporting any dispute. 
 
 Applicant has paid the $582 charged-off debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.g. (Ex. C) He 
owed $4,433 on a bank account, which had been placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.i). The 
creditor offered to settle the matter for $664, which Applicant paid. (Ex. E) He had other 
past-due accounts (not alleged in the SOR) which were settled and paid. One clothing 
store creditor agreed to settle a $296 debt for $88 and another creditor agreed to settle 
a $2,784 electronics store account for $835. Applicant accepted and paid both offers. 
(Ex. A-1, A-2) He asserts a $150 department store account was settled for 30% of the 
amount owed. (Ex. B) 
 
 Applicant’s intent is to pay his debts. He is saving between $400 and $2,000 
each month to address his delinquent accounts. (Tr. 60) Because the household income 
can vary greatly each month, saving and then making a payoff is better than attempting 
to make regular monthly payments on delinquent accounts. (Tr. 70) He has received no 
financial counseling. (Tr. 61) In 2004, he purchased a new vehicle. He is current on his 
$696 monthly payments and has eight remaining payments. (Tr. 63) He and his wife are 
current on their $2,400 monthly truck lease and on the insurance, maintenance, and fuel 
for the truck. (Tr. 68) 
 
 At the hearing, Applicant was informed that he not only had to have reasonable 
cause to dispute a debt, but had to document his dispute. (Tr., 83) He was told he 
needed to document the validity of his claims.  
 
 A summary of Applicant’s judgment, accounts charged off, accounts placed for 
collection and other unpaid obligations, and their current status follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount Current Status 
a Judgment. $4,366 Unpaid.  
b Medical account incurred 
when Applicant injured 
his knee. 
$249 
 
Unpaid. Applicant admits owing this debt 
and contacted his insurance company 
regarding it. (Tr. 49)  
c School debt to obtain 
Applicant’s CDL.  
$5,833 
 
Unpaid. 
d Hospital collection 
account.  
 
$135 Unpaid. He has made no effort to 
determine the nature of the debt. (Tr. 51)  
e  Charged-off credit card 
account.  
 
$4,861 Applicant disputes this debt asserting he 
never had a credit card with this company. 
(Tr. 52) He provided no supporting 
documentation.  
 
5 
 
 
 
 Creditor Amount Current Status 
f Credit card account 
placed for collection.  
 
$5,355 Unpaid. Applicant does not dispute owing 
this creditor, but disputes the amount being 
claimed. He provided no documentation 
supporting his contesting of the debt with 
the credit bureau. (Tr. 54) 
g Credit Union account 
charged off. 
$582 Paid. (Ex. C)  
h Collection agency 
collecting for a telephone 
company account. 
$796 Applicant disputes this debt. He asserts he 
was charged a cancellation fee after he 
closed the account.  
i Collection agency 
collecting for a bank 
account.  
$4,433 Settled and paid. (Ex. E)  
j Collection agency 
collecting for a telephone 
company account. 
 
$170 Applicant disputes this debt. He asserts he 
was charged a cancellation fee after turning 
in his telephone. He failed to document any 
dispute. (Tr. 56) 
k Repossessed vehicle 
account charged off. 
$8,867 Settled and paid. (Ex. D) 
l Repossessed camper 
account charged off. 
$13,841
 
Unpaid.  
m Medical debt incurred 
when he hurt his knee. 
 
$279 
 
Applicant disputes this debt. He is talking to 
his health insurance provider about this 
debt. (Tr. 59) 
n Collection agency 
collecting for a collection 
account. 
$3,000 This is a duplication of the debt listed in 
SOR ¶ 1.i, which was settled and paid. (Ex. 
E, Tr. 86) 
 Total debt listed in SOR $52,767  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
6 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
 
7 
 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant has a history of financial problems. Applicant had one judgment and 13 
charged-off accounts or accounts placed for collection, which totaled approximately 
$52,000. Disqualifying Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” 
and AG ¶ 19(c), “a history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply.  
 
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
8 
 
 Applicant’s conduct does not warrant fully application of AG ¶ 20(a) or AG ¶ 
20(b) because he did not act more aggressively and responsibly to resolve his 
delinquent debts. Because of the number of debts, his financial problems are not 
isolated. A large number of the debts remain unpaid, and, therefore, is a continuing 
course of conduct.  
 
The mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20(b) only partially apply. Applicant and 
his wife were both unemployed, followed by attempts at self-employment, which were 
financially unsuccessful. The periods of unemployment and reduced earnings are 
factors beyond his control. However, he must also show he has acted responsibly under 
the circumstances. He and his wife’s annual combined income is approximately 
$80,000. After obtaining his full time job approximately two-and-one-half years ago and 
being informed of the Government’s concern about his delinquent accounts in 1999, he 
has paid approximately $5,000 on the SOR debts. This does not show an aggressive 
approach to addressing his delinquent accounts. 
 
The mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20(c) do not apply. Applicant has 
received no financial counseling and more than $35,000 of the debt has yet to be 
addressed.  
 
 The mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20(d) apply to some of the SOR 
accounts. Applicant has paid approximately $4,600 toward settling and paying two SOR 
debts (SOR ¶ 1.i, $4,433 and 1.k, $8,867) and three additional debts not referenced in 
the SOR. The delinquent accounts he settled and paid total approximately $16,500. He 
also paid an additional charged-off account (SOR ¶ 1.g, $585). Together these debts 
account for approximately $17,000 of the $52,000 in delinquent SOR debt. The 
mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20(d) apply to these paid debts.  
 
 Applicant’s ability to enter into monthly repayment plans is greatly hindered by 
the large variances that occur in his income from month-to-month. One month he may 
have sufficient income to make payments and the next month, with maintenance repairs 
and other expenses, his income may be sufficient only to meet his essentials. To 
address this problem, he asserts he is setting aside $400 to $2,000 per month to pay on 
his bills. However, he failed to show the money was being set aside or that payment 
was being made with this money.  
 
The mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 20(e) do not apply. Applicant disputes 
one charged-off account (SOR ¶ 1.e, $4,861) and three accounts placed for collection 
(SOR ¶ 1.h, $796; SOR ¶ 1.j, $170; and, SOR ¶ 1.m, $279), but provided no 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of his dispute. At the hearing, he was 
informed that he needed to do more than merely contest these accounts. He was told 
documentation was required as to any dispute that the debt was not his or that the debt 
no longer existed. For the mitigating conditions in AG ¶ 20(e) to apply, there must be a 
dispute of the obligation and applicant must provide documented proof to substantiate 
the basis of the dispute or provide evidence of actions to resolve the issue, which he 
has failed to do.  
 
9 
 
 
Applicant also asserted that the $3,000 account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.n) 
was a duplication of the account placed for collection (SOR ¶ 1.i, $4,433) which he paid. 
However, he provided no documentation supporting his assertion.  
 
There are some positive signs, such as him addressing approximately $17,000 of 
the $52,000 of delinquent debt and meeting his current daily living expenses and his 
intention to pay his debts. However, it is too early to conclude his financial problems are 
part of his past and will not recur.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Prior to 2001, Applicant and his 
wife’s joint annual income exceeded $80,000. In the mid-2000s, a downturn in the 
economy led to his unemployment in the home building industry and his wife’s job of 
selling homes. Not until August 2008, did their joint annual income reach $80,000. He 
has paid a portion of his debt, but a significant portion remains unaddressed.  
 
The issue is not simply whether all his debts are paid–which they are not–it is 
whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to hold a security 
clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) At this time, he has too much outstanding debt for me to 
conclude his debt no longer constitutes a security concern. However, this decision 
should not be construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the 
state of reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award of a security clearance 
in the future.   
 
 
10 
 
The awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is 
based on applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence 
presented. Under Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not recommended. 
Should Applicant be afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security clearance in the 
future, having paid the delinquent obligations, established compliance with a repayment 
plan, or otherwise addressed the obligations; he may well demonstrate persuasive 
evidence of his security worthiness. However, a clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude he has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a–1.f:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:   For Applicant     
  Subparagraph 1.h:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.i:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.k:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.l and 1.m Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.n:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
  
