 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08743 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LOUGHRAN, Edward W., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated alcohol consumption and criminal conduct security 
concerns. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On December 1, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline G, alcohol consumption. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) implemented by the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 21, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. On February 1, 2011, DOHA amended the SOR to add 
allegations under Guideline J, criminal conduct. The case was assigned to me on 
February 7, 2011. Applicant answered the amended SOR on February 14, 2011. 
 
2 
 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on March 2, 2011, and the hearing was 
convened as scheduled on March 24, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 12. GE 1 through 4 and 6 through 12 were admitted without objection. GE 5 
was admitted over Applicant’s objection. Applicant testified and called two witnesses, 
but he did not submit any documentary evidence. The record was held open until April 
8, 2011, for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant timely submitted a 
document that was marked exhibit (AE) A and admitted without objection. Department 
Counsel’s memorandum forwarding Applicant’s exhibit is marked Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. 
DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on April 1, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He seeks to retain a 
security clearance that he has held for several years. He attends college and is in his 
third year. He is married but separated. He has two children.1 
  
 Applicant was charged in 2003 with marijuana possession and possession of 
drug paraphernalia. He received a deferred prosecution. The charges were dismissed in 
2009. Applicant admits that he possessed marijuana and drug paraphernalia. He has 
not used illegal drugs since 2003.2 
 
 In January 2008, Applicant met a friend after work for some drinks. He estimated 
that he drank about 16 beers and six shots before he attempted to drive home. He 
drove through a stop sign and entangled his vehicle in a fence. He was stopped by the 
police after he untangled his vehicle. He was given a breathalyzer test. He believes his 
blood alcohol concentration (BAC) was .23%. He was arrested and charged with driving 
under the influence of alcohol (DUI), first offense; DUI, with BAC of .08 or more, first 
offense; and driving under the extreme influence of alcohol with BAC of .15 or more, 
first offense. He was convicted of the first charge and sentenced to 10 days in jail, and 
he was ordered to attend DUI counseling. The remaining charges were dismissed. The 
conviction was set aside in May 2009.3 
 
 Applicant’s wife went for a “girls’ night out” in August 2008. The following 
evening, Applicant found inappropriate pictures on her digital camera. He had been 
drinking, and they argued. She said something to the effect that he should just put a 
bullet in his head. Applicant’s brother was staying with them at the time. Applicant took 
his brother’s revolver and went to the back yard. The gun had one bullet in it. Applicant 
placed the gun to his head. His wife called the police. Applicant had the gun to his head 
when the police arrived. There was a stand-off for about 45 minutes, while the police 
attempted to convince him to put the gun down. Applicant eventually pulled the trigger 
seven times. The police used non-lethal force to subdue him. Applicant admitted that it 
“may have been one of the dumbest things [he had] ever done in [his] life.” He stated 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 35-36, 65; GE 1. 
 
2 Applicant’s response to amended SOR; GE 1, 3, 11, 12. 
 
3 Tr. at 36-42; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3, 9. 
 
3 
 
that he had no intention to kill himself. He stated he placed the gun to his head so that 
the police would not harm or blame his brother and his wife. He stated that he ensured 
that the bullet was not in a position to be fired each time he pulled the trigger. After he 
pulled the trigger five times, he moved the cylinder to again place the bullet away from 
the hammer when he pulled the trigger the sixth and seventh time.4 
 
 Applicant received inpatient treatment for six days following the revolver incident. 
He was diagnosed with depression, not otherwise specified (NOS), and alcohol 
dependence. The medical records containing the diagnosis were signed by a nurse 
practitioner (N.P.). His discharge plan included recommendations that he continue in 
counseling, seek anger management support, and attend Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
meetings. Applicant continued to drink alcohol after he was discharged.5 In February 
2010, Applicant responded to DOHA interrogatories, noting: 
 
I have made a few mistakes in my life that I don’t necessarily regret. We 
have to make mistakes in life to learn valuable lessons, and sometimes 
those mistakes come with severe penalties. I personally think that I am an 
honest and trustworthy person. Since my DUI, I have made every effort to 
not drink to the point of intoxication and I always have a designated driver 
or call a cab if I do drink any amount of alcohol.6 
 
 On July 17, 2010, Applicant was playing poker with some friends. He stated that 
he had two drinks. After the poker game, he went to a bar with his friends. The bar had 
a special in which a gallon of beer was sold. Applicant stated that he drank about 75% 
of the gallon of beer. At about 2:30 in the morning, he attempted to drive home on an 
interstate highway. He was falling asleep and attempted to pull off the highway and 
sleep in his pick-up truck. He fell asleep before he could park the truck. His truck hit a 
metal pole and two trees. Two travel trailers were also damaged when they were struck 
by the trees. Applicant’s airbag deployed during the accident. Applicant was transported 
to the hospital with head lacerations. He was treated for his injuries and diagnosed with 
acute alcohol intoxication.7 
 
 Applicant was evaluated on July 22, 2010, by a psychotherapist. He was 
diagnosed with alcohol dependence (moderated) and anxiety disorder NOS.8 
 
 In October 2010, Applicant was charged for the July 2010 crash with DUI with 
one prior DUI conviction within 84 months; DUI with BAC of .08 or more, with one prior 
DUI conviction within 84 months; driving under the extreme influence of alcohol with 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 42-50; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 2, 3. 
 
5 Tr. at 46, 50-52; GE 4, 5. 
 
6 GE 2. 
 
7 Tr. at 31-32, 52-59; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 3. 
 
8 Tr. at 60; GE 6. 
 
4 
 
BAC of .15 or more, with one prior DUI conviction within 84 months; driving under the 
extreme influence of alcohol with BAC of .20 or more, with one prior DUI conviction 
within 84 months; and criminal damage. The charges are still pending. Applicant has a 
court date in May 2011.9 
 
 Applicant stated that he has not drunk any alcohol since the July 2010 crash, and 
he does not plan to drink in the future. He attended faith-based alcohol counseling from 
September 2010 through February 2011. He completed 36 hours of a state-approved 
DUI/alcohol education and treatment program on March 5, 2011. He attends AA 
meetings. He stated that he has “turned [his] entire life around.” He acknowledges that 
he has had alcohol problems, but he does not believe he is alcohol dependent or an 
alcoholic. He stated that he had a strong urge to drink several weeks before the 
hearing. He points to the fact that he did not drink as proof that he is not an alcoholic.10  
 
 Two of Applicant’s supervisors testified to Applicant’s excellent job performance 
and his reliability at work.11 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
                                                          
9 Tr. at 33, 61-65; Applicant’s response to SOR; GE 7. 
 
10 Tr. at 31-34, 60-61; GE 3; AE A. 
 
11 Tr. at 66-71. 
 
5 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
The security concern for alcohol consumption is set out in AG ¶ 21:   
     
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22. The following are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent;  
 
(c) habitual or binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired 
judgment, regardless of whether the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol 
abuser or alcohol dependent; and 
 
(d) diagnosis by a duly qualified medical professional (e.g., physician, 
clinical psychologist, or psychiatrist) of alcohol abuse or alcohol 
dependence. 
 
 
 
6 
 
Applicant had DUIs in 2008 and 2010. In 2008, he was intoxicated and involved 
in a police stand-off. His alcohol-related incidents and pattern of alcohol consumption 
are sufficient to raise AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c).  
 
Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol dependent in 2008 and in 2010. The Appeal 
Board has stated that an administrative judge should take an expansive view of what 
constitutes a duly qualified medical professional.12 AG ¶ 22(d) is applicable.  
 
SOR ¶¶ 1.b and 1.e both allege that Applicant was diagnosed as alcohol 
dependent. When the same conduct or facts are alleged in separate allegations under 
the same guideline, one allegation must be concluded for the Applicant. SOR ¶ 1.e is 
concluded for Applicant as a duplication.  
 
  SOR ¶¶ 1.d and 1.f. allege the same conduct. SOR ¶ 1.d is concluded for 
Applicant as a duplication.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate alcohol consumption security concerns are 
provided under AG ¶ 23. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment;  
 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and 
 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
 Applicant’s most recent alcohol-related incident occurred in July 2010. He is 
pending trial for the charges related to that incident. That incident is recent, did not 
happen under unusual circumstances, and I am unable to determine that it is unlikely to 
                                                          
12 ISCR Case No. 07-00558 at 5 (App. Bd. Apr. 7, 2008). 
 
7 
 
recur. Applicant’s alcohol consumption continues to cast doubt on his reliability, 
trustworthiness, and good judgment. AG ¶ 23(a) is not applicable. 
 
 Applicant has not had a drink of alcohol since July 2010. He attended faith-
based alcohol counseling from September 2010 through February 2011; he completed 
36 hours of a state-approved DUI/alcohol education and treatment program on March 5, 
2011; and he attends AA meetings. The remaining mitigating conditions have some 
applicability. However, I am concerned that Applicant does not yet appear to accept the 
severity of his alcohol problems, he is pending trial for his latest DUI, and he has been 
sober for less than a year. I find that alcohol consumption security concerns remain 
despite the presence of some mitigation. 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct  
 
The security concern for criminal conduct is set out in AG ¶ 30: 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about an Applicant’s judgment, reliability, 
and trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person’s 
ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
 AG ¶ 31 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted. 
 
Applicant was charged in 2003 with marijuana possession and possession of 
drug paraphernalia. He admits that he possessed marijuana and drug paraphernalia. He 
received a deferred prosecution, and the charges were dismissed in 2009. He was 
convicted of DUI after a January 2008 arrest. The conviction was set aside in May 2009. 
In July 2010, he was drunk and hit a metal pole and two trees with his pick-up truck 
after he fell asleep. He is pending a court date for the charges resulting from that 
incident. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate criminal conduct security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 32. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
 
8 
 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant’s most recent criminal incident occurred in July 2010. He is pending 
trial for the charges related to that incident. No criminal conduct mitigating conditions 
are applicable under the same rationale discussed above in the alcohol consumption 
discussion.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines G and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered the favorable character evidence presented by Applicant’s 
supervisors. Applicant has three serious alcohol-related incidents. On the second 
occasion, he was drunk and held a revolver loaded with a bullet to his head while 
involved in a police stand-off. In July 2010, he drove his pickup truck on a highway in 
the early morning hours while drunk. He fell asleep and hit a metal pole and two trees 
causing damage to two trailers located close to the trees. He is pending a court date on 
the charges generated by that action. Despite the three alcohol-related incidents, the 
likelihood of incarceration, and two diagnoses of alcohol dependence, Applicant does 
not appear to accept the seriousness of his alcohol problems. He feels that he is in 
control of his problem, and he points to the fact that he was able to resist the urge to 
drink as proof that he is not an alcoholic. Applicant and those around him were lucky 
that no one was seriously harmed in the three incidents. I am not convinced that 
alcohol-related problems will not recur. 
 
9 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude Applicant has not 
mitigated alcohol consumption and criminal conduct security concerns. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1.d-1.e:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.f:   Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a-2.c:  Against Applicant 
  
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Edward W. Loughran 
Administrative Judge 
