1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 09-07805
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se   
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows
he has a history of financial problems or difficulties, which are unresolved. He has been
unable to make any payments on his delinquent debts, although he intends to begin a
repayment plan soon. Applicant did not present sufficient evidence to rebut, explain,
extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns stemming from his history of financial
problems. Accordingly, as explained below, this case is decided against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 Exhibit 1. 2
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on August 12,1
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a complaint, and
it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline known as
Guideline F for financial considerations.   
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned
to me October 2, 2010. The hearing took place November 17, 2010. The transcript (Tr.)
was received November 29, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the delinquent indebtedness
alleged, and his admissions are incorporated herein. In addition, the following findings of
fact are supported by substantial evidence.  
Applicant is a 37-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He is married and
has two minor children. His educational background includes an associate’s degree in
electrical engineering, which he completed in 2007. He has worked as an electrical
designer for his current employer since January 2008. He anticipates continuing his
education in the field of electrical engineering at his company’s expense. This is the first
time he has applied for a security clearance to work in the defense industry.  2
Applicant’s employment history includes four years of active duty military service
in the U.S. Navy. He was trained as an electrician and then work aboard a ship in that
capacity. Since his honorable discharge from the Navy in 1998, he has held full-time
employment as an electrician for two different companies. He worked for the second
company for about ten years until beginning his current position. To do so, he and his
wife and two children relocated, at company expense, to their current location, which is
near his wife’s family. 
Applicant’s wife’s employment history has not been as steady as her husband. In
1999, she was diagnosed with lupus. Before that, she had worked on a full-time basis.
She became very ill at one point, forcing her to leave employment, and she continues to
 Tr. 76. 3
 Exhibits 3, 4, 5, and 6. 4
 Exhibits A, B, and C. 5
3
receive treatment to this day. She returned to work as a receptionist in late 2000 or
2001, but was laid off from that job in 2002. She then decided to focus on school, as
she had previously started pursuing an associate’s degree in 2001. Thereafter, she and
Applicant had their first child in 2003, and the second followed in 2005. She finished her
associate’s degree in 2007. Once the family relocated in January 2008, she found a
part-time waitress job that allowed her to work at night and care for their children during
the day. She held that job until about September 2010, and she is now receiving
unemployment compensation. Applicant believes she was laid off because she was
slow and could not keep up the fast pace due to her medical condition.   3
The SOR alleges delinquent indebtedness ranging in amounts from $60 to
$5,176 for a total of about $17,332. The delinquent debts consist of collection accounts,
charged-off accounts, and an unpaid judgment. In addition to his admissions, the
delinquent debts are established by the documentary evidence.  To date, Applicant has4
been unable to make any payments on these debts. He and his wife considered
bankruptcy in the 2007–2008 period and sought the advice of a bankruptcy attorney.
Ultimately, they decided not to pursue bankruptcy because they considered it unethical.
They also obtained advice and counseling from a nonprofit entity.  After the second5
counseling session in November 2010, their financial counselor believed Applicant and
his wife were in a position to make reasonable payments toward their delinquent debts
beginning in December 2010. And that is the course of action Applicant intends to
pursue.  
Applicant has no other sources of income other than his employment and his
wife’s unemployment compensation. He has no money in the bank, investment
accounts, or other financial reserves. 
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a6
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.7
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 8
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 9
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).10
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.11
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.12
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.13
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 14
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).15
4
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As6
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt7
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An8
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  9
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting10
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An11
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate12
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme13
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.14
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.15
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.16
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 17
 See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an18
applicant is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness
or recurring financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  19
 AG ¶ 19(a).  20
 AG ¶ 19(c). 21
 AG ¶ 20 (a)–(f). 22
5
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it16
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant17
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline18
F is:
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  19
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information within the defense industry.   
The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. This raises security concerns because it indicates inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within20 21
the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish these two disqualifying
conditions. 
There are six mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline F.  Any of the22
following may mitigate security concerns:  
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).23
6
¶ 20(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
¶ 20(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
¶ 20(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;
¶ 20(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
¶ 20(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Of those mitigating conditions, the most pertinent are ¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d). I have
considered these three mitigating conditions in light of the record evidence as a whole,
and none, individually or in combination, is sufficient to rebut, explain, extenuate, or
mitigate the security concerns stemming from Applicant’s history of financial problems
or difficulties.   
Applicant has experienced life events that were largely beyond his control and
were factors in his financial problems. His wife’s illness and periodic unemployment
clearly fall into this category. Still, he is facing a small mountain of delinquent debt,
which he is just beginning to address. His promise or intention to make payments in the
future, although a circumstance that receives consideration, is not the same as a track
record of payments. At this juncture, it is too soon to tell if he will be able to address his
delinquent indebtedness in a meaningful or realistic way. Looking forward, based on his
history of unresolved financial problems, it is most probable that he will not resolve this
situation in the near future, and that his financial problems will continue or recur.  
To conclude, the evidence as a whole justifies current doubts about Applicant’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan and the clearly-consistent
standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this
conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept  and Applicant’s23
7
favorable evidence. Nevertheless, Applicant did not meet his ultimate burden of
persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is decided against
Applicant. 
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.m: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.          
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
