 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-07940 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: J. Theodore Hammer, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kathleen E. Voelker, Esq. 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated Foreign Influence security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On June 30, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence. DOHA acted under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on August 5, 2010, and requested a hearing before 
an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 8, 2010. DOHA 
issued a notice of hearing on November 10, 2010, and the hearing was convened as 
scheduled on December 21, 2010. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on 
December 30, 2010.  
 
2 
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Both Department Counsel and Applicant’s counsel submitted written requests 
that I take administrative notice of certain facts about Iraq. Neither side objected to the 
requests and they were approved. The requests and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HE) I and 
III. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.   
 
Evidence 
 
The Government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s exhibit index is marked as HE II. 
Applicant testified and offered Exhibits (AE) A through P, which were admitted without 
objection. Applicant’s exhibit index is marked as HE IV. The record was held open for 
Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted AE Q and R, which were 
admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant’s post-hearing memorandum is 
marked HE V.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 41-year-old employee of a defense contractor. She is seeking to 
retain a security clearance she has held without a violation since 2008. She was born in 
Iraq. She graduated from high school and college in Iraq. She married in 1988 and 
divorced in 2010. She has a son and daughter, ages 20 and 13, who were born in Iraq, 
but who are now United States citizens.1  
 
 Applicant came to the United States in 2000. Her husband came to the United 
States in 1998 and, once established, brought Applicant and their two children to this 
country. Applicant’s husband came to the United States as a political refugee because 
of his work with a foreign humanitarian organization after the Gulf War in 1991. 
Applicant became a United States citizen in October 2007.2   
 
 Applicant’s parents reside in and are citizens of Iraq. Her father is 79 years old 
and currently unemployed. He retired from the Iraq army in 1984 after serving for 25 
years. He receives a $200 monthly pension. Her mother is 69 years old and is 
unemployed. They have never left Iraq. Neither one is affiliated with the Iraqi 
government. Both have applied for immigration visas to the United States. Applicant last 
saw her parents in 2005 when she traveled to Iraq to see them. She has regular contact 
with them by telephone. 3 
  
                                                          
1 Tr. at 38-39, 41-42; GE 1. 
 
2 Tr. at 40-45; GE 1. 
 
3 Tr. at 64-72, 74, 76; GE 1, 2; AE L-M. 
 
3 
 
 Applicant has four brothers, three of whom are Iraqi citizens, and one is a 
German citizen. One brother performed mandatory military service in Iraq then moved 
to Germany were he now lives. He has no affiliation with the Iraqi government. One 
brother lives in Sweden and works for a commercial business there. He has no 
affiliation with the Iraqi government. Her two brothers living in Iraq work for a family 
business. Neither have affiliations with the Iraqi government. One of these brothers 
applied for a United States immigration visa. Applicant contacts her brothers about once 
a month by telephone.4 
 
 Applicant’s sister is a citizen and resident of Sweden. She has no affiliations with 
the Iraqi government. Applicant contacts her by telephone twice a week. Applicant’s 
former father-in-law resides in Iraq. He is unemployed and has no affiliation with the 
Iraqi government. Applicant has contact with him about once a month. One former 
sister-in-law resides in Iraq. She works for a commercial business and has no affiliation 
with the Iraqi government. Applicant has contact with her former sister-in-law about 
once a month.5 
 
 Applicant visited her family in Iraq in 2005. She went there after her first tour as a 
linguist. None of her family members are associated with the government of Iraq or 
have any connection to any terrorist organization. Applicant has not visited any family 
members in Iraq since 2005. Her family members in Iraq are not aware that she has 
been working in Iraq since 2009. The only time she communicates with them is when 
she returns to the United States on vacation.6 
 
 Applicant is a proud supporter and contributor to the mission in Iraq. She 
volunteered to perform linguist duties in Iraq from April 2004 to May 2005. She then 
volunteered to go back to Iraq in April 2009. She believes that she has valuable skills 
that can help both the United States and Iraq. She intends to return to the United States 
after her linguist duties are over. She wants her children to be educated in the United 
States.7  
 
 Applicant has been a linguist for defense contractors at various times since 2005. 
She worked in Iraq in 2005 and recently since April 2009. Applicant has experienced 
combat situations in Iraq, including rocket and mortar attacks and improvised explosive 
device (IED) detonations. She is willing to accept the danger because she believes in 
the mission. She would immediately report any attempt to seek information from her by 
any unauthorized source. She submitted copies of eight letters from military officers and 
contractor supervisors attesting to her competency and outstanding support for the 
mission. All the military officers she worked for unconditionally recommended her for a 
security clearance. She also received multiple certificates of achievement from senior 
                                                          
4 Tr. at 77-79; GE 2. 
 
5 Tr. at 50-54. 
 
6 Tr. at 53, 61-68, 71. 
 
7 Tr. at 50, 54, 58-59, 62-63, 92. 
 
 
4 
 
military and defense personnel for her outstanding support of Operation Iraqi Freedom.8 
One certificate noted: 
 
For your outstanding support, dedication, and leadership to [unit 
supported] of [location]. Your selfless service ensuring the security of all 
Iraqi citizens is vital to the preservation of freedom and prosperity. Your 
actions reflect distinct credit upon yourself, the people of [location], and 
the nation of Iraq. Our Country Not Ourselves!9 
  
Iraq  
 
The Iran-Iraq war (1980-88) devastated the economy of Iraq. Iraq declared 
victory in 1988 but actually achieved a weary return to the status quo antebellum. The 
war left Iraq with the largest military establishment in the Gulf region but with huge debts 
and an ongoing rebellion by Kurdish elements in the northern mountains. The 
government suppressed the rebellion by using chemical and biological weapons on 
civilian targets, including a mass chemical weapons attack on the Kurdish city of 
Halabja that killed several thousand civilians. 
 
Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, but a U.S.-led coalition acting under United 
Nations (UN) resolutions expelled Iraq in February 1991. After the war, Kurds in the 
north and Shi’a Muslims in the south rebelled against the government of Saddam 
Hussein. The government responded quickly and with crushing force, killing thousands, 
and pursued damaging environmental and agricultural policies meant to drain the 
marshes of the south. 
 
In 2003, the United States led a coalition to remove Saddam Hussein from power 
in Iraq. Following the swift invasion and successful removal of Hussein’s government 
from power, the United States endeavored to set a solid foundation of democratic 
institutions in Iraq. The Constitution in Iraq was ratified on October 15, 2005. After free 
elections in 2005, Iraq's new government, a parliamentary democracy, took office in 
March 2006.  
 
In 2007, 92% of Iraq’s exports were in crude oil and crude oil materials. Almost 
half of Iraq’s exports went to the United States. The United States’ ultimate goal in Iraq 
is to establish a peaceful, united, stable, democratic, and secure nation that will be an 
ally of the United States in the war against terrorism. The United States has invested 
thousands of lives and billions of dollars to assist in the reconstruction of Iraq. Success 
in Iraq is a high national priority of the United States. 
 
Despite the elections and new government, Baghdad, Mosul, and several other 
areas have especially serious problems with violent terrorists and insurgents. Although 
there have been recent improvements in the security environment, Iraq remains 
                                                          
8 Tr. at 58-59, 138; AE B-K, P-R. 
 
9 AE B. 
 
 
5 
 
dangerous, volatile, and unpredictable. Some areas of Iraq are more peaceful and less 
susceptible to terrorist attacks than others; however, all areas of the country are still 
very dangerous. Terrorists have the ability to strike most areas of the country with 
explosive devices and mines. Numerous attacks and kidnappings have targeted the 
U.S. Armed Forces, contractors, and other civilians, as well as Iraqis. Even with 
aggressive governmental action against terrorists by U.S. and Iraqi forces, the threat of 
terrorism in Iraq remains very high. Terrorist groups can conduct intelligence activities 
as effectively as state intelligence services. 
Human rights concerns include a climate of violence; misappropriation of official 
authority by sectarian, criminal, and extremist groups; arbitrary deprivation of life; 
disappearances; torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or 
punishment; impunity; poor conditions in pretrial detention and prison facilities; denial of 
fair public trials; delays in resolving property restitution claims; immature judicial 
institutions lacking capacity; arbitrary arrest and detention; arbitrary interference with 
privacy and home; other abuses in internal conflicts; limitations on freedoms of speech, 
press, assembly, and association due to sectarianism and extremist threats and 
violence; restrictions on religious freedom; restrictions on freedom of movement; large 
numbers of internally displaced persons (IDPs) and refugees; lack of protection of 
refugees and stateless persons; lack of transparency and widespread, severe 
corruption at all levels of government; constraints on international organizations and 
nongovernmental organizations’ (NGOs) investigations of alleged violations of human 
rights; discrimination against and societal abuses of women and ethnic and religious 
minorities; human trafficking; societal discrimination and violence against individuals 
based on sexual orientation; and limited exercise of labor rights. 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
6 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The security concern for Foreign Influence is set out in AG ¶ 7 as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 7. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and 
 
 
7 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information. 
 
  Applicant parents, two brothers, a former father-in-law, and a former sister-in-law 
are citizens and residents of Iraq. Iraq has human rights issues, and it has been 
victimized by terrorism. The presence of Applicant’s family members in Iraq creates a 
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion. 
It also creates a potential conflict of interest. AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b) have been raised by 
the evidence.  
 
Conditions that could mitigate Foreign Influence security concerns are provided 
under AG ¶ 8. The following are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; and 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest. 
 
 Applicant has been in the United States since 2000, and she has been a U.S. 
citizen since 2007. Her children and ex-husband are U.S. citizens. Her parents and one 
brother are seeking immigration visas to enter the United States. However, they still 
reside in Iraq. Iraq has continuing human rights and terrorist concerns. Because of the 
nature of the Iraqi government and the terrorist concerns, I am unable to find AG ¶ 8(a) 
applicable.  
 
 Applicant served the Iraqi mission at two different times since 2005. She served 
in a combat zone and has been subject to mortar, missile attacks, and IED detonations 
because she believes in the mission. She made a significant contribution to the war 
effort. She was trusted by military commanders to translate vital information and provide 
invaluable cultural insight. She has not visited any family members living in Iraq since 
2005. She does not communicate with her overseas family members while she is in 
Iraq. She credibly testified that she would report any attempt to coerce her to reveal 
classified information. The Appeal Board has stated that such testimony, standing 
alone, is of limited value, unless there is record evidence that the applicant has acted in 
a similar manner in the past in comparable circumstances, or that the applicant has a 
previous track record of complying with security regulations and procedures in the 
context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which he or she made a significant 
 
8 
 
contribution to the national security.10 In ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov. 
14, 2006), the Appeal Board discussed this issue: 
 
As a general rule, Judges are not required to assign an applicant’s prior 
history of complying with security procedures and regulations significant 
probative value for the purposes of refuting, mitigating, or extenuating the 
security concerns raised by that applicant’s more immediate disqualifying 
conduct or circumstances. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 01-03357 at 4 (App. 
Bd. Dec. 13, 2005); ISCR Case No. 02-10113 at 5 (App. Bd. Mar. 25, 
2005); ISCR Case No. 03-10955 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 30, 2006). 
However, the Board has recognized an exception to that general rule in 
Guideline B cases, where the applicant has established by credible, 
independent evidence that his compliance with security procedures and 
regulations occurred in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances 
in which the applicant had made a significant contribution to the national 
security. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-12363 at 2 (App. Bd. July 14, 
2006). The presence of such circumstances can give credibility to an 
applicant’s assertion that he can be relied upon to recognize, resist, and 
report a foreign power’s attempts at coercion or exploitation.  
 
I find Applicant has such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in 
America that she can be expected to resolve any potential conflict of interest in favor of 
the United States. AG ¶ 8(b) is applicable.  
 
Analysis 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
                                                          
10 ISCR Case 07-06030 at 3-4 (App. Bd. June 19, 2008). 
 
 
9 
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline B in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
I considered Applicant’s favorable character evidence and service in Iraq. I also 
considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iraq. Guideline B is not limited to 
countries hostile to the United States. “The United States has a compelling interest in 
protecting and safeguarding classified information from any person, organization, or 
country that is not authorized to have access to it, regardless of whether that person, 
organization, or country has interests inimical to those of the United States.”11 The 
distinctions between friendly and unfriendly governments must be made with caution. 
Relations between nations can shift, sometimes dramatically and unexpectedly. 
Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United States 
over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. Finally, 
we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields. The nature of a nation’s 
government, its relationship with the United States, and its human rights record are 
relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are vulnerable to 
government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is significantly greater 
if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family member is associated 
with or dependent upon the government, the country is known to conduct intelligence 
operations against the United States, or the foreign country is associated with a risk of 
terrorism.  
 
Applicant is a loyal U.S. citizen who has worked overseas under dangerous 
conditions in support of the national defense. She credibly testified that she would report 
any attempt to coerce her to reveal classified information. The Appeal Board has held 
that “generally, an applicant’s statements, by themselves, as to what he [or she] would 
do in the face of threats by a foreign government or entity are entitled to little weight. On 
the other hand, an applicant’s proven record of action in defense of the United States is 
very important and can lead to a favorable result for an applicant in a Guideline B 
case.”12 Iraq has human rights and terrorism issues. The complicated state of affairs in 
Iraq places a significant burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that her 
foreign family members do not pose an unacceptable security risk. She has met that 
burden.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated Foreign Influence security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
11 ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
12 ISCR Case 04-02511 at 4 (App. Bd. Mar. 20, 2007). 
 
10 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
                                                
 
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
