                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)
----------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 09-00267
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
______________
 Decision
______________
WESLEY, Roger C., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I conclude that
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns regarding his foreign preference and
foreign influence.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
Statement of the Case
On June 25, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued
a Statement of Reasons (SOR), detailing reasons why DOHA could not make the
preliminary affirmative determination of eligibility for granting a security clearance, and
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a security
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. The action was taken
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as
amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines (AGs) implemented by the
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006.
Applicant responded to the SOR on July 24, 2010, and elected to have his case
decided on the basis of the written record. Applicant received the File of Relevant
2
Material (FORM) on January 10, 2011, and did not respond with any information within
the 30 days permitted.  The case was assigned to me on March 24, 2010.  
Besides its 12 exhibits (characterized as Items), the Government requested
administrative notice of six documents: Background Note: Egypt, U.S. Department of
State (March 2010); Egypt Country Specific Information, U.S. Department of State
(September 2010); Country Reports on Terrorism 2009: Chapter 2, Country reports:
Middle East and North Africa Overview, U.S. Department of State (August 2010);
Country Reports on Terrorism 2009: Foreign Terrorist Organizations, U.S. Department
of State (August 2010); Human Rights Report: Egypt, U.S. Department of State (March
2010); and Egypt: Background and U.S. Relations, CRS Report to Congress (May
2009).  
Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for
administrative proceedings. See ISCR Case No. 05-11292 (App. Bd. April 12, 2007).
Administrative notice is appropriate for noticing facts or government reports that are
well known. See Stein, Administrative Law, Sec. 25.01 (Bender & Co. 2006). For good
cause shown, administrative notice was granted with respect to the above-named
background reports addressing the geopolitical situation in Egypt. Administrative notice
was extended to the documents themselves, consistent  with the provisions of Rule 201
of Fed. R. Evid. This notice did not foreclose Applicant from challenging the accuracy
and reliability of the information contained in the reports addressing Egypt’s current
status.
Summary of Pleadings
Under Guideline C, Applicant allegedly (a) applied for and received an Egyptian
passport in November 2004, even though he became a naturalized U.S. citizen in about
1991; (b) receives a monthly pension from his Egyptian army service with a retirement
rank of captain; (c) has a bank account in Egypt and has accumulated about $17,000
USD; (d) will inherit properties in Egypt; and (e) may return to Egypt to live once he
retires. 
Under Guideline B, Applicant allegedly (a) has a mother who is a citizen and
resident of Egypt; (b) has two brothers and two sisters who are citizens and residents of
Egypt; (c) has one sister who is employed by the Egyptian government; (d) has nieces
and nephews who are citizens and residents of Egypt; (e) maintains regular contact
with his family members in Egypt; and (f) traveled to Egypt in at least 1991, 1993, 1995,
1996, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2004, 2007, and 2009.
In his response to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the allegations with
explanations. He explained that he is a highly-ethical individual, who has worked hard to
continue to be the good citizen he has always been. He claimed he has never used his
Egyptian passport after becoming a U.S. citizen for travel purposes and uses it only as
evidence of his birth when visiting family members in Egypt. He claims that most jobs in
Egypt are government-owned, and he only travels to Egypt to visit his family.  
3
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 56-year-old senior staff electronic engineer for a defense
contractor who seeks a security clearance. The allegations covered in the SOR and
admitted to by Applicant are adopted as relevant and material findings. Additional
findings follow.
Background
Applicant was born in Egypt. He attended schools in Egypt and earned a
bachelor’s degree in engineering in 1977. Upon graduating from college, he was
commissioned to serve in the Egyptian Army. He served between 1978 and 1984, and
was approved to attend military education classes in the United States. (Item 7)  
While in the United States, Applicant met a U.S. citizen, who he married in July
1983. (Item 5) He has no children from this marriage and divorced his wife in
September 1986. (Item 5)  
Applicant accepted early retirement from the Egyptian Army in 1984 and moved
to the United States the same year. He was naturalized as a U.S. citizen in 1991 (Item
5) and  maintains dual citizenship with Egypt. Since immigrating to the United States,
Applicant earned a master’s degree in business administration from an accredited U.S.
college in April 1995.  He has no U.S. military service.
While Applicant expressed his exclusive allegiance to the United States, he has
declined to consider renouncing or relinquishing his Egyptian citizenship. (Item 8) His
cited reasons are several.  Loss of his Egyptian citizenship would place him at risk to
forfeiture of his inheritance rights in Egypt. (Item 8) Applicant expects to inherit 1/5 of
one and a half of his mother’s houses when she expires. (Item 7) Additionally,
maintaining his Egyptian citizenship has helped Applicant to better care for his family
members, who reside in Egypt. (Item 8) Medical care, land purchases, and other official
business transactions are easier to pursue with Egyptian citizenship. (Item 8) Without
Egyptian citizenship, he will not be able to conduct business in Egypt on behalf of his
mother and siblings. (Item 8)  
Applicant renewed his Egyptian passport in November 2004. (Item 4). It is valid
until November 2011. He has never used his Egyptian passport for travel, and
maintains it only so he can provide proof of his birth in Egypt to Egyptian officials, if
needed. (Item 4) Although open to relinquishing his Egyptian passport, he claims he
does not know how to do so.  So, his present intention is to retain his Egyptian passport
until it expires. (Item 4)  
Based on his Egyptian military retirement, Applicant receives a government
pension of about $150 a month in U.S. dollars. (Item 8) In accordance with his
disbursement instructions, the pension proceeds are deposited directly into a savings
account that he holds in an Egyptian bank. (Item 8) He has a current balance in this
account of about $17,000, a considerable increase over the $10,000 balance he
1  Recent reports out of  Egypt following Mubarak’s resignation suggest possible constitutional changes in
Egyptian succession and voting procedures.  At this time, it is too early to tell what effects, if any, these
discussed changes will have on selections and elections of new Egyptian leaders and the stabilization of
Egypt’s political, economic, and social institutions. At the present time, it is too soon to make reliable
predictions as to how  Egypt’s relations with its neighbors and W estern allies will  progress. 
4
reported. (Item 8) This account includes his military pension deposits and some
savings. (Item 7) He has no other assets or accounts in Egypt. (Items 7 and 8) 
Since becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant has not voted in an Egyptian election, 
run for public office in Egypt, or served in the Egyptian military. (Item 8) He has stated a
desire to retire to Egypt in the future (when he reaches retirement age) to enable him to
be closer to his family. (Item 8)
Applicant’s mother, two brothers, and two sisters all are citizens and residents of
Egypt. Besides his immediate family, he also has nieces and nephews who are citizens
and residents of Egypt. (Item 1) His mother’s sole source of income is from her
deceased husband’s retirement from the state-run newspaper. (Item 7) His two brothers
work at public high schools, one as a general manager, and the other as a vice
principal. (Item 7)
One of Applicant’s sisters is a tax auditor, possibly for the Egyptian government’s
tax department. (Item 7) His other sister and her husband work for the Egyptian
agricultural ministry as a senior account manager and engineer, respectively. (Item 7)
Applicant stays in touch with all of his family members by phone, email, or text
messaging about twice a month. (Item 8)
Records reveal that Applicant has traveled frequently to Egypt between 1991
and 2009 to visit family members.  He acknowledged his regular pleasure visits to Egypt
in 1991, 1993, 1995, 1996, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2004, 2007, and 2009 to visit his
immediate family members and other relatives.  (Item 8)  He assured that during his
many visits he never experienced any problems with customs officials or local
authorities. On these visits, he encountered no evidence of monitoring by a foreign
government and engaged in no activity or behavior that could place him in a position of
compromise. (Item 8)  
Egypt’s country status
Egypt is the most populous country in the Arab world and the second most-
populist country on the African continent. Background Note: Egypt, supra, at 2, U.S.
Department of State (March 2010). It is a republic with a strong executive and a
developing economy that relies extensively on U..S. aid.  See id., at 4-6; Egypt Country
Specific Information, supra, at 1, U.S. Department of State (September 2010).  Hosni
Mubarak succeeded Anwar Sadat as Egypt’s president following Sadat’s assassination
by Islamic extremists in October 1981. He was confirmed by popular referendum for
four additional six-year terms in September 2005.   See Background Note: Egypt,1
supra, at 4.  
Over the past 40 years, Egypt has been a strong military and strategic partner of
the United States. See Background Note: Egypt, supra, at 8 In the past, it has played
5
an important role in Middle East security and peace initiatives in the Gulf crisis and in
joint military exercises. The United States and Egypt have long enjoyed a strong and
friendly geopolitical relationship based on shared mutual interests in Middle East peace
and stability, revitalizing the Egyptian economy, strengthening trade relations, and
promoting regional security. See Background Note: Egypt; supra; Egypt: Background
and U.S. Relations, supra, at 6. 
Despite strong U.S.-Egyptian strategic interests, Egypt has continued to suffer
from terrorist attacks in recent years. See Background Note: Egypt, supra, at 5. These
attacks generally coincide with major local holidays and strike near tourist sites. See
Egypt Country Specific Information, supra, at 3. In April 2009, for instance, the Egyptian
government “uncovered a 49-person Hezbollah cell clandestinely operating in Egypt.”
See Egypt: Background and U.S. Relations, supra, at 20. Criminal networks that may
be associated with terrorist groups in the region, including Hezbollah, have used
tunnels located in Egypt’s northern Sinai region to smuggle humans, weapons, and
other contraband into Israel and the Gaza Strip. See Country Reports on Terrorism
2009: Chapter 2-Country Reports: Middle East and North Africa Overview, supra, at 3. 
Egypt’s human rights record is considered poor by U.S. State Department
standards, and serious abuses continue in many areas.  See Human rights Report:
Egypt, supra, at 1; Egypt: Background and U.S. Relations, supra (noting the inherent
tensions and contradictions facing U.S.-Egyptian relations as a result of the Egyptian
government’s repressive human rights practices).  
Egypt considers all children born to Egyptian fathers to be Egyptian citizens,
even if the Egyptian birth certificate or passport is not issued.  Dual nationals residing in
Egypt for more than six months require proof of Egyptian citizenship, such as a family
I.D. card.  Male dual nationals staying in Egypt for more than six months from the date
of arrival and who have not completed military service must obtain an exemption
certificate through the Ministry of Defense before they can leave Egypt.  Individuals who
travel to Egypt on their Egyptian passports are normally treated as Egyptian citizens by
the local government. Available consular assistance for those traveling on Egyptian
passports is extremely limited.  See Egypt Country Specific Information, supra, at 7.
Endorsements
Applicant provided no endorsements or performance evaluations on his behalf.
Nor did he provide any proof of community and civic contributions. Afforded an
opportunity to supplement the record, he provided no additional information about his
work and personal life.  
                        
Policies
The AGs list guidelines to be used by administrative judges in the decision-
making process covering DOHA cases. These guidelines take into account factors that
could create a potential conflict of interest for the individual applicant, as well as
considerations that could affect the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information. These guidelines include "[c]onditions that could raise a
6
security concern and may be disqualifying” (disqualifying conditions), if any, and many
of the "[c]onditions that could mitigate security concerns.” These guidelines must be
considered before deciding whether or not a security clearance should be granted,
continued, or denied. The guidelines do not require administrative judges to place
exclusive reliance on the enumerated disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the
guidelines in arriving at a decision. Each of the guidelines is to be evaluated in the
context of the whole person in accordance with AG ¶ 2(c). 
In addition to the relevant AGs, administrative judges must take into account the
pertinent considerations for assessing extenuation and mitigation set forth in AG ¶ 2(a)
of the revised AGs, which are intended to assist the judges in reaching a fair and
impartial commonsense decision based upon a careful consideration of the pertinent
guidelines within the context of the whole person. The adjudicative process is designed
to examine a sufficient period of an applicant’s life to enable predictive judgments to be
made about whether the applicant is an acceptable security risk. 
When evaluating an applicant’s conduct, the relevant guidelines
are to be considered together with the following AG ¶ 2(a) factors: (1) the
nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual’s age and
maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is
voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral chances; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the
potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
Viewing the issues raised and evidence as a whole, the following individual
guidelines are pertinent in this case:
 Foreign Preference
The Concern: When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate
preference  for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful
to the interests of the United States.  See AG ¶  9.
Foreign Influence
The Concern: Foreign contacts and interests may be a security
concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests,
may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group,
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication
under this Guideline can and should considered the identity of the foreign
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located,
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign
7
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.  See AG ¶ 6.
Burden of Proof
By virtue of the principles and policies framed by the AGs, a decision to grant
or continue an applicant's security clearance may be made only upon a threshold
finding that to do so is clearly consistent with the national interest.  Because the
Directive requires administrative judges to make a commonsense appraisal of the
evidence accumulated in the record, the ultimate determination of an applicant's
eligibility for a security clearance depends, in large part, on the relevance and
materiality of that evidence. See Kungys v. United States, 485 U.S. 759, 792-800
(1988).  As with all adversarial proceedings, the judge may draw only those inferences
which have a reasonable and logical basis from the evidence of record.  Conversely,
the judge cannot draw factual inferences that are grounded on speculation or
conjecture.
The Government's initial burden is twofold: (1) it must prove by substantial
evidence any controverted facts alleged in the SOR, and (2) it must demonstrate that
the facts proven have a material bearing to the applicant's eligibility to obtain or
maintain a security clearance. The required materiality showing, however, does not
require the Government to affirmatively demonstrate that the applicant has actually
mishandled or abused classified information before it can deny or revoke a security
clearance. Rather, the judge must consider and weigh the cognizable risks that an
applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Once the Government meets its initial burden of proof of establishing admitted
or controverted facts, the evidentiary burden shifts to the applicant for the purpose of
establishing his or her security worthiness through evidence of refutation, extenuation,
or mitigation.  Based on the requirement of  Exec. Or. 10865 that all security
clearances be clearly consistent with the national interest, the applicant has the
ultimate burden of demonstrating his or her clearance eligibility. “[S]ecurity-clearance
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” See Department of the
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988). 
Analysis  
Applicant is a senior staff electronic engineer for a defense contractor who
seeks a security clearance. Born and raised in Egypt, Applicant immigrated to the
United States in 1984 after completing his schooling and military service in Egypt.
After becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1991 and receiving a U.S. passport, he
retained his Egyptian citizenship and passport and became a dual citizen with Egypt.
His dual citizenship status enables him to retain all of the rights, privileges, and
responsibilities that inhere with Egyptian citizenship.  And when his Egyptian passport
was due to expire, he renewed it in 2004 and continues to carry it with him for
evidentiary purposes when he travels to Egypt to visit his relatives. 
8
Security concerns in this case relate to both foreign preference and foreign
influence associated with Applicant’s longstanding family and property ties to Egypt,
his retaining his Egyptian citizenship with no expressed intentions to consider
renouncing or relinquishing it, and his renewal of his Egyptian passport with the
intention of retaining it for citizenship evidentiary purposes when he travels to Egypt to
see his family. 
Foreign Preference 
Dual citizenship concerns necessarily entail allegiance assessments and invite
critical considerations over acts indicating a preference for the interests of the foreign
country over the interests of the United States. The issues, as such, raise concerns
over Applicant’s  preference for a foreign country over the United States. By virtue of
his retaining his Egyptian citizenship, accepting pension privileges, preserving
inheritance entitlements, keeping an Egyptian bank account, and renewing his
Egyptian passport after becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen, Applicant exercised
active citizenship with Egypt. His actions create considerable doubts about which
country he prefers. 
Afforded opportunities to surrender his Egyptian passport and consider
renouncing his Egyptian citizenship to the Egyptian Embassy, or other authorized
public authority, Applicant declined to do so.  As a result, Applicant may not claim any
of the mitigating conditions available for surrenders of foreign passports and
renouncements of foreign citizenship. Whether Applicant’s collective actions reflect an
overall preference for his birth country (Egypt), or retained dual citizenship options
that are not incompatible with his imposed fiduciary duties to the United States, are
issues that require reconciling with the security requirements demanded of those who
are afforded access to classified information. 
Since becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen, Applicant has taken several actions
and exercised Egyptian privileges that reflect active indicia of dual citizenship.
Specifically, he retained his Egyptian passport and used his passport to provide
Egyptian citizenship evidence during his regular travels to Egypt between 1991 and
2009. Applicant also exercises privileges of Egyptian citizenship in other discrete
ways: He continues to receive a monthly pension from his Egyptian army service; he
retains an Egyptian bank account that continues to increase in size; he preserved his
inheritance rights; and his considered retirement to Egypt when he reaches retirement
age. He declined to take any active steps to date to surrender his Egyptian passport
and expressed no tangible willingness to renounce his Egyptian citizenship. 
In assessing split-preference cases, the Appeal Board has looked to indicia of
active exercise of dual citizenship. Where the subject applicant has relied on his
foreign citizenship and passport to own and service property in a foreign country that
restricts ownership and inheritance rights to residents and individuals with citizenship
in that country, the Board has considered such actions to constitute important
considerations of preference. See ISCR Case No. 16098 at 2 (App. Bd. May 29,
2003). Because holding a security clearance involves a fiduciary relationship between
the Government and the clearance holder, preference questions acquire added
security significance. See Snepp v. United States, 444 U.S. 507, 511 n.6 (1980).  Split
9
preferences (as here) can place increased strains on the clearance holder where
conflicts over safeguarding  classified materials and protecting the clearance holder’s
private foreign interests arise. 
Here, Applicant used his Egyptian birth and citizen status to retain and use his
Egyptian passport when traveling to Egypt (even if limited to evidentiary purposes)
and renew his Egyptian passport that enables him to enter and exit Egypt with
minimum amounts of interference and inconvenience. His retention of his Egyptian
citizenship and passport enables him to qualify for acceptance of prospective
inheritance benefits and continued receipt of his Egyptian military pension benefits.
His actions represent material indicia of a preference for Egypt that cannot be easily
reconciled with the split preference he has shown for many years for his adopted
country, the United States.  
Preference questions require predictive judgments about how an applicant can
be trusted in the future to honor his fiduciary responsibilities to the Government. In
Applicant’s case, he was manifestly aware of the security significance of his choosing
to retain his Egyptian citizenship and an Egyptian passport while continuing to hold a
U.S. security clearance. For he has declined to take any actions to surrender and
renounce after being apprised of the Government’s concerns in the SOR. While his
choices may be understandable, they also reflect a current and ongoing preference
for his roots in Egypt over his expressed allegiances for the United States.   
Because Applicant retains his Egyptian citizenship and Egyptian passport while
holding U.S. citizenship and a U.S. passport, the Government may apply certain
provisions of disqualifying condition (DC) ¶ 10(a) of AG ¶ 9, “exercise of any right,
privilege or obligations of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through
the foreign citizenship of a family member.“ This DC includes but is not limited to:
(1) possession of a current foreign passport;
(2) military service or a willingness to bear arms for a foreign country; 
(3) accepting educational, medical, retirement, social welfare, or other such      
              benefits from a foreign country; 
(4) residence in a foreign country to meet citizenship requirements; 
(5) using foreign citizenship to protect financial or business interests in another 
              country;
(6) seeking or holding political office in a foreign country; and
(7) voting in a foreign election. 
Specifically, DC ¶ 10(a)(1),  (3) and (5) both apply to the established facts and
circumstances herein.  By retaining his Egyptian citizenship and passport, Applicant is
able to accept and preserve special travel, pension and inheritance rights in Egypt
that are not currently available to non-Egyptian residents and citizens.
10
Were Applicant to renounce his Egyptian citizenship and unconditionally
surrender his Egyptian passport, he risks a potential forfeiture of his pension and
inheritance rights and increased surveillance and inconvenience when he travels to
Egypt to visit his family members. His election to retain the Egyptian citizenship and
passport represent entirely rational and understandable choices on Applicant’s part.
They also reflect clear preferences for his home country of Egypt, where he could
retire in the future.  No mitigating conditions are available to Applicant under the facts
presented. 
Whole-person precepts do not enable Applicant to circumvent conclusions
reached through an analysis of the individual disqualifying and mitigating conditions of
the foreign preference guideline. Afforded an opportunity to provide endorsements,
personnel evaluations, and other data about himself, he declined to do so. 
Overall, Applicant is not able to persuade that his current preference is still with
the United States. Because he made considerable use of Egyptian privileges
associated with his retaining and exercising his Egyptian citizenship privileges and
passport, he manifested a preference for Egypt under the criteria as established by
the Appeal Board. Applicant fails to absolve himself of foreign preference concerns
associated with the presented issue of whether his preference lies with his adopted
country (United States), or the country where he was born and raised (Egypt).
Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
subparagraph 1.a of Guideline C.
Foreign Influence 
Applicant and his family have deep roots in Egypt, a country with historically
good relations with the United States, but also one occupied by terrorist groups and
credited with a poor human rights record. With the fall of the Mubarak government, it
is still too soon to make any sound predictive assessments about Egypt’s political
future and economic well-being. 
The Government urges security concerns over risks that Applicant’s family
members residing in Egypt, who either are employed by the Egyptian government or
receive government retirement benefits, might be placed at risk to disclose material
information about Applicant. Applicant still has his mother, two brothers, and two
sisters who reside in Egypt and maintain regular contact with Applicant. His Egyptian
contacts provide potential opportunities to exploit his retirement savings and other
cash assets in his bank account in Egypt as he further considers potential plans for
retirement in Egypt.
Because he still has his mother and four siblings with likely government
affiliations residing in Egypt, he could  be subject to undue foreign influence by
Egyptian government authorities to access sensitive proprietary information in
Applicant’s possession or control. As such, he and his family present potential
heightened security risks covered by disqualifying condition  (DC) ¶ 7(a), “contact with
a foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person
who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” of the
11
AGs for foreign influence. The citizenship/residence status of these family members in
Egypt, combined with Applicant’s own demonstrated preference for the country, do
pose some potential concerns for Applicant because of the risks of undue foreign
influence that could potentially affect his use of his monetary assets and close
immediate and extended family ties in Egypt.   
Applicant has both family members and material assets in Egypt that he pays
close attention to on a regular basis. Since becoming a U.S. citizen, he has made
regular trips to Egypt to visit his family members, and he carries his Egyptian passport
with him on these trips for Egyptian birth validation purposes. Possession of Egyptian
and U.S. passports on his family visits can enhance the risks of his movements being
monitored and scrutinized.  Potential conflicts that might be associated with his having
close family members, a bank account, and dual passports in his possession during
his trips to Egypt are potentially major ones. And from all that is known, most of
Applicant’s family members are either employed by the Egypt government or receive
government retirement benefits, and are sources of.potentially serious conflicts in the
relatively unstructured and uncontrolled political and security environment of present-
day  Egypt. 
 Because most of Applicant’s living family members residing in Egypt with
government affiliations or connections have potential conflict situations with Applicant
that could place them at risk to pressure and compromise, application of ¶ DC 7(b),
“connection to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential
conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information
or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by
providing that information,” is warranted herein.
The AGs governing collateral clearances do not dictate per se results or
mandate particular outcomes for applicants with relatives who are citizens/residents of
foreign countries in general. What is considered to be an acceptable risk in one
foreign country may not be in another. While foreign influence cases must by practical
necessity be weighed on a case-by-case basis, guidelines are available for
referencing in the supplied materials and country information about Egypt. Unlike the
old AGs, the new ones do take into account the country’s demonstrated relations with
the United States as an important consideration in gauging whether the particular
relatives with citizenship and residency elsewhere create a heightened security risk.
The geopolitical aims and policies of the particular foreign regime involved do matter. 
Based on his case-specific circumstances, MC ¶ 8(a), “the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or
the persons or activities of these persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.”  is
partially available to Applicant. Current security and political conditions in Egypt pose
some heightened security risks that could subject them to potential pressures and
influence from Egyptian government and military officials. 
Of little benefit to Applicant is MC ¶ 8(b), “there is no conflict of interest, either
because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group,
12
government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the United States, that the individual can be
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” Applicant’s
preferences and commitments to the United States are not sufficiently demonstrated
under these circumstances to neutralize potential conflicts that are implicit in his
monetary interests and relationships with his immediate family members and other
relatives in Egypt. MC ¶ 8(c), “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so
casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create risk for foreign
influence or exploitation,” has little  applicability, too, based on Applicant’s exhibited
frequent communications and regular visits with his family members in Egypt.  
 
 MC ¶ 8(f), “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.” is not available to
Applicant. His financial interests in Egypt are considerable and are likely to continue
to grow as they have over the course of the past three years.
Not available to Applicant either is MC ¶ 8(e), “the individual has promptly
complied with existing agency requirements regarding the reporting of contacts,
requests, or threats from persons, groups, or organizations from a foreign country.”
There is no evidence presented in the record that Applicant promptly notified and
briefed his employer on his returns from his visits to Egypt between 1991 and 2009.  
Whole-person assessment is not available to minimize Applicant’s exposure to
any potential conflicts of interests with his Egyptian family members residing in Egypt.
Without any endorsements, personnel evaluations, or other pertinent data to evaluate
Applicant’s overall security risks, any discounting of security risks assigned through
the use of the disqualifying and mitigating conditions of the foreign influence guideline
cannot be safely made. 
Overall, security concerns attributable to Applicant's having property interests
and family members residing in Egypt are not sufficiently mitigated to permit safe
predictive judgments about Applicant's ability to withstand any Egyptian risks of undue
influence. Unfavorable conclusions warrant with respect to the allegations covered by
Guideline B.
Formal Findings
In reviewing the allegations of the SOR in the context of the findings of fact,
conclusions, and the factors and conditions listed above, I make the following
separate formal findings with respect to Applicant's eligibility for a security clearance.
GUIDELINE C (FOREIGN PREFERENCE): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
13
GUIDELINE B (FOREIGN INFLUENCE): AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.f: Against Applicant
 Conclusions  
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s security
clearance.  Clearance is denied.
                                          
Roger C. Wesley
Administrative Judge 
14
