 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
   )    ISCR Case No. 09-04895 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O‟Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant abused marijuana on a monthly basis from 1978 until he was arrested for 
illegal drug possession in 1981. He smoked it again from 1985 until mid-1987, and once 
each around December 2003 and February 2004 on a boat. He abused cocaine and 
amphetamines on limited occasions more than 20 years ago. His illegal drug involvement is 
mitigated by his abstention over the past six years and commitment to abstain. Personal 
Conduct concerns established by his falsification of a May 1988 security clearance 
application are mitigated by subsequent efforts to correct the record. Clearance granted. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On May 6, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant, detailing the security concerns under Guideline 
H (Drug Involvement), and Guideline E (Personal Conduct), which provided the basis for its 
preliminary decision to revoke his security clearance. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
 
 
 2 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR allegations on May 26, 2010, and requested a hearing 
if his explanations were insufficient for a favorable adjudication. On August 24, 2010, the 
case was assigned to me to consider whether it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. On September 2, 2010, I 
scheduled a hearing for October 7, 2010. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Five Government exhibits (Ex. 1-5) and six 
Applicant exhibits (Ex. A-F) were entered into evidence. Applicant testified, as reflected in a 
transcript (Tr.) received on October 14, 2010. 
 
Procedural Rulings 
 
 At the hearing, before the introduction of any evidence, the Government moved to 
amend ¶ 2.a under Guideline E to substitute 1.b for an inadvertent erroneous cross-
reference to 1.c. The Government also proposed to clarify the SOR by correcting the 
omission of a paragraph designation and allege under ¶ 2.c that Applicant stated in his 
subject interview of August 11, 1988, that he had no future intent to use illegal substances. 
The SOR was amended without objection. 
 
           Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
The amended SOR alleged under Guideline H, Drug Involvement, that Applicant 
used marijuana with varying frequency from about 1975 to at least February 2004 (SOR 
1.a), including after he had been granted a security clearance in about March 1998 (SOR 
1.b); that he purchased marijuana (SOR 1.c); that he used cocaine about four times from 
1986 to 1987 (SOR 1.d); that he purchased cocaine (SOR 1.d); that he had used (SOR 1.f) 
and purchased (SOR 1.g) amphetamines; and that he was found guilty of June 1981 
offenses of drunk driving and possession of marijuana and amphetamines (SOR 1.h). 
Applicant was alleged under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, to have falsified his January 
28, 2008 Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) by falsely denying 
that he had ever illegally used a controlled substance while possessing a security 
clearance (SOR 2.a); to have falsified his May 24, 1988 Personnel Security Questionnaire 
(PSQ) by indicating that he had experimented with marijuana when he had in fact also 
used cocaine and amphetamines (SOR 2.b); and to have stated during his August 11, 
1988 subject interview that he had no future intent to use illegal substances (SOR 2.c). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the use and purchase of illegal drugs 
as alleged under Guideline H, although he indicated that he smoked marijuana once in 
February 2004 while he held a security clearance as a part-time on-call employee. 
Concerning the June 1981 offense, he was fined for drunk driving only. While he also 
 
 3 
responded “I admit” to the Guideline E allegations, he indicated that he had misinterpreted 
the e-QIP inquiry into any illegal drug use while employed in sensitive positions and 
responded “No” because he had never been employed as a law enforcement official, 
prosecutor, or courtroom official. Furthermore, he was not in a position directly and 
immediately affecting public safety when he used the marijuana in February 2004. 
Applicant admitted that he had not disclosed his amphetamine and cocaine abuse on his 
initial security clearance application submitted in May 1988, although he disclosed the 
information in an August 1988 subject interview. Applicant indicated that he did not intend 
any future illegal drug use as of his interview in August 1988, as he does not now intend 
any future illegal drug use. His admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After 
considering the pleadings, exhibits, and transcript, I make the following additional findings 
of fact. 
 
Applicant is 49 years old, married, and has a 15-year-old son. He has been 
employed since December 1997 with a federal contractor, during the last few years as a 
manager in communications services. (Ex. 1; A; Tr. 48.) From June 2002 to June 2004, he 
was on “sabbatical” from his daily duties, in a part-time on-call status. (Tr. 37.) He seeks to 
retain a Secret security clearance for his duties, which include supervising a team of 
technicians responsible for the maintenance and operation of corporate facilities where 
classified meetings are held. (Ex. 1; A.) 
 
Applicant began drinking alcohol and using illegal drugs as a teenager. While truant 
from school one day during the fall in 1975, he smoked marijuana provided by friends 
because he wanted “to act cool.” He abstained from illegal drugs for the next three years, 
although he abused alcohol as a minor. From the fall of 1978 to 1981, he smoked 
marijuana monthly in social situations. Applicant paid about $10 for a “dime” bag twice 
yearly, which was enough for a couple of joints. Between March 1979 and September 
1981, he also abused amphetamines (“black beauties” and “cross tops”) once or twice a 
week. Applicant and his friends took turns purchasing and sharing amphetamines. 
Applicant bought the drug every other month at a cost of $10 each time. (Ex. 4.) 
 
By 1980 or 1981, Applicant was drinking to intoxication almost daily. In June 1981, 
Applicant was pulled over for an equipment violation. He was arrested for driving under the 
influence of alcohol (DUI) on the highway, and misdemeanor possession of a controlled 
substance. (Ex. 4; 5.) He had an eighth of an ounce of marijuana in his car and 10 to 15 
amphetamine pills. He was fined $333 for DUI and $50 for possession of marijuana. 
Applicant failed to pay the fine for the DUI, and was cited for contempt of court. He spent 
17 days at a work camp, five of which were in lieu of paying the fine. Applicant did not 
attend a court-ordered alcohol education program because the cost was too high, and he 
moved. (Ex. 4.) Around summer 1983, Applicant was charged with his second DUI, 
although he pleaded guilty to a reduced charge of reckless driving. (Ex. 2; 4.)  
 
Applicant abstained from illegal drugs after September 1981 until mid-1985, when 
he resumed smoking marijuana. Until summer 1987, he smoked the illegal drug at parties 
or other social settings about once every three months when it was offered to him. In spring 
1986, Applicant snorted cocaine at a party when it was offered to him for free. Although he 
 
 4 
did not enjoy its effects, he snorted the drug three more times, with his last use in 
September 1987. Applicant bought cocaine twice, paying $25 for a quarter gram that he 
shared with friends. (Ex. 4.) 
 
As of May 1988, Applicant had attended a couple of colleges without earning a 
degree, but he had earned a certificate from a technical school. He started working as a 
junior illustrator for a defense contractor. (Ex. 1.) On May 24, 1988, he completed a PSQ 
for a Secret clearance. He disclosed his arrest record, including his conviction for DUI and 
marijuana possession, albeit mistakenly dated the offense as occurring in June 1980 rather 
than June 1981. He also responded affirmatively to question 15.a, “Have you ever used 
any narcotic, depressant, stimulant, hallucinogen (to include LSD or PCP) or Cannabis (to 
include marijuana or hashish) except as prescribed by a licensed physician?” He indicated 
that he “experimented with marijuana” approximately between 1978 and 1981, and that he 
possessed marijuana in quantity never more than an ounce. (Ex. 2.) Applicant was just 
starting out in his career in art, and he was worried about how information regarding drug 
use would be viewed for his security clearance and continued employment. (Tr. 44.)  
 
On August 11, 1988, Applicant was interviewed by a Defense Investigative Service 
(DSS) special agent, in part about his illegal drug abuse and why he omitted his 
amphetamine and cocaine abuse from his PSQ. He detailed his illegal drug involvement, 
which he indicated ended with a last use of marijuana the previous summer. He stated he 
had “no intentions of being involved with any illegal drugs in any way in the future.” 
Applicant acknowledged that he failed to list his amphetamine and cocaine usage on his 
PSQ because he was concerned about the impact of that information. He added that he 
had fully volunteered the information during his interview. (Ex. 4.)  Applicant was granted 
an interim Confidential clearance, but he left the job after only about six months when he 
relocated to his present area for employment. He was granted a Confidential security 
clearance in 1988 or 1989. (Tr. 35.) 
 
In August 1989, Applicant married his spouse. Applicant attended an art institute 
from September 1993 to May 1995, and a college from May 1995 to May 1997, although 
he did not complete a degree. In March 1996, Applicant and his spouse had a son. (Ex. 1.) 
In December 1997, Applicant began working for his current employer. He was apparently 
granted a Secret clearance in March 1998. (Ex. 1; Tr. 35.) 
 
Around June 2002, Applicant went on part-time on-call status with his employer at 
the request of his director. (Tr. 29.) Applicant could decline work offered by his employer, 
but he also had no benefits and no guarantee that he would be able to return to his 
previous job. However, Applicant was placed on on-call status to make it as easy as 
possible for him to return to work on completion of the sabbatical. (Answer.) He did not 
inquire into, and was not told, whether his security clearance would remain valid (Tr. 29.), 
and he still is not certain whether his clearance was in effect or put on hold while he was in 
an on-call status. (Tr. 41-42, 46.) Applicant was not debriefed from his classified 
responsibilities when he left full-time status in June 2008, although he denies knowing then 
that he should have been debriefed, if his clearance was withdrawn or put on hold. (Tr. 46-
47.) 
 
 5 
 
Through December 2002, Applicant, his wife, and his son sailed between ports off 
the Atlantic Coast of the United States. He worked for his employer for four days in 
November 2002, and did not access classified information during that time. (Tr. 36-38, 47.) 
Applicant and his family spent from January 2003 through March 2004 sailing between 
Caribbean ports. (Tr. 37-39.) Applicant smoked marijuana on two occasions when it was 
offered to him on another person‟s boat in the Caribbean; in December 2003 and around 
late February 2004. (Tr. 38-39.) Once back in U.S. waters, Applicant stopped off in a U.S. 
port in April 2004 and worked for his employer for one week. (Tr. 38.) 
 
Applicant returned to full-time employment with the defense contractor. On January 
28, 2008, Applicant completed his e-QIP for a Secret clearance. Applicant reported that he 
had been on-call from his work and sailing throughout the Caribbean from January 2002 
until March 2003 [sic], apparently based on a log kept onboard his sailboat. In response to 
question 24.a concerning any illegal drug use in the last seven years, he indicated that he 
used marijuana one time each around March 2002 [sic] and around December 2003, and 
that he did not intend to use marijuana again. He responded negatively to question 24.b, 
which inquired in part whether he had ever illegally used a controlled substance while 
possessing a security clearance. (Ex. 1.) 
 
In response to inquiries from DOHA about any current use of illegal drugs, Applicant 
indicated on September 30, 2009:  “Tried marijuana while in [the Caribbean] in February 
2004. It was one cigarette. My status of employment was Part Time On Call during a two 
year sabatical [sic].”  Applicant denied any intent to use any illegal drugs in the future. He 
admitted his use of marijuana in February 2004 when asked to list any illegal drug use 
since receiving his Secret clearance in March 1998. (Ex. 3.) 
  
 In his May 2010 answer to the SOR, and at his hearing on his continued security 
clearance eligibility, Applicant indicated that he was off by a full year on his e-QIP when he 
indicated he traveled in the Caribbean starting in January 2002 and used marijuana in 
March 2002. (Tr. 32, 39.) He indicated he misread question 24.b to be asking whether he 
ever used illegal substances while employed as a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or 
courtroom official holding a security clearance. He answered “No” because he had never 
been employed as a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official. (Tr. 40.) 
 
 On October 7, 2010, Applicant expressed a willingness to sign a statement to the 
effect that he would not use any illegal substances in the future. (Tr. 29.) Before the 
hearing ended, he wrote in his own hand the following:  “I [name omitted] am willing to 
accept automatic revocation of my clearance if any use of illegal substance is found to be 
true.” (Ex. F.) Applicant affirmed on the record that he did not intend to use any illegal 
substances in the future, and that he was willing to accept the loss of his clearance if he 
used illegal drugs in the future. (Tr. 52.) 
 
 Applicant is often required to attend Secret-level meetings to support and facilitate 
the technical requirements of the meetings. From September 2009 to September 2010, 
Applicant was responsible for over 64 Secret-level classified meetings where sensitive 
 
 6 
material was discussed, presented, or displayed. (Ex. A.) There is no indication that he 
performed his duties inappropriately. Applicant‟s finances appear to be stable (Ex. B.), and 
he has no criminal record in the state where he and his spouse have had their permanent 
residence for the past 20 years. (Ex. 1; C.) As of October 2010, Applicant was enrolled in 
college with a 3.418 cumulative grade point average. (Ex. E.) 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a „right‟ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant‟s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant‟s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
process. The administrative judge‟s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See 
also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or 
sensitive information). 
 
 7 
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
The security concern for drug involvement is set out in AG ¶ 24: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual‟s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person‟s ability or 
willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(a), drugs are defined as “mood and behavior altering substances,” 
and include: 
 
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in 
the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or 
cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens),
1
 and 
 
(2) inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
Under AG ¶ 24(b), drug abuse is defined as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a 
legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved medical direction.” Three disqualifying 
conditions under AG ¶ 25 are implicated. 
 
AG ¶ 25(a), “any drug abuse,” applies because of Applicant‟s abuse of marijuana 
once in the fall of 1975, monthly from the fall of 1978 to 1981, once every three months 
from mid-1985 to 1987, and once each in December 2003 and late February 2004. AG ¶ 
25(a) is also implicated because of his abuses of amphetamines once or twice weekly from 
March 1979 to September 1981, and of cocaine four times between spring 1986 and 
September 1987. AG ¶ 25(c), “illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, 
manufacture, purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia,” is 
established because of Applicant‟s purchases, albeit now very dated, of marijuana, 
amphetamines, and cocaine, and of his possession of illegal drugs when he used them 
and on the occasion of his arrest in June 1981. AG ¶ 25(g), “any illegal drug use after 
being granted a security clearance,” must be considered because Applicant smoked 
marijuana at least twice after he had been granted a Secret clearance in 1998. However, 
the evidence falls short of proving that Applicant knowingly abused marijuana in disregard 
of his clearance obligations. Although Applicant was not debriefed from his security 
responsibilities when he left full-time employment in June 2002, he maintains he was 
unaware of the effect of his on-call status on his clearance. Applicant should have 
confirmed his clearance, but because his on-call work in November 2002 did not involve 
                                                 
1
Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. § 
812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule I controlled substance. 
 
 8 
classified material, I accept his testimony that he was unaware whether his clearance 
remained in effect while he was sailing around the Caribbean. 
 
Applicant satisfies some components of the relevant mitigating conditions AG ¶¶ 
26(a) and 26(b). He has not abused amphetamines or cocaine in over 20 years, so his 
abuse of those drugs would fall within AG ¶ 26(a), “the behavior happened so long ago, 
was so infrequent, or happened under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual‟s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment.” However, Applicant‟s dated drug abuse cannot be evaluated in isolation from 
his marijuana abuse in December 2003 and in February 2004, after he had resolved to 
abstain from all illegal drugs in the future. 
 
As to whether AG ¶ 26(b), “a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the 
future,” is established, there is no evidence that Applicant currently associates with the 
persons with whom he abused illegal drugs. AG ¶ 26(b)(1), “disassociation from drug-using 
associates and contacts,” applies, but it is not controlling in mitigation given Applicant‟s 
abuse of marijuana at age 42, some 16 years after he had presumably put his drug use 
and his socializing with drug abusers behind him. Similarly, while the circumstance of his 
latest drug use, on a boat in the Caribbean, may be unlikely to reoccur, AG ¶ 26(b)(2), 
“changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used,” does not guarantee 
against recurrence of future abuse. That said, there is no evidence that Applicant sought 
out the marijuana that he smoked in 2003 and 2004. Nothing about Applicant‟s present 
lifestyle appears to be conducive to illegal drug involvement. His employment is stable. 
Applicant and his spouse are happily married and their finances are sound. Applicant has 
demonstrated an ability to abstain from illicit drugs while actively carrying out his 
responsibilities for the defense contractor, including for the last six years since he resumed 
his full-time status. And his abuse, while on call in the Caribbean, appears to be an 
aberration in otherwise law-abiding conduct for the past 20 years. Despite Applicant‟s 
relapse after 16 years of being drug-free, his present 6.5 years of abstinence qualifies as  
“an appropriate period of abstinence” under AG ¶ 26(b)(3). If it was not clear to him before, 
he now knows that any future illegal drug involvement, on or off the job, in full-time or on-
call status, could result in the loss of his security clearance and potentially his employment. 
He has demonstrated a willingness to comply with Department of Defense requirements by 
executing the “signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any 
violation” required under AG ¶ 26(b)(4). He is unlikely to abuse any illegal drug in the 
future. 
 
Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in Guideline E, AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual‟s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
 
 9 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Personal conduct security concerns are raised by Applicant‟s acknowledged 
misrepresentation of his illegal drug abuse history on his May 1988 PSQ. Applicant not 
only omitted his abuses of amphetamines and cocaine as alleged in SOR 2.b, but he also 
minimized the extent of his marijuana involvement. His abuse on the order of monthly from 
the fall of 1978 to 1981 and once every three months from mid-1985 to summer 1987 
clearly went beyond the experimentation he reported on his PSQ. Applicant‟s intentional 
misrepresentations implicate AG ¶ 16(a),“deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification 
of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities.” 
 
However, Applicant denies that he intentionally falsified his January 2008 e-QIP 
when he responded “No” to whether he had ever illegally used a controlled substance while 
employed as a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom official; while possessing 
a security clearance; or while in a position directly and immediately affecting public safety. 
Accordingly, the burden is on the Government to prove Applicant lied on his e-QIP. A 
finding of intentional falsification can be inferred if the evidence shows that the answer was 
false and not attributable to good-faith mistake or inadvertence. Applicant asserted in his 
answer and at his hearing that he misinterpreted the question to pertain only to those 
persons who had been employed as a law enforcement officer, prosecutor, or courtroom 
official. By logical extension, had Applicant properly understood the question to apply to 
any persons holding a security clearance, he would have responded “Yes” because he 
knew he had smoked marijuana after he had been granted a security clearance. Yet, 
Applicant also testified at his hearing that he did not come to know that his security 
clearance was in effect when he smoked the marijuana while on sabbatical until he had to 
respond to questions about using marijuana while he held a clearance. (Tr. 41.) Although 
not entirely clear whether Applicant was referring to the e-QIP, the interrogatories, or even 
his answer, DOHA asked Applicant in September 2009 to respond to the following 
statement:  “You have been a cleared Department of Defense contractor, holding a Secret 
level clearance since March 1998. Please list any illegal drug use, to include narcotics, 
dangerous drugs, psychoactive or controlled substances, marijuana or hashish that you 
have used since receiving your clearance.” DOHA‟s assertion about his clearance would 
give Applicant reason to believe that his clearance was valid during his on-call status, 
which he may well have not understood when he completed his e-QIP. 
 
The variation in Applicant‟s accounts of his most recent marijuana abuse must be 
considered in assessing whether to accept that he acted in good faith. Under section 9 of 
the e-QIP concerning where he has lived for the last seven years, Applicant accurately 
indicated that he lived aboard his sailing vessel with his spouse and son outside the United 
States from January 2003 to March 2004. He reported that they then sailed in U.S. waters 
until August 2004, although according to his hearing testimony, his sabbatical ended in 
June 2004. Yet, despite the accurate reporting of when he was outside of the United States 
 
 10 
in answer to section 9, he was off by one year when he listed his visits to Caribbean 
nations in section 18 as occurring between January 2002 and March 2003. There is little 
information available that could shed light on the process Applicant undertook to gather his 
travel data and complete the e-QIP. Even with estimating his drug use on his e-QIP, he 
provided no credible explanation for why he was off by two years in reporting marijuana 
use in March 2002, but was seemingly accurate about his December 2003 abuse. That 
said, the evidence falls short of demonstrating that Applicant deliberately falsified questions 
24.a or 24.b on his recent e-QIP. Whereas Applicant listed two uses of marijuana on his e-
QIP in the last seven years, including a last use in December 2003 [sic], and he corrected 
the date of his last use when he responded to DOHA interrogatories, it does not appear 
that he intended to conceal information from the Government. He indicated in response to 
question 26 that he was granted a Secret clearance based on a background investigation 
around March 1998, and he listed marijuana use after that date on his e-QIP, so it is 
difficult to see what Applicant would have gained from a negative response to question 
24.b concerning any drug use while he had a clearance. 
 
Concerning potential mitigation of his May 1988 PSQ falsification, AG ¶ 17(a), “the 
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts,” does not apply without evidence that 
Applicant corrected the record voluntarily, before he was questioned during his August 
1988 subject interview. However, he was candid about his abuse of illicit substances during 
that interview, and “so much time has passed” since he minimized his drug use on his May 
1988 PSQ to apply AG ¶ 17(c), “the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or 
the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual‟s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment,” to the falsification. AG ¶ 17(d), “the individual has acknowledged the 
behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to 
alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or 
other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur,” is also implicated in 
that Applicant, who is the sole source of information about his latest marijuana use, 
corrected the record when he responded to DOHA interrogatories, well before the SOR 
was issued. 
 
Applicant‟s abuse of marijuana in Caribbean waters around December 2003 and 
February 2004 was an exercise of poor judgment (SOR 2.c), but it does not preclude me 
from accepting that he had no intent to smoke marijuana in the future as of his DSS 
interview in August 1988. There is no evidence that Applicant abused any illegal drug over 
the next 15 years, which in and of itself would tend to substantiate that he did not intend to 
use any illegal drug again and that he was not lying when he denied any future intent to the 
agent. His recent abuse bears implications for whether he can be counted on to abide by 
his written statement of intent to abstain with automatic revocation of his clearance should 
he use any illicit substance, but those concerns have been resolved in his favor, largely 
because of his recent candor about his marijuana use and a present lifestyle not conducive 
to illegal drugs. 
 
 11 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant‟s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual‟s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept. 
 
Applicant exercised poor judgment by smoking marijuana on two relatively recent 
occasions, more than 15 years after he had put his drug use behind him. The circumstance 
of the use on another person‟s boat in the Caribbean, while Applicant was in an on-call 
status for his employer, does not minimize the security concerns, especially where 
Applicant‟s clearance was apparently still valid. That said, Applicant was the sole source of 
the information about that drug abuse, and he is not likely to risk his employment by using 
illegal drugs in the future. His drug abuse is not to be condoned, but it was sufficiently 
limited to where he can be counted on to abide by his stated willingness to abstain with 
automatic revocation of his clearance should he again abuse any illicit substance. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the amended 
SOR, as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline H:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.e:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.f:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.g:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.h:  For Applicant 
 
 
 12 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:  For Applicant 
   
 Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance.  
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
