1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 09-08710 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Stephanie Hess, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate security concerns under Guideline F (financial 
considerations). Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 17, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On June 2, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on June 25,  2010, and DOHA received her answer 
on June 28, 2010. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on July 20, 2010. The 
case was assigned to another administrative judge on July 27, 2010, and was 
reassigned to me on August 8, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on September 7, 
2 
 
2010, scheduling the hearing for September 29, 2010. The hearing was held as 
scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 4, which were 
received without objection. The Applicant did not offer any exhibits at her hearing, but 
did testify on her own behalf. I held the record open until October 13, 2010, to afford her 
the opportunity to submit additional evidence. Applicant did not submit additional 
evidence post-hearing. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on October 7, 2010. 
The record closed on October 13, 2010. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1a to 1g, 1j to 1o, and 1q to 1s; and denied SOR ¶¶ 
1h, 1i, and 1p. Her admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. 
 
Background Information 
 
 Applicant is a 33-year-old security administrative assistant, who has been 
employed by a defense contractor since June 2009. She has an interim secret 
clearance. Successfully vetting for a security clearance is a condition of her continued 
employment. (GE 1, Tr. 12-14.) 
 
 Applicant graduated from high school in May 1996. She attended community 
college for the fall semester 2003. She married in January 2004 and divorced her 
husband in October 2006. Applicant has two sons ages 12 and 3, who reside with her. 
The father of her 12-year-old son is required to pay $237 in monthly child support; 
however, Applicant added that he is “[a]lways behind.” Applicant has a relationship with 
a “significant” other, who lives with her and is the father of her three-year-old son.  She 
did not serve in the armed forces. (GE 1, Tr. 14-19, 47-48.) 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR cites 20 allegations under this concern.1
 
 Broken down, the 
allegations consist of 19 debts totalling $31,198. The 20th allegation cites a 2001 arrest 
for writing a bad check. Of those 19 debts, 15 are collection accounts, 2 are charged-off 
accounts, 1 is a judgment, and 1 is a warrant for writing a bad check. These debts have 
been accruing for many years, beginning as early as 2001 or before, and are ongoing. 
(GE 3.) Applicant attributes her ongoing financial problems to being a single mother 
working low-wage jobs, uncovered medical expenses, lack of consistent child support, 
and a period of unemployment. (GE 2(I-8), Tr. 54.) She was unemployed from 
December 2008 to June 2009. (GE 1, Tr. 57.) Her younger son has significant medical 
problems to include polycystic kidneys, fibrosis of the liver, asthma, high potassium, and 
gastroesophageal reflux disease. He receives Supplemental Security Income from 
Social Security. (Tr. 47-48, 54.) 
                                                          
1 The SOR mistakenly lists two separate allegations under 1k. 
3 
 
Applicant appeared at her hearing poorly prepared to discuss her debts, and it 
became clear shortly after the hearing commenced that she had done little if anything to 
make any headway in addressing her indebtedness. She did discuss the limited 
progress she made on four debts – her student loan account that had been placed in 
collection in the amount of $3,453, a collection account for $134 for writing a bad check 
to her city of residence, a collection account for $129 owed to a utility company, and a 
2007 arrest for writing a $160 bad check to her local court. As a result of writing a $160 
bad check to her local court, she was ordered to pay the full check amount and court 
costs. (SOR ¶¶ 1h, 1o, 1q, 1r.)  As a result of her writing the $134 bad check to her city 
of residence, she was fined and ordered attend to a finance class. (SOR ¶ 1s.) She has 
been paying down her student loan at a rate of $25 or $50 a month, depending on what 
she can afford. Attached to her February 2010 Response to DOHA Interrogatories was 
a February 2010 statement from the student loan creditor indicating her loan balance 
had been paid down to $2,829.27. She stated with sufficient certainty that the remaining 
three debts had been paid. (GE 2(I-15), Tr. 27-29, 35-38.) 
 
 She provided little or no evidence that she contacted her creditors or that she 
made any attempt to resolve her financial situation. She has not sought formal financial 
counselling. She provided no documentation that showed she had paid or did not owe 
the debts she denied. At her hearing and while the record remained open post-hearing, 
she did not submit any documentary mitigating evidence. (Tr. 20-41.) She does not 
have any credit cards, nor does she have a savings account. Applicant does not have a 
retirement plan. At the hearing date, she had $11 in her checking account. (Tr. 45-46.) 
With her current income, Applicant is only able to maintain the bare necessities such as 
food, clothing, and shelter. Apart from her student loan, which she is slowly paying 
down, and three other debts she has paid, the other debts remain unpaid. Given her 
current situation, she acknowledged that she is unable to pay these debts. (Tr. 51-52.) 
 
Character Evidence 
 
In her SOR Response, Applicant submitted a reference letter from a coworker. 
Her coworker stated that Applicant was an excellent worker and a problem solver as 
well as possessing a work ethic, energy, and creativity. Her coworker recommended her 
for “any endeavor [Applicant] chooses to pursue.” (SOR Response.) 
 
Policies 
 
The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information. Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
4 
 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. 
Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, a 
clearance decision is merely an indication that the Applicant has or has not met the 
strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing 
a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 
(App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). 
 
 
 
   
 
5 
 
Analysis 
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  Under Guideline F, the concern is that an Applicant’s failure or inability to live 
within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet financial obligations may indicate poor self-
control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which 
can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to protect 
classified information. An individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having 
to engage in illegal acts to generate funds. (AG ¶ 18.) 
 
 Applicant accumulated 19 debts totaling $31,198. She has made progress on 
four debts. However, the remaining 15 debts have not been paid or remain unresolved. 
Applicant’s history of indebtedness is well documented and has been ongoing since at 
least 2001. AG ¶ 19(a): “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶ 19(c): “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations” apply. 
 
  Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct does not warrant full application of AG ¶ 20(a) because there 
is more than one delinquent debt and her financial problems are not isolated. Therefore, 
her debt is “a continuing course of conduct” under the Appeal Board’s jurisprudence. 
See ISCR Case No. 07-11814 at 3 (App. Bd. Aug. 29, 2008) (citing ISCR Case No. 01-
03695 (App. Bd. Oct. 16, 2002)).  
6 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 20(b), Applicant receives partial credit because she was unemployed 
preceding her current employment. This misfortune no doubt impacted her ability to pay 
bills. However, to receive full credit under this mitigating condition, Applicant has to 
demonstrate that she acted responsibly under the circumstances. There is no evidence 
that Applicant remained in contact with her creditors or tried to make minimum 
payments during this time.2
 
  
AG ¶ 20(c) is not applicable because Applicant did not seek financial counseling. 
Furthermore, her finances are not under control. Likewise, there is not sufficient 
evidence in the record to establish full mitigation under AG ¶ 20(d).3
 
 Applicant’s 
unemployment covered a relatively short span of her lengthy period of indebtedness. 
Applicant offered little or no evidence that she had made or is making a good-faith effort 
to repay her creditors or otherwise resolve her debts. Applicant receives some credit for 
attempting to pay down the arrearage on her student loans and for paying four of her 
smaller debts.  AG ¶ 20(e) is not applicable. Although Applicant disputes the validity of 
several of the debts she denied, she provided no documentation that she contacted the 
creditors in question or that she disputed the validity of the debts on her credit reports. 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
                                                          
2 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside 
his control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner 
when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) 
(citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he 
maintained contact with his creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep his debts 
current. 
 
3 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option in order to 
claim the benefit of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be 
an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines 
and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).  
The comments in the Analysis section of this decision are incorporated in the 
whole-person concept analysis. Applicant’s financial indebtedness is ongoing. I 
recognize that Applicant has been faced with several life challenges; however, her 
financial problems did not occur overnight nor can they be pinpointed to a particular 
event or occasion. They have been ongoing since at least 2001, before the birth of her 
second son and before her lay off. I was also concerned with the lack of financial 
situational awareness she demonstrated during her hearing. I consider her 2001 arrest 
for writing a bad check mitigated given the passage of time as well as the fact she 
complied with all court imposed punishment. With regard to the remaining unresolved 
debts, Applicant demonstrated that she has not reached a state of financial 
responsibility, nor is she likely to reach such a state in the near future.  After weighing 
the disqualifying and mitigating conditions and all the facts and circumstances in the 
context of the whole-person concept, I conclude she has not mitigated security 
concerns pertaining to financial considerations.  
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my careful consideration of the whole-person factors and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the adjudicative 
process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the adjudicative guidelines. 
Applicant has not fully mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons 
stated, I conclude she is not eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 1a – 1g:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1h:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1i – 1n:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1o:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1p:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraphs 1q – 1s:  For Applicant 
8 
 
Decision 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
