 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 09-01379 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Archibald J. Thomas, III, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns regarding foreign influence.  Eligibility 
for a security clearance and access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 15, 2008, Applicant applied for a security clearance and 
submitted both an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) and 
Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions versions of a Security Clearance Application (SF 
86).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
furnished him a set of foreign influence interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on June 9, 2009.2 On an unspecified date, DOHA furnished him another 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86 - Archival Copy, dated September 15, 2008); Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86 - 
Questionnaire for Sensitive Positions, dated September 15, 2008). Henceforth, because the Archival Copy of the SF 
86 is very difficult to read, and the information in it is identical to the other version of the SF 86, further references will 
cite the other version. 
 
2 Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated June 9, 2009). 
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
set of interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories on June 9, 2009.3 On April 
15, 2010, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to Executive 
Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), 
as amended and modified; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and 
modified (Directive); and Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For Access 
to Classified Information (effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 
2006) (AG) for all adjudications and other determinations made under the Directive. The 
SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and detailed 
reasons why DOHA could not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive 
that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security 
clearance for Applicant. The SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to 
determine whether a clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on April 23, 2010. In a sworn 
statement, dated April 28, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department Counsel indicated the 
Government was prepared to proceed on July 8, 2010, and the case was assigned to 
me on August 4, 2010. A Notice of Hearing was issued on August 23, 2010, and I 
convened the hearing, as scheduled, on September 24, 2010. 
 
During the hearing, 2 Government exhibits (GE 1-2) and 11 Applicant exhibits 
(AE A-I, AE K-L) were admitted into evidence, without objection. There was no AE J. 
Applicant and three other witnesses testified. The transcript of the hearing (Tr.) was 
received on October 1, 2010. 
 
Rulings on Procedure 
 
At the commencement of the hearing, Department Counsel requested that I take 
administrative notice of certain enumerated facts pertaining to India, appearing in 15 
written submissions. Facts are proper for administrative notice when they are easily 
verifiable by an authorized source and relevant and material to the case. In this 
instance, the Government relied on source information regarding India in publications of 
the U.S. Department of State,4 U.S. Department of Justice,5 U.S. Department of 
 
3 Government Exhibit 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated June 9, 2009). 
 
4 U.S. Department of State, Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs, Background Note: India, dated 
November 2, 2009; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, 2009 Human Rights 
Reports: India, dated March 11, 2010; U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Travel Alert, dated May 
13, 2010; U.S. Department of State, Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism, Country Reports: South and 
Central Asia Overview, Country Reports on Terrorism 2008, dated April 30, 2009; U.S. Department of State, Country 
Specific Information: India, dated February 17, 2010; and U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Public Affairs, U.S. – 
India Agreements and Achievements, dated July 20, 2009. 
 
5 U.S. Department of Justice, Press Release, Businessman Pleads Guilty to Supplying Indian Government 
with Controlled Technology, dated March 13, 2008. 
 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
Commerce,6 the Congressional Research Service,7 and the Office of the National 
Counterintelligence Executive.8 
 
The seven press releases were presented apparently to substantiate that India 
actively pursues collection of U.S. economic and propriety information, and, therefore, 
Applicant’s relationships with his various family members and extended family members 
in India raises suspicion of him. None of the cases cited involves Applicant personally or 
involved espionage through any familial relationship. The anecdotal evidence of criminal 
wrongdoing of other U.S. citizens is of decreased relevance to an assessment of 
Applicant’s security suitability, especially where there is no evidence that Applicant, or 
any member of his family or extended family, was ever involved in any aspect of the 
cited cases or ever targeted by any Indian intelligence official. Furthermore, these press 
releases are little more than self-congratulatory public relations products issued by 
public relations offices, with the collateral effect of deterring other criminals 
contemplating possible attacks on our national security. 
 
After weighing the reliability of the source documentation and assessing the 
relevancy and materiality of the facts proposed by the Government, pursuant to Rule 
201, Federal Rules of Evidence, I take administrative notice of certain facts,9 as set 
forth below under the India subsection. However, while I do not reject the facts set forth 
in the various press releases, the inference that somehow Applicant or his family, or his 
extended family participated in criminal activity was not argued during the hearing and is 
specifically rejected.  
 
6 U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release: Export Privileges Denied 
to Indian Corporation and Three Executives, dated December 7, 2007; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of 
Industry and Security, Press Release: California Man to Plead Guilty in Plot to Export Restricted Technology to India, 
dated July 30, 2007; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release: High-Tech 
Firms/Executives Sentenced in Export Case, dated November 21, 2005; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of 
Industry and Security, Press Release: Chyron Corporation Settles Charges of Unlicensed Export to India, dated 
August 30, 2004; U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release: Berkeley 
Nucleonics Corporation Settles Charges of Unlicensed Exports, dated June 28, 2004; and U.S. Department of 
Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, Press Release: Sentry Settles Charges of Unlicensed Exports, dated 
June 25, 2004.  
 
7 Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress, India – U.S. Relations, dated January 30, 2009. 
 
8 Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive, Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic 
Collection and Industrial Espionage, FY 2008, dated July 23, 2009. 
 
9 Administrative or official notice is the appropriate type of notice used for administrative proceedings. See 
McLeod v. Immigration and Naturalization Service, 802 F.2d 89, 93 n.4 (3d Cir. 1986); ISCR Case No. 05-11292 at 4 
n.1 (App. Bd. Apr. 12, 2007); ISCR Case No. 02-24875 at 2 (App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 02-18668 
at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 10, 2004)). The most common basis for administrative notice at ISCR proceedings, is to notice 
facts that are either well known or from government reports. See Stein, ADMINISTRATIVE LAW, Section 25.01 
(Bender & Co. 2006) (listing fifteen types of facts for administrative notice). Requests for administrative notice may 
utilize authoritative information or sources from the internet. See, e.g. Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 126 S.Ct. 2749 (2006) 
(citing internet sources for numerous documents). Tr. at 36-37. 
 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                          
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted nearly all of the factual allegations 
(¶¶ 1.a. through 1.g., 1.i., and 1.j.) of the SOR. Those admissions are incorporated as 
findings of fact. He denied the remaining allegation (¶ 1.h.). 
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor, and he is seeking to 
obtain a security clearance, the level of which has not been specified.  From February 
1998 until June 2000, he was a technical manager for a defense contractor. That 
company was acquired and merged into another defense contractor, and Applicant 
remained in the same position with the new company until September 2008.10 He has 
been employed as a senior software engineer with his current employer, another 
government contractor, since October 2008.11  
 
Applicant was born in 1972 in India.12 He initially came to the United States in 
August 1996, on a student visa, to pursue a master’s degree in computer science, and 
he obtained the degree in December 1997.13 Upon receiving his degree, he decided to 
remain in the United States to work and reside.14 His progression from student visa to 
temporary visa, to permanent resident, culminated with his naturalization as a U.S. 
citizen in July 2008.15  
 
In July 1997, while still a graduate student in the United States, Applicant 
returned to India briefly where he married his wife, a citizen and resident of India.16 She, 
too, became a naturalized U.S. citizen in July 2008.17 They now have two sons, both 
born in the United States, in 2001 and 2007, respectively.18  
 
Applicant’s father, now afflicted with dementia, a form of Alzheimer’s disease, 
was born in India in 1934, before India had achieved independence from the United 
Kingdom, and he is a citizen-resident of India.19 He retired in about 1992 from his 
position as a bank officer.20 Applicant’s mother was born in India in 1940,21 also before 
10 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 4-5.  
 
11 Tr. at 66. 
 
12 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 2.  
 
13 Id. at 4; Tr. at 74. 
 
14 Tr. at 74. 
 
15 Id. at 74-75; Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 2. 
 
16 Government Exhibit 1, at 6. 
 
17 Id.  
 
18 Id. at 7-8. 
 
19 Id. at 7; Applicant’s Response to the SOR, dated April 28, 2010, at 4. 
 
20 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2, at 4. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
.   
                                                                                                                                                                                          
independence, and she too is a citizen-resident of India.22 She has always been a 
homemaker, and has never worked outside of the family residence.23 Neither parent 
has ever had any affiliation with the Indian government or intelligence service 24
 
Applicant has two brothers and one sister. One brother is a professional 
photographer, with his own photo studio; the other brother is an engineer, working for 
an American company; and his sister is a physician, working in a private hospital.25 All 
are citizen-residents of India.26 None of his siblings has ever had any affiliation with the 
Indian government or intelligence service.27 
 
The parents and brother of Applicant’s wife are also citizen-residents of India.28 
His father-in-law, currently semi-retired, was a small business owner.29 His mother-in-
law is a homemaker who occasionally assisted her husband at his workplace.30 His 
brother-in-law is a small business owner now running the family business.31 No member 
of this segment of Applicant’s extended family has ever had any affiliation with the 
Indian government or intelligence service.32 
 
Applicant also has several casual friends, originally from India. Applicant met 
these individuals either while attending various schools in India, or the United States, or 
as coworkers in the United States. These contacts now work and reside in the United 
States. Some of them have become U.S. citizens.33 None of his casual friends has ever 
had any affiliation with the Indian government or intelligence service.34 
 
The frequency of Applicant’s on-going contacts with the members of his family, 
extended family, and casual friends is varied. He calls his parents on an average of 
 
21 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 7. 
 
22 Id. 
 
23 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 19, at 4. 
 
24 Id. 
 
25 Id.; Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 8-9. 
 
26 Id. 
 
27 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 19, at 4. 
 
28 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 9-10. 
 
29 Id. at 9. 
 
30 Id. at 9-10. 
 
31 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 19, at 5. 
 
32 Id. 
 
33 Id. 
 
34 Id. 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
once each week to check on their welfare.35 He calls his siblings once every one to two 
months, on special occasions such as birthdays, and to check up on their parents’ 
health.36 Before Applicant became a U.S. citizen, he took four personal trips and one 
business trip to India staying for various periods with his parents and meeting with his 
siblings during family dinners.37 Applicant has very little continuing interaction with his 
in-laws or brother-in-law. While he owned a residential property in India, the interaction 
was more frequent, generally related to the property. Now, however, the property has 
been sold and they do not maintain communication.38 Applicant does not maintain 
communication with his brother-in-law, and it has been one year since they last spoke.39 
Since Applicant relocated and took his current position, he has had infrequent contact 
with most of his casual friends.40  
 
When Applicant and his wife became naturalized U.S. citizens, they took an oath 
of allegiance to the United States.  That oath included the words:41 
 
I hereby declare, on oath, that I absolutely and entirely renounce and 
abjure all allegiance and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or 
sovereignty, of whom or which I have heretofore been a subject or citizen.  
 
 Applicant explained the emotions of the moment:42 
 
The day I took oath with my wife was a very emotional day for me. Having 
gone through various stages applying for a temporary visa, it was very 
emotional for me and my wife to finally be recognized as United States 
citizens. It is something that both my wife and I are very proud. 
 
And being registered to vote, that was an emotional day to me to be 
actually able to vote during the presidential elections back in 2008. We’re 
very proud to be American citizens. I have no loyalty to India or any other 
country. This is our home now. This is where I want to see my children 
grow up and be successful in their careers. 
 
In November 2004, during a booming real estate market in India, Applicant and 
his wife purchased a residential rental property in India for US$241,223, with a 
35 Id. at 4. 
 
36 Id. 
 
37 Id. at 4, 7. 
 
38 Id. at 5. 
 
39 Id. 
 
40 Id. 
 
41 8 C.F.R. § 337.1(a) (1995). 
 
42 Tr. at 77. 
 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
mortgage loan from an Indian bank.43 At the same time, he opened a bank account in 
India to deposit rental income and mortgage payments.44 He rented the property for 
US$1,062 per month.45 Applicant’s in-laws helped with the closing costs and served 
essentially as the local property managers.46 Applicant estimated that his monthly net 
income from the rent, after taxes and one-half of the rent being retained by his in-laws, 
was US$448.47 In July 2008, Applicant’s in-laws gave their daughter and Applicant a gift 
by paying off the remainder of the mortgage.48 In December 2008, Applicant estimated 
the value of the property to be about US$350,000.49 On November 25, 2009, Applicant 
and his wife sold the property for approximately US$570,000.50 The proceeds from the 
sale were initially deposited in their bank account in India in December 2009,51 and 
immediately transferred to their joint bank account in the United States.52 On December 
7, 2009, Applicant informed his facility security officer of the sale of the property and the 
repatriation of funds.53 
 
In April 2010, Applicant and his wife purchased a residence in the United States 
for $251,155.16.54 As of July 31, 2010, Applicant and his wife estimate they have a net 
worth in the United States, including their various 401(k) and IRA retirement plans, 
college savings plans, money market accounts, savings accounts, checking accounts, a 
rental property, their residence, automobiles, jewelry, and household goods, of 
$898,386.55  
Applicant’s only foreign financial assets are his two Indian bank accounts, 
estimated to be worth US$2,011 and US$314, respectively.56 They were maintained 
43 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 10-11; Personal Subject Interview, dated December 19, 2008, at 1, 
attached to Government Exhibit 3, supra note 3. 
 
44 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 19, at 7; Tr. at 70-71. 
 
45 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2, at 17. 
 
46 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 43, at 1. 
 
47 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2, at 17. 
 
48 Personal Subject Interview, supra note 43, at 1. 
 
49 Id. 
 
50 Tr. at 67-68; Applicant Exhibit A (Sale Deed, dated November 25, 2009), at 6. 
 
51 Applicant Exhibit B (Detailed Statement, dated April 20, 2010), at 1. 
 
52 Applicant Exhibit C (Combined Statement, dated December 11, 2009), at 1. 
 
53 Applicant Exhibit H (E-mail to facility security officer, dated December 7, 2009). 
 
54 Applicant Exhibit D (Final Settlement Statement (HUD-1), dated March 31, 2010), at 1. 
 
55 Applicant Exhibit L (List of assets and liabilities, dated July 31, 2010). The list is supported by 
documentation in the form of investment reports, retirement savings statements, account statements, bank 
statements, etc. 
 
56 Applicant Exhibit E (Detailed Statement, dated April 28, 2010). 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                          
after the sale of the Indian property to enable him to receive a possible tax refund 
associated with the sale.57 
 
Applicant contends that he is “deeply rooted in [the United States].”58 He has 
made his home here and is raising a family with two children.59 He considers himself to 
be extremely fortunate to be given the opportunity to become first an immigrant and 
then a U.S. citizen, and he would not trade this opportunity to live in any other country in 
the world.60 With two active children, Applicant is busy with their school activities, 
homework, music lessons, and community service.61  
 
Work Performance and Character References 
 
Applicant’s most recent performance review has rated his overall performance as 
“frequently exceeds.”62 His immediate supervisor, the deputy program manager as well 
as the author of Applicant’s performance review, has known Applicant for two years, 
and is very impressed with his work.63 Applicant’s work ethic is outstanding; he gets 
along well with his peers; and he is very respectful.64 Applicant’s second level 
supervisor, the program manager, initially interviewed Applicant for the position for 
which he was ultimately hired. In his opinion, Applicant’s performance since his last 
review has improved to an even higher level.65 Based on his observations and 
interaction with Applicant, he believes that Applicant is trustworthy, and he supports 
Applicant’s application for a security clearance.66 An associate manager with the prime 
contractor was one of the members of the interviewing panel when Applicant was hired. 
He has the highest respect for Applicant, his character, and his initiative,67 and he 
 
57 Applicant Exhibit H, supra note 53. 
 
58 Applicant’s Response to the SOR, supra note 19, at 3. 
 
59 Id. 
 
60 Tr. at 76. 
 
61 Id. 
 
62 Applicant Exhibit I (Performance Review, dated March 2, 2010), at 5. The exhibit is an unsigned duplicate 
of the original document that was signed and dated. Tr. at 43. 
 
63 Id. 
 
64 Id. at 42. 
 
65 Id. at 57. 
 
66 Id. at 57-58. 
 
67 Id. at 63-64. 
 
9 
                                      
 
supports Applicant’s application for a security clearance without reservation.68 Applicant 
has received accolades for his performance.69 
 
India 
 
In 1947, the United Kingdom partitioned the Indian subcontinent into the largely 
Hindu India and the Muslim Pakistan, and granted them independence. The relationship 
between India and Pakistan has been strained, if not actually hostile, ever since, 
essentially over a dispute about Kashmir. During the Cold War, India’s foreign policy 
was one of nonalignment with either of the two major power blocs. Nevertheless, while 
the United States generally aligned itself with Pakistan, India moved closer to the Soviet 
Union and received significant military support from the relationship. However, since the 
collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, India has moved closer to the United States. The 
United States and India are the world’s largest democracies, and the United States is 
India’s largest trade and investment partner. They have common principles and shared 
national interests, including defeating terrorism, preventing weapons proliferation, and 
maintaining regional stability. They are also both committed to political freedom 
protected by representative government.  
 
In the course of its history since independence, two Indian prime ministers were 
assassinated; there have been continuing hostilities between India and Pakistan; and 
there have been Islamic terrorist attacks in India, with the most recent attack occurring 
in 2008. After the Al-Qaeda attacks on the United States on September 11, 2001, Indian 
intelligence agencies provided the United States with substantial information on that 
terrorist organization’s activities in Pakistan and Afghanistan. Since that time, the U.S.-
India security cooperation has flourished, with greatly increased counterterrorism 
cooperation. U.S. diplomats rate military cooperation among the most important aspects 
of the transformed bilateral relations. The two countries have held a series of 
unprecedented and increasingly substantive combined military exercises. 
 
In 2008, Secretary of State Clinton acknowledged the new administration’s desire 
to “further strengthen the excellent bilateral relationship” between the two countries. 
Nevertheless, disagreements exist. Some Indian officials express concern that the 
United States is a “fickle” partner that may not always be relied upon to provide the 
reciprocity, sensitivity, and high-technology transfers sought by India. Some U.S. 
government officials have criticized India’s extensive trade and investment barriers, its 
nuclear weapons programs, the pace of India’s economic reforms, its human rights 
practices, and its inadequate laws and ineffective enforcement of intellectual property 
rights protection. 
 
Under its constitution, India is a “sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic 
republic.” It is a multiparty, federal, parliamentary democracy, with a bicameral 
                                                          
 
68 Id. at 64-65. 
 
69 Applicant Exhibit G (Various e-mails, various dates). 
 
 
10 
                                      
 
                                                          
parliament, including the Rajya Sabha (Council of States) and the Lok Sabha (House of 
the People). While the central government has greater power in relation to its states, the 
position of president is largely ceremonial. The real national executive power is 
centered in the Cabinet (senior members of the Council of Ministers), led by the prime 
minister. India’s independent judicial system began under the British, and its concepts 
and procedures resemble those of Anglo-Saxon countries. 
 
There is evidence that India is an active participant in economic espionage, 
industrial espionage or trade secret theft, or violations of export-control regulations. 
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”70 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”71   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”72 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and it has the burden of 
70 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
71 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
72 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                          
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.73  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”74 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”75 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Foreign Influence is set out in 
AG ¶ 6:       
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
73 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
74 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
75 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
                                                          
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B.  However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country, and an applicant has contacts with that relative, this factor alone is 
sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could potentially result in the 
compromise of classified information.76 Applicant’s relationship with his parents, 
siblings, in-laws, and his wife’s sibling, as well as his financial interests in India, are 
current security concerns for the Government. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 7(a), “contact with a foreign family member, business or professional associate, 
friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact 
creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or 
coercion” is potentially disqualifying. Similarly, under AG ¶ 7(b), “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual's obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual's desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information” may raise security concerns. In addition, under AG ¶ 7(d), “sharing living 
quarters with a person or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship 
creates a heightened risk of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion,” 
may raise security concerns. Also, it is potentially disqualifying under AG ¶ 7(e) if there 
exists “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign country, or in 
any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could subject the individual to 
heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” I find AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), 7(d), and 
7(e) apply in this case. However, the security significance of these identified conditions 
requires further examination of Applicant’s respective relationships with his family 
members and extended family members who are Indian citizen-residents, as well as 
closer examination of his foreign financial interests, to determine the degree of 
“heightened risk” or potential conflict of interest.  
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from foreign influence. Under AG ¶ 8(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the 
country in which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, 
organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.” Similarly, AG ¶ 8(b) may 
apply where the evidence shows “there is no conflict of interest, either because the 
individual's sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or 
country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” In addition, AG ¶ 8(c) may apply where “contact or 
76 See ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 at 12 (App. Bd. 
Feb. 8, 2001). 
 
13 
                                      
 
                                                          
communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little 
likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” Also, AG ¶ 8(f) 
may apply when “the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or 
property interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be 
used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.” In this instance, 
Applicant’s relationship with his parents and siblings is neither casual nor infrequent. 
Accordingly, AG ¶ 8(c) does not apply as it pertains to them. However, considering 
Applicant’s more casual and infrequent relationship with his brother-in-law, as well as 
his evolving and more current infrequent relationship with his in-laws, AG ¶ 8(c) does 
apply. AG ¶ 8(d) partially applies. 
In assessing whether there is a heightened risk because of an applicant’s 
relatives or associates in a foreign country, it is necessary to consider all relevant 
factors, including the totality of an applicant’s conduct and circumstances, in light of any 
realistic potential for exploitation. One such factor is the potential for pressure, coercion, 
exploitation, or duress. In that regard, it is important to consider the character of the 
foreign power in question, including the government and entities controlled by the 
government within the relevant foreign country.  Nothing in Guideline B suggests it is 
limited to countries that are hostile to the United States.77 In fact, the Appeal Board has 
cautioned against “reliance on overly simplistic distinctions between ‘friendly’ nations 
and ‘hostile’ nations when adjudicating cases under Guideline B.”78 
 
Nevertheless, the relationship between a foreign government and the United 
States may be relevant in determining whether a foreign government or an entity it 
controls is likely to attempt to exploit a resident or citizen to take action against the 
United States. It is reasonable to presume that although a friendly relationship, or the 
existence of a democratic government, is not determinative, it may make it less likely 
that a foreign government would attempt to exploit a U.S. citizen through relatives or 
associates in that foreign country. 
 
As noted above, since the breakup of the Soviet Union, the United States and 
India have developed an increasingly warm and friendly relationship, making it unlikely 
that the Indian government would attempt coercive means to obtain sensitive 
information.  However, it does not eliminate the possibility that India would employ some 
non-coercive measures in an attempt to exploit a relative.  While Applicant’s parents 
and siblings, as well as his in-laws and brother-in-law, still reside in India, there may be 
speculation as to “some risk,” but that speculation, in the abstract, does not, without 
more, establish sufficient evidence of a “heightened risk” of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion to disqualify Applicant from holding a 
security clearance. There is no evidence that Applicant’s parents or siblings, or his in-
laws or brother-in-law are, or have been, political activists, challenging the policies of 
the Indian government; that terrorists have approached or threatened Applicant or his 
parents or siblings, or his in-laws or brother-in-law, for any reason; that the Indian 
77 See ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002); ISCR Case No. 00-0489 at 12 (App. Bd. Jan. 
10, 2002). 
78 ISCR Case No. 00-0317 at 6 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002). 
 
14 
                                      
 
government has approached Applicant; that his parents or siblings, or his in-laws or 
brother-in-law, currently engage in activities that would bring attention to themselves; or 
that his parents or siblings, or his in-laws or brother-in-law, are even aware of 
Applicant’s work. As such, there is a reduced possibility that they would be targets for 
coercion or exploitation by the Indian government, which may seek to quiet those who 
speak out against it. Applicant has met his burden of showing there is little likelihood 
that those relationships could create a risk for foreign influence of exploitation. Applicant 
is fully involved in his children’s lives and activities. He and his wife and children have 
“such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that [they] can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” As to his 
parents and siblings in India, AG ¶ 8(a) applies. As to his in-laws and brother-in-law, ¶ 
8(b) applies.  
  
Applicant has been a resident of the United States since 1996. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen, and he, his wife, and their two children reside in the United 
States. Now that he has sold the residential rental property in India, he no longer has 
any substantial foreign financial interests in India. The two bank accounts he maintains 
in India, are jointly worth an estimated $2,325. They are still open to enable him to 
receive a possible tax refund associated with the sale of the Indian property, and they 
are insignificant in comparison to Applicant’s overall $898,386 net worth. That interest is 
too insignificant to be “used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure [Applicant].”  
AG ¶ 8(f) applies. 
 
It is true that, before becoming a U.S. citizen in 2008, Applicant had taken five 
trips to India during which he visited his parents. Those trips should have no current 
security significance.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
 
15 
                                      
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant and his “closest family” --
his wife and two children -- are U.S. citizens residing in the United States. His Indian-
born friends all work in the United States, and as everyone has matured their respective 
relationships have evolved into more casual and distant relationships. Applicant is not 
vulnerable to direct coercion or exploitation through his wife or children, or even through 
his casual friends now residing in the United States, and the realistic possibility of 
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress with regard to them is low. 
 
A Guideline B decision concerning India must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in that country, as well as the potential dangers existing there. 
India, as is true with the United States, is a democracy with advanced nuclear 
capabilities.  Both countries have both been victims of Islamic terrorists. Because both 
nations share a common vision for the future, it is in India’s interests to maintain 
friendship with the U.S. to counterbalance international terrorism. It is very unlikely India 
would forcefully attempt to coerce Applicant through his parents, siblings, in-laws, or 
brother-in-law, all still residing in India. Furthermore, while there is evidence that India is 
an active participant in economic espionage, industrial espionage or trade secret theft, 
or violations of export-control regulations, there is no evidence that Applicant has been 
targeted.   
 
As noted above, Applicant’s entire life is now centered in the United States. This 
is where his children are growing up and where they have school, friends, and 
involvement in community and school affairs. He is well respected by his friends and 
colleagues for his honesty, integrity, and truthfulness. That he and his parents keep in 
close contact should not be considered a negative factor. (See AG && 2(a)(1) through 
2(a)(9).) 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions or doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising from his foreign influence 
concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
 
16 
                                      
 
  Subparagraph 1.h:    For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.i:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.j:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is  
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
