 
1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 09-08088 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John Bayard Glendon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the Drug Involvement security concerns, but has not 
mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On September 16, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations and Guideline H, Drug Involvement. DOHA acted 
under Executive Order (EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the 
Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant answered the SOR on October 26, 2010. He requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on November 19, 2010. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on November 19, 2010, and the hearing was 
 
2 
 
convened as scheduled on December 1, 2010. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 
through 8, which were admitted into evidence without objection. Department Counsel’s 
exhibit index is marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I. Applicant testified and submitted 
exhibit (AE) A that was admitted into evidence at the hearing. The record was held open 
for Applicant to submit additional information. Applicant submitted AE B, which was 
admitted into evidence without objection. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on 
December 10, 2010.  
 
Procedural Ruling 
 
 Applicant was verbally notified by Department Counsel of the November 30, 
2010, hearing date prior to the issuance of the written notice of hearing dated November 
19, 2010. At hearing, I asked Applicant if he was ready to proceed and he stated that he 
was ready.1 Applicant waived the 15-day notice requirement imposed by ¶ E3.1.8 of the 
Directive. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He has worked for 
his current employer since July 2009. He has a master’s degree. He is divorced and has 
two children. He currently pays $1000 per month in child support.2  
 
 The SOR alleged six delinquent debts (one debt is a duplicate) and unauthorized 
use of prescription drugs. The debts were listed on credit reports obtained on August 
18, 2010, August 12, 2009, September 19, 2008, and June 7, 2006. In his answer, 
Applicant admitted owing the debts and using the prescription drugs.3  
 
 Applicant attributes his financial difficulties to a series of events beginning in 
2008. He and his wife were sued in a civil action over a real estate purchase option on 
their home. Although he and his wife won the lawsuit, they did not receive any monetary 
remedy and they paid out about $80,000 in attorney’s fees. They used their credit cards 
to finance this litigation. Ultimately, he could not continue to pay the mortgage on this 
property, and it was sold in a short-sale. Also in 2008, he lost his job and was 
unemployed for three months before finding work with a defense contractor. He also 
was unemployed more recently, before he was hired for his current job. Finally, he and 
his wife separated and he was required to pay support for his wife and children. The 
support started at about $3,000 per month in March 2009, and then dropped down to 
about $1000 per month because of the terms of a separation agreement in September 
2009.4  
 
                                                          
1 Tr. at 13. 
 
2 Tr. at 5, 6, 31; GE 2. 
 
3 GE 3-7. 
 
4 Tr. at 26-33; GE 3. 
 
 
3 
 
 Applicant hired a bankruptcy attorney, but did not pursue bankruptcy any further. 
He did participate in the mandatory bankruptcy counseling program in November 2009.5 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a is a judgment resulting from  past-due rent in the 
amount of $2,050. Applicant acknowledges this debt. He paid $1,000 toward this 
judgment in November 2010. The balance remains unpaid and unresolved. He plans to 
pay $200 to $300 per month until it is paid.6 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is a charged-off credit card debt in the amount of 
$45,906. Applicant acknowledges this debt. It remains unpaid and unresolved.7   
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c is a charged-off credit card debt in the amount of 
$9,111. Applicant acknowledges this debt. It remains unpaid and unresolved.8 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d is charged-off credit card debt in the amount of 
$18,567. It remains unpaid and unresolved.9 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e is a collection account on a credit card debt in the 
amount of $13,452. Applicant acknowledges this debt. It remains unpaid and 
unresolved.10 
 
 The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is a duplicate of the debt in SOR ¶ 1.e. This debt is 
resolved.11  
 
 Applicant took his wife’s prescription drugs on several occasions (Codeine-
Tylenol, Ativan, and Klonopine), without medical authorization from May 2009 to June 
2009. He took these drugs because he experienced severe shoulder pain from a bicycle 
accident and because he was experiencing stress and anxiety due to the loss of his job 
and his marital problems. He did not take any of these drugs after June 2009.12 
 
                                                          
5 Tr. at 33; AE A-B. 
 
6 Tr. at 42-43; GE 4-6; AE A. 
 
7 Tr. at 43; GE 4-6. 
 
8 Tr. at 43; GE 4-6. 
 
9 Tr. at 44; GE 4-6. 
 
10 Tr. at 44-45; GE 4-6. 
 
11 Tr. at 44-45; GE 4-6. 
 
12 Tr. at 41; GE 3. 
 
 
4 
 
 Applicant presented letters from friends and business acquaintances that 
commented on his loyalty and honesty as a friend, his high values and morals, and his 
trustworthiness and dedication.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions that are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
                                                          
13 AE A. 
 
 
5 
 
applicant concerned.” See also Executive Order 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18 as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 19. Two are potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
 (c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant accumulated a number of delinquent debts and was unable or unwilling 
to satisfy his obligations. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying 
conditions.  
 
  Several Financial Considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
 
6 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s debts are recent, numerous, and there is no indication that they will 
not recur. AG ¶ 20(a) is not applicable.  
 
Applicant experienced some personal setbacks because of expenses related to 
his civil lawsuit, his divorce, and periods of unemployment. However, he failed to take 
any meaningful action to address his debts. While his lawsuit, his divorce, and his 
unemployment were conditions outside his control, he failed to act responsibly under 
the circumstances when he failed to address his debts. AG ¶ 20(b) is not applicable.  
 
 Applicant participated in the mandatory bankruptcy credit counseling. Other than 
paying $1,000 towards satisfying the judgment against him, his debts are not resolved 
or under control. AG ¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) are not applicable.  
 
 Applicant disputed the debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.f as a duplication of the debt listed 
in SOR ¶ 1.e. AG ¶ 20(e) is applicable to SOR ¶ 1.e. 
 
 At this point, Applicant’s finances remain a concern with no apparent plan to 
resolve the debts at issue. 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to Drug Involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse. 
 
 Appellant used his wife’s prescription drugs without medical authorization on 
several occasions. AG ¶ 25(a) applies. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and especially considered the following: 
 
 
7 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which drugs were prescribed and abuse has since ended. 
 
 Applicant was experiencing a stressful time in his life and was suffering from a 
physical injury during the time he abused his wife’s prescription drugs. Those were 
circumstances that are unlikely to recur. AG ¶ 26(a) applies. Since the drugs were not 
prescribed to the Applicant, AG ¶ 26(b) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.       
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
relevant facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline F and Guideline H in my whole-person analysis. Some of 
the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant 
additional comment.  
 
I considered the lawsuit, divorce, and periods of unemployment that contributed 
to Applicant’s financial problems. I considered his favorable character evidence. I also 
considered the circumstances that led to his abusing his wife’s prescription drugs. On 
the other hand, Applicant failed to establish any type of financial plan to address his 
debts. Additionally, he has not shown a track record of financial stability. His use of 
prescription drugs was circumstance-specific. He convinced me that he will not use un-
prescribed drugs in the future.  
 
 
8 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Drug Involvement security concerns but he has 
not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline H:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 2.a – 2.c:  For Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
                                                
    
 
________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
