 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00089 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 11, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 13, 2010, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
 
2 
 
 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 28, 2011. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant and he received it on February 14, 2011. Applicant was given an opportunity 
to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
submitted his response to the FORM on March 9, 2011. The case was assigned to me 
on April 4, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, 1.g, and 1.h and 
denied 1.c -1.f. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits 
submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 50 years old. He is married and has two adult children. He has 
worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since May 2004. He is a senior 
engineer. He served on active duty as an enlisted member of the Navy from about June 
1978 to April 2004, retiring in the pay grade of E-8. He has previously held a security 
clearance.1   
  
 The debts listed in the SOR are supported by credit reports dated November 2, 
2010, and September 26, 2009. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.b - 1.e, and 1.g are 
various consumer debts totaling $89,555. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f is a second 
real estate mortgage in the amount of $29,665. Applicant also filed for Chapter 13 
bankruptcy relief in September 2008, but subsequently had the case dismissed in April 
2009 (SOR¶ 1.a). The last allegation in the SOR concerns Applicant’s 2004 special 
court-martial conviction for committing larceny while still in the Navy (SOR ¶ 1.h).2 
  
 In January 2007, Applicant transferred with his job from one state to another. In 
September 2006, he purchased a condominium (condo) that he had to sell because of 
his relocation. His company paid his interest payment for six months on the condo while 
it was offered for sale. The property was listed at the price Applicant owed on it. 
Applicant received one offer to buy the property in six months. The offer was about 
$10,000 below the list price. He did not accept this offer; rather he looked to rent the 
property. He was thwarted in his rent attempt by the rules of the homeowners 
association which prohibited renting the property. Consequently Applicant was paying 
all the living expenses at his new location as well as the expenses related to his condo. 
Additionally, he was paying on numerous credit card bills, auto loans, signature loans, 
and two recreational vehicle (RV) loans.3 
 
 Applicant could no longer afford to make the condo payments. He sought debt 
relief through a debt consolidation company. He claims to have paid the company 
                                                          
1 GT Items 4, 6 
 
2 GT Item 1. 
 
3 GT Item 4. 
 
 
3 
 
 
several thousand dollars only to discover that his creditors would not work with them. 
He next sought advice about bankruptcy from a law firm. He was advised to file for 
Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief. He filed bankruptcy under Chapter 13 in September 2008. 
In April 2009, he requested and received a voluntary dismissal of the bankruptcy 
petition. He pursued the dismissal because he and his wife did not want to burden the 
court with their debt problems. He now believes it was a mistake to have the bankruptcy 
petition dismissed. He then began to set up payment arrangements with his creditors. 
One creditor brought a wage garnishment action against him that resulted in a 25% 
reduction in his monthly pay.4   
 
 The consumer debt listed at SOR ¶1.b in the amount of $27,008 is still owed. 
Applicant made $250 per month payments on the debt in January and February 2011.5 
 
 The consumer debt listed at SOR ¶1.c in the amount of $5,257 has been 
resolved. A judgment for this debt was satisfied in November 2010.6   
 
 The consumer debt listed at SOR ¶1.d in the amount of $14,168 has been 
resolved. A settlement was reached and Applicant paid the amount in December 2010.7 
 
 The consumer debt listed at SOR ¶1.e in the amount of $1,712 has been 
resolved. A settlement was reached and Applicant paid the amount in December 2010.8 
 
 This second mortgage on the condo listed at SOR ¶1.f in the amount of $29,665 
is unresolved. Applicant has no payment plan for this debt. He is waiting to receive a 
demand letter from the current creditor. The last action reported on this account was in 
October 2009.9 
 
 The consumer debt listed at SOR ¶1.g in the amount of $25,913 has been 
resolved. A credit report dated February 21, 2011, reflects a zero balance and a closed 
status.10 
 
                                                          
4 Id. 
 
5 Applicant’s Reply to Form (AR) Item 8 (In Applicant’s reply he provided supporting information which he 
labeled as “Items”. To distinguish Applicant’s items from the Government items, any Applicant item 
reference will be preceded by the letters: AR and the Government items will be preceded by the letters 
GT. 
 
6 AR Item 4, 5. 
 
7 AR Item 4, 5. 
 
8 AR Item 4, 5. 
 
9 AR; GT Item 8. 
 
10 AR Item 7. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 In April 2003, a Navy criminal investigation was initiated concerning Applicant 
because he was suspected of filing false Navy travel vouchers and forging documents 
to support those vouchers. When he was first interviewed about the allegations, he 
voluntarily wrote a statement denying any wrongdoing. He attested, inter alia, he was 
“better off financially than I have ever been”, and that he “did not need to commit fraud 
to get money.” He further stated, “I could not do that to my family, my CO or the people 
who worked for me.” Applicant was a master chief petty officer, paygrade E-9, at the 
time of the investigation. A few weeks after his original statement for the investigation, 
Applicant gave a subsequent statement where he admitted to creating false receipts 
and submitting false travel claims. He explained he was going through a stressful time 
and he could use the extra money to pay for family needs. He was later convicted of 
larceny at a special court-martial in January 2004 and sentenced to confinement for 33 
days, fined $6,000 and reduced to the paygrade of E-8.11 
 
 Applicant presented letters from four coworkers who attested to his good 
character for trustworthiness, loyalty, and dedication to project success. They all 
recommend him for a security clearance. He also presented his employer performance 
evaluations where he was consistently given an overall rating of “exceeds 
requirements.”12   
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
                                                          
11 GT Item 10. 
 
12 AR Items 12, 13. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;  
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations; and 
 
(d) deceptive or illegal financial practices such as embezzlement, 
employee theft, check fraud, income tax evasion, expense account fraud, 
filing deceptive loan statements, and other intentional financial breaches 
of trust.  
 
6 
 
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. He was 
convicted of larceny for filing false travel vouchers while in the Navy. I find all three 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
  
 Applicant paid or resolved the debts listed at SOR ¶¶ 1.c, 1.d, 1.e., and 1.g. I find 
mitigating condition AG ¶ 20(d) applies to these debts. He also has made two recent 
payments toward the debt listed at SOR ¶ 1.b which also amounts to a good-faith effort 
to pay that debt. AG ¶ 20(d) applies to this debt.  
 
 Applicant’s decision to file for Chapter 13 bankruptcy relief and then seek a 
voluntary dismissal of the same does not cast doubt on his current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. AG ¶ 20(a) applies to this situation. 
 
 Applicant has not resolved his past-due second mortgage listed at SOR ¶ 1.f. 
Applicant’s difficulty in selling his home may be a condition beyond his control, however, 
his lack of action in attempting to resolve the debt for two years does not show 
responsible action. I find AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Additionally, the debt is recent and 
unresolved. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(c), and 20(d) also do not apply.  
 
 Although Applicant’s larceny conviction was in 2004, the severe breach of trust 
he committed by stealing government funds and the cover-up lies he told to conceal his 
action, call into question his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. None of the 
mitigating conditions listed above apply to SOR ¶ 1.h.  
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s years of 
service in the Navy as well as his recent job performance evaluations. I also considered 
the character statements supporting him. Although he has made good progress toward 
resolving his financial problems, a large debt of over $29,000 remains unpaid. 
Additionally, his crime of larceny while a master chief petty officer in the Navy and the 
resulting lies he told investigators call into question his integrity, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. Therefore, although he has mitigated several of the debts, he failed to 
provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.e:    For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.f:     Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.g:     For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.h:     Against Applicant 
 
 
8 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
