                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-06205
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Caroline A. Jeffreys, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
April 5, 2011
______________
Decision
______________
LOKEY ANDERSON, Darlene D., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations Processing
(e-QIP) on November 23, 2009.  (Government Exhibit 4.)  On September 27, 2010, the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA), pursuant to Executive Order 10865
and Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, (as
amended) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to the Applicant, which detailed
reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the
Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a
security clearance for the Applicant and recommended referral to an Administrative
Judge to determine whether clearance should be denied or revoked.
The Applicant responded to the SOR in writing on December 9, 2010, in which
he elected to have the case determined on a written record in lieu of a hearing.
Department Counsel submitted  the Government’s File of Relevant Material (FORM) to
the Applicant on January 28, 2011.  The Applicant was instructed to submit information
in rebuttal, extenuation or mitigation within 30 days of receipt.  Applicant received the
FORM on February 7, 2011, and he failed to submit a response to DOHA.  The case
was assigned to the Administrative Judge for resolution on March 24, 2011.  Based
upon a review of the case file, pleadings and exhibits, eligibility for access to classified
information is denied.
2
 FINDINGS OF FACT
The Applicant is 53 years old.  He has an Associates Degree and is employed by
a defense contractor as a Technical Specialist RFF.  He is seeking to obtain a security
clearance in connection with his employment.
The Government opposes the Applicant's request for a security clearance, on the
basis of allegations set forth in the Statement of Reasons (SOR).  The following findings
of fact are entered as to each paragraph and guideline in the SOR:
Paragraph 1 (Guideline F - Financial Considerations)  The Government alleges that the
Applicant is ineligible for clearance because he is financially overextended and at risk of
having to engage in illegal acts to generate funds.      
The Applicant admits seven of the delinquent debts set forth in the SOR,
specifically, allegations 1(c), 1(d), 1(e), 1(f), 1(g), 1(h) and 1(j).  He denies four of the
delinquent debts set forth in allegations 1(a), 1(b), 1(i) and 1(k) and claims that these
have been settled or paid or he has started making payments toward the debt.  (See,
Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  There is no documentary evidence to support this claim.
Credit Reports of the Applicant indicate that he is indebted to each of the outstanding
creditors listed in the SOR, which total over $54,727.00.  (Government Exhibits 7 and
8.)  Since November 2009, the Applicant has been working for his current employer.   
He claims that his delinquent debts were the result of a nine month period of
unemployment in 2006, chronic underemployment, and then a two month period of
unemployment in 2009.  His house was foreclosed upon in 2006.  Applicant states that
the amount owed on the loan at the time of the foreclosure was $88,000.  The house
was sold on the open market for $138,000.  He states that there was a $50,000 profit on
the sale, enough profit from the sale of his house to cover both the first and second
mortgages.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR.)  The Applicant claims that he also had to
incur the expenses of moving out of state to eventually find employment while trying to
keep two houses afloat.  (Applicant’s Answer to SOR and Government Exhibit 6.)  The
Applicant failed to submit any documentary evidence in support of these contentions.
He states that he will take care of his delinquent debts as best he can within his budget.
There is no evidence that he has initiated a payment plan or begun payments toward
any of his delinquent debts.  His financial statement dated August 14, 2010, reflects his
monthly gross income of $3,560.00 a month with monthly expenses of $2,576.00
without payments toward any of his delinquent debts.  (Government Exhibit  5.)
The following delinquent debts remain outstanding; A delinquent debt owed to a
creditor in the amount of $733.00 remains owing.  (Government Exhibit 7.)  A delinquent
debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $150.00 remains owing.  (Government Exhibits
5, 6 and 7.)  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $743.00 remains
owing.  (Government Exhibits 5, 6 and 7.)  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in the
amount of $1,056.00 remains owing.  (Government Exhibits 5, 6 and 7.)  A delinquent
debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $10,512.00 remains owing.  (Government
3
Exhibits 5, 6 and 7.)  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $7,373.00
remains owing.  (Government Exhibits 5, 6 and 7.)  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor
in the amount of $3,078.00 remains owing.  (Government Exhibit 7.)  A delinquent debt
owed to a creditor in the amount of $7,845.00 remains owing.  (Applicant’s Answer to
SOR.)  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $19,848.00 remains
owing.  (Government Exhibits 5, 6, 7 and 8.)  A delinquent debt owed to a creditor in the
amount of $3,307.00 remains owing.  (Government Exhibits 5, 6 and 8.)  A delinquent
debt owed to a creditor in the amount of $82.00 remains owing.  (Applicant’s Exhibits 5,
6 and 8.) 
POLICIES
Enclosure 2 of the Directive sets forth adjudication policies divided into
"Disqualifying Factors" and "Mitigating Factors."  The following Disqualifying Factors
and Mitigating Factors are found to be applicable in this case:
Guideline F (Financial Considerations)
18.  The Concern.  Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.  An individual who
is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate
funds. 
Conditions that could raise a security concern:
19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; 
19.(c) a history of not meeting financial obligation. 
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns:
None.
In addition, as set forth in Enclosure 2 of the Directive at pages 18-19,  in
evaluating the relevance of an individual’s conduct, the Administrative Judge should
consider the following general factors:
a.  The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct and surrounding
circumstances;
     b.  The circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation;
4
c.  The frequency and recency of the conduct;
d.  The individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct;
e.  The extent to which participation is voluntary;
f.  The presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavior
changes;
g.  The motivation for the conduct; 
h. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation or duress; and
 i.  The likelihood of continuation or recurrence.
The eligibility criteria established in the DoD Directive identify personal
characteristics and conduct which are reasonably related to the ultimate question,
posed in Section 2 of Executive Order 10865, of whether it is “clearly consistent with the
national interest” to grant an Applicant’s request for access to classified information.
The DoD Directive states, “The adjudicative process is an examination of a
sufficient period of a person’s life to make an affirmative determination that the person is
an acceptable security risk.  Eligibility for access to classified information is predicated
upon the individual meeting these personnel security guidelines.  The adjudicative
process is the careful weighing of a number of variables known as the whole person
concept.  Available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable
and unfavorable should be considered in reaching a determination.” The Administrative
Judge can draw only those inferences or conclusions that have reasonable and logical
basis in the evidence of record.  The Judge cannot draw inferences or conclusions
based on evidence which is speculative or conjectural in nature.  Finally, as emphasized
by President Eisenhower in Executive Order 10865, “Any determination under this order
. . . shall be a determination in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a
determination as to the loyalty of the Applicant concerned.”
CONCLUSIONS
In the defense industry, the security of classified industrial secrets is entrusted to
civilian workers who must be counted upon to safeguard such sensitive information
twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week.  The Government is therefore
appropriately concerned when available information indicates that an Applicant for
clearance may be involved in instances of financial irresponsibility, which demonstrates
poor judgment or unreliability.
It is the Government’s responsibility to present substantial evidence to support
the finding of a nexus, or rational connection, between the Applicant’s conduct and the
5
holding of a security clearance.  If such a case has been established, the burden then
shifts to the Applicant to go forward with evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation
which is sufficient to overcome or outweigh the Government’s case.  The Applicant
bears the ultimate burden of persuasion in proving that it is clearly consistent with the
national interest to grant him a security clearance.
In this case the Government has met its initial burden of proving that the
Applicant has been financially irresponsible (Guideline F).  This evidence indicates poor
judgment, unreliability and untrustworthiness on the part of the Applicant.  Because of
the scope and nature of the Applicant's conduct, I conclude there is a nexus or
connection with his security clearance eligibility.
The evidence shows that the Applicant’s financial problems may have started as
a result of unemployment and underemployment.  However, since November 2009, for
more than a year, he has been working for his current employer.  Since then, he has not
shown that he has taken timely and reasonable steps to address his indebtedness.  His
delinquent debts are recent and continuing, numerous and significant, and there is no
evidence of financial counseling or a good faith effort to resolve them.  In fact, there is
no evidence in the record in mitigation.  The Applicant failed to respond to the FORM or
submit any documentary evidence in support of his contentions.        
 
Considering all of the evidence, the Applicant has not introduced persuasive
evidence in rebuttal, explanation or mitigation that is sufficient to overcome the
Government's case. Under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), Disqualifying
Conditions 19.(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts, and 19.(c) a history of not
meeting financial obligation apply.  None of the mitigating conditions are applicable.  
The Applicant has not demonstrated sufficient good judgment or a good faith
effort to resolve his indebtedness, nor is there sufficient evidence of financial
rehabilitation.  For the most part, the Applicant has ignored his debts and has not
demonstrated that he can properly handle his financial affairs.  Accordingly, I find
against the Applicant under Guideline F (Financial Considerations).
    
I have also considered the “whole-person concept” in evaluating the Applicant’s
eligibility for access to classified information.  Under the particular facts of this case, the
totality of the conduct set forth under all of the guidelines viewed as a whole, support a
whole-person assessment of poor judgement, untrustworthiness, unreliability, a lack of
candor, an unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, and/or other
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard classified
information.
  
I have considered all of the evidence presented, however, it does not come close
to mitigating the negative effects of his financial indebtedness and its impact on his
ability to safeguard classified information.  On balance, it is concluded that the Applicant
has failed to overcome the Government's case opposing his request for a security
6
clearance.  Accordingly, the evidence supports a finding against the Applicant as to the
factual and conclusionary allegations expressed in Paragraph 1 of the SOR.    
     FORMAL FINDINGS
Formal findings For or Against the Applicant on the allegations in the SOR, as
required by Paragraph 25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive are:
Paragraph 1: Against the Applicant.
        Subpara.  1.a.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.b.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.c.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.d.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.e.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.f.: Against the Applicant.
                                    Subpara.  1.g.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.h.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.i.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.j.: Against the Applicant.
    Subpara.  1.k.: Against the Applicant.
DECISION
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
the Applicant.
  Darlene Lokey Anderson
Administrative Judge
