 This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992, as1
amended (Directive), and adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
 
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:      )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-01611
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Christopher Graham, Esquire
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence concern that existed due to her family
ties to and real estate interest in Venezuela, and the foreign preference concern that
existed due to her previous possession of a Venezuelan passport. Clearance is granted.
On October 27, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant.  The SOR alleges security concerns under Guidelines B (foreign influence)1
and C (foreign preference). Applicant’s response to the SOR was received by DOHA on
November 19, 2010. Applicant admitted SOR allegation 1.a.1, but denied she had
exercised dual citizenship with Venezuela. She admitted SOR allegation 2.a, denied
2
allegation 2.b, and denied that her foreign contacts or interests created a security
concern. Applicant requested a hearing.
The case was assigned to another administrative judge on January 13, 2011.
She caused a notice of hearing to be issued on February 17, 2011, scheduling the
hearing for March 17, 2011. The case was reassigned to me on March 15, 2011, due to
the unavailability of the originally assigned judge on the scheduled hearing date. The
hearing was conducted as originally scheduled. 
The Government submitted 10 documentary exhibits that were marked as
Government Exhibits (GE) 1-10. GE 1-3 were admitted into the record without objection.
Administrative notice was taken of the contents of GE 4-9 without objection. Applicant’s
objection to administrative notice being taken of the contents of GE 10 was sustained.
Department Counsel submitted one document containing written comments on the
contents of GE 3-9, which was marked as Appellate Exhibit (App. Ex.) I, and made part
of the record without objection. Applicant testified, and submitted four documents that
were marked as Applicant’s Exhibits 1-4, which were admitted into the record without
objection. The transcript was received on March 24, 2011.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions are incorporated herein. In addition, after a thorough
review of the testimony, pleadings, and exhibits, I make the following findings of fact:
Applicant is a 56-year-old woman who has been employed by a defense
contractor, currently as a civil engineer, since April 2007. She was previously employed
by the United States Army in Germany as an environmental/civil engineer from July
1999 until January 2003; and by the United States Department of State in Germany as
a community liaison officer from June 2003 until June 2005. She was unemployed from
February 2003 until May 2003, and again from July 2005 until March 2007. Applicant’s
periods of unemployment were due to permanent change of station (PCS) orders issued
to her husband, a career United States Army officer.
Applicant is a Venezuelan citizen by birth. She immigrated to the United States in
1982 to attend college. She obtained a bachelor’s degree in civil engineering from that
university in May 1985, and a second bachelor’s degree from the same university in
international economics and finance in December 1986. Applicant became a naturalized
United States citizen on October 22, 1993. In her response to the SOR, Applicant stated
she renounced her Venezuelan citizenship when she became a United States citizen,
although she does not elaborate as to how she renounced that citizenship. 
Applicant was first married in June 1984. That marriage ended by divorce in
December 1986. Applicant’s first husband was a United States citizen. Applicant has
been remarried since December 1992. Applicant’s husband is a United States citizen
and a graduate of the United States Military Academy. He retired from the Army as a
3
Lieutenant Colonel. Applicant has a 16-year-old daughter from her second marriage
who is solely a United States citizen.
Applicant’s current United States passport was issued in August 2004. She had a
Venezuelan passport that was issued in November 2007 that was not due to expire until
November 2012. Applicant explained in a statement she provided in December 2009,
that she obtained the Venezuelan passport at her parents’ urging because they were
concerned that she might not be allowed to enter or exit Venezuela if she only
possessed a United States passport. Applicant surrendered her Venezuelan passport to
her employer’s Facility Security Officer (FSO) in August 2010, after she learned her
possession of that passport created a security concern. She retrieved the passport from
the FSO in anticipation of the hearing of this case and then destroyed it in open court
during the conduct of the hearing. 
Applicant listed significant foreign travel in the security clearance application she
submitted. That travel was either in connection with PCS moves or visits to nearby
countries where she and her husband were stationed. She provided copies of her
United States and Venezuelan passports, which disclose that she exclusively used her
United States passport in connection with that travel. 
Applicant’s father is an 82-year-old citizen and resident of Venezuela. Her mother
is a 75-year-old citizen and resident of Venezuela. Because her parents were
concerned their family residence, a condominium they own in Venezuela, would escheat
to Venezuela upon their deaths, they conveyed ownership of the condominium equally
to Applicant and her brother in 2008. Applicant reconveyed the condominium to her
parents when she discovered her ownership of the condominium created a security
concern. Applicant estimated the value of the condominium is approximately $240,000.
U.S. Department of State publications provide the following information about
Venezuela:
U.S. - Venezuelan relations have been tense in recent years, although
both nations agreed at the April 2009 Summit of the Americas in Trinidad
to seek a relationship based on mutual interest. President Chavez
continues to define himself in opposition to the United States, using
incendiary rhetoric to insult the U.S. Government and U.S. influence in
Latin America. (GE 4)
Violent crime in Venezuela is pervasive, both in the capital, Caracas, and
in the interior. The country’s overall per capita murder rate is cited as one
of the top five in the world. . . . Armed robberies take place throughout the
city, including areas generally presumed safe and frequented by tourists.
Well-armed criminal gangs operate widely, often setting up fake police
checkpoints. Only a small percentage of crimes result in trials and
convictions. (GE 5)
4
In May (2009), the United States re-certified Venezuela as “not
cooperating fully” with U.S. counterterrorism efforts under Section 40A of
the Arms Export and Control Act, as amended. Pursuant to this
certification, defense articles and services may not be sold or licensed for
export to Venezuela from October 1, 2009 to September 30, 2010. This
certification will lapse unless it is renewed by the Secretary of State by
May 15, 2010. 
President Hugo Chavez persisted in his public criticism of U.S.
counterterrorism efforts. In October (2009), he called the United States
“the first state sponsor of terrorism” and has repeatedly referred to the
United States as a “terrorist nation.” Since Colombia and the United States
signed a Defense Cooperation Agreement, Venezuela’s cooperation with
the United States on counterterrorism has been reduced to an absolute
minimum. President Chavez continued to strengthen Venezuela’s
relationship with state sponsor of terrorism Iran. Iran and Venezuela
continued weekly Iran Airlines flights connecting Tehran and Damascus
with Caracas. (GE 6)
Politicization of the judiciary and official harassment and intimidation of the
political opposition and the media intensified during the year (2009). The
following human rights problems were reported by the nongovernmental
organization (NGO) community, the media, and in some cases the
government itself: unlawful killings, including summary executions of
criminal suspects; widespread criminal kidnappings for ransom; prison
uprisings resulting from harsh prison conditions; arbitrary arrests and
detentions; corruption and impunity in police forces; a corrupt, inefficient,
and politicized judicial system characterized by delays and violations of
due process; political prisoners and selective prosecution for political
purposes; infringement of citizens’ privacy rights by security forces;
government closure of radio and television stations and threats to close
others; government attacks on public demonstrators; systematic
discrimination based on political grounds; considerable corruption at all
levels of government; threats and attacks against domestic NGOs;
violence against women; inadequate juvenile detention centers; trafficking
in persons; and restrictions on workers’ right of association. (GE 7)  
A July 28, 2009, Report for Congress, prepared by the Congressional Research
Service provides the following information about Venezuela:
Over the past several years, U.S. officials have expressed concerns about
human rights, Venezuela’s military arms purchases (largely from Russia),
its relations with Cuba and Iran, and its efforts to export its brand of
populism to other Latin American countries. Declining Venezuelan
cooperation on antidrug and antiterrorism efforts also has been a concern.
Since 2006, the Department of State has prohibited the sale of defense
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.2
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).4
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).5
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.6
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
5
articles and services to Venezuela because of lack of cooperation on
antiterrorism efforts. . . . (GE 8) 
 
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision must
be a fair and impartial decision based upon relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶
6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or
factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines
should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance.
Considering the evidence as a whole, Guideline B (foreign influence) and Guideline C
(foreign preference) with their disqualifying and mitigating conditions, are most relevant
in this case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden2 3
of proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of
evidence,  although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet4
its burden of proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a5
preponderance of the evidence.”  6
Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
her.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a7
favorable clearance decision.  No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the8 9
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
 Id at 531.10
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.11
6
they must, on the side of denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant10
should be allowed access to classified information must be resolved in favor of
protecting national security.      11
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the
foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens
to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
Applicant’s mother and father are citizens and residents of Venezuela.
Disqualifying Condition (DC) 7(a): contact with a foreign family member . . . or other
person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a
heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion
applies. 
Applicant’s parents transferred ownership of their family residence in Venezuela
to Applicant and her brother in an effort to prevent it from escheating to the Venezuelan
Government upon their death. When Applicant realized her ownership of this property
created a security concern, she reconveyed the property to her parents. Department
Counsel conceded that by so doing, Applicant had mitigated this alleged security
concern. I agree. No additional disqualifying condition applies due to Applicant’s
temporary ownership of a condominium in Venezuela.
Applicant has resided in the United States since 1982, when she entered this
country to attend college. She obtained degrees from a university in the United States in
1985 and 1986. She became a naturalized United States citizen in October 1993. She
has been married to a career United States Army officer since December 1992. She has
served as a military wife with her husband in overseas assignments during which she
was herself employed by the United States Army and the United States Department of
State. She has a 16-year-old daughter who is a United States citizen. 
Succinctly stated, Applicant has proven herself to be a loyal and dedicated
United States citizen by her service to this country as the wife of a career military officer
and as an employee of the United States Army and the United States Department of
7
State.  Mitigating Condition (MC) 8(b): there is no conflict of interest, . . . because . . .
the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships in the U.S., that the
individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor or the U.S. interest
applies. 
The President of Venezuela defines himself in opposition to the United States,
using incendiary rhetoric to insult the U.S. Government and U.S. influence in Latin
America. Venezuela refuses to cooperate with the United States in its counterterrorism
efforts and, instead, fosters a close relationship with Iran, a state sponsor of terrorism.
Violent crime is rampant in Venezuela and serious concerns exist about Venezuela’s
human rights conduct. While there is no record evidence that Venezuela has attempted
to exploit its citizens to obtain information from foreign relatives, the totality of the
negative information available about Venezuela prohibits application of MC 8(a): the
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of
the U.S.
Guideline C, Foreign Preference
Foreign preference is a concern because when an individual acts in such a way
as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she
may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests
of the United States.
Applicant obtained a Venezuelan passport at her parent’s urging because they
were concerned she may encounter problems entering or exiting Venezuela on only a
United States passport. Applicant never used the Venezuelan passport, and, instead,
used her United States passport for all her foreign travel. She surrendered her
Venezuelan passport when she discovered possession of it created a security concern.
She destroyed the Venezuelan passport in open court during the hearing of her case.
Department Council conceded that her prior possession of a Venezuelan passport no
longer creates a security concern and that she has mitigated the foreign preference
concern that previously existed. I agree. No foreign preference disqualifying condition
applies. 
I have considered all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in
this case, the whole-person concept, including Applicant’s almost 30 years of residency
in the United States, her almost 20 years of being a United States citizen, her service to
the Untied States as the wife of a career military officer, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1
through ¶ 6.3.6 of the Directive, and the applicable disqualifying and mitigating
conditions. Having done so, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence and
foreign preference security concerns. She has overcome the case against her and
satisfied her ultimate burden of persuasion. Guidelines B and C are decided for
8
Applicant. It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security
clearance. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance is granted.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
9
