  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-05477 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden F. Murphy, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Amy Chan, Esq. 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Between July 2008 and April 2010, Applicant smoked marijuana five to eight 
times. Applicant has rebutted or mitigated the security concerns under drug involvment. 
Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on November 24, 2010, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H, drug involvment. 
 
1 
 
                                                          
  
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
2 
 
 On December 14, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. 
On March 2, 1011, I was assigned the case. On March 24, 2011, DOHA issued a Notice 
of Hearing for the hearing held on April 14, 2011.  
 
 The Government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 and 2, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through G, 
which were admitted into evidence without objection. On April 26, 2011, DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, she admitted the factual allegations, with 
explanations. I incorporate her admissions to the SOR allegations. After a thorough 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following additional findings 
of fact:   
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old senior technical designer who has worked for a 
defense contractor since 2009. She is seeking to obtain a security clearance. The 
president and CEO of her company was very pleased with her duty performance and 
stated her efforts were above and beyond what had been expected. (Ex. B) Her 2010 
performance evaluation rated her as a “4,” indicating her performance was good and 
had regularly exceeded the job requirements in terms of quality and quantity of work. 
(Ex. C, Tr. 24) She excels at her job, has a wealth of art, scripting, and design technical 
knowledge, and is an incredible asset to the company. (Ex. C) Her performance 
evaluation signed in February 2011 rated her as a “4,” stating her work is “always of the 
highest quality, and she consistently produces results that are above expectations.” (Ex. 
D)  
 
 The company’s executive producer is very impressed with Applicant’s drive, 
confidence, and her desire to constantly take on additional responsibilities. He rates her 
as an exemplary employee, well liked, and possessing great leadership qualities. (Ex. 
E, Tr. 24) The director of engineering states Applicant is a top-notch engineering talent, 
who has artistic talent combined with high technical skill. (Ex. F, Tr. 25)  
 
At age 13, Applicant started working as a teacher’s assistant for a family theater 
company. (Tr. 27) At age 16, she started working for a pizza company. In 2004, she 
obtained her associate’s degree in computer animation. (Tr. 33) Following graduation, 
she did graphic design work and continued with some teaching education. (Tr. 34) She 
had an internship doing design work for a game company. (Tr. 34) She also worked 
developing software for a medical company. (Tr. 28, 34) In 2009, she started her current 
job with an annual salary of $81,000. (Tr. 38)  
 
 Between early 2008 and April 2010, Applicant used marijuana five to eight times. 
(Tr. 30, 39) When she started, she and most of the employees had been laid off from 
their job due to business reasons. (Tr. 30) Additionally, she had ended a long-term 
relationship and started a new one. She was moving on to a new avenue of her life. (Tr. 
 
3 
 
30) Obviously, Applicant knew about marijuana, but had never been confronted with the 
possibility of using it. (Tr. 31) Even in college, she had never been around marijuana. 
(Tr. 39) Her use occurred sporadically over a two-year period. She has never purchased 
or grown marijuana. She intends never to use marijuana again and feels confident she 
knows what to do should she be offered marijuana in the future. (Tr. 45, 51)  
 
 In April 2010, Applicant listed her use on her 2010 Questionnaire for National 
Security Positions, Standard Form (SF) 86. (Ex. 1) She also revealed her usage during 
her May 2010 personal subject interview. (Ex. 2) Applicant’s marijuana use would occur 
when she and her boyfriend, also a game designer, would meet with other friends. 
There was a subset of those friends who used marijuana. After smoking with this subset 
of friends a number of times, Applicant, her boyfriend, and a couple of other friends 
made a conscious decision to refrain from associating with that group of acquaintances 
in the future. She made it clear to this group that she was no longer interested in using 
marijuana. (Tr. 44)  
 
 Applicant’s last use occurred at a party in 2010. She did not know it was 
marijuana until after she had smoked it. She, her boyfriend, and other friends would get 
together at parties and sometimes smoke tobacco in a “hookah” water pipe. (Tr. 43, 61) 
At times, other spices were mixed with the tobacco and people would attempt to guess 
the identity of the added ingredient. In April 2010, after smoking from the water pipe, it 
was announced the added ingredient was marijuana. (Tr. 41) This revelation upset 
Applicant as well as a number of the other party guests. (Tr. 61) She testified that last 
time she smoked marijuana intentionally was sometime in mid to late 2009. (Tr. 60) 
 
 Applicant provided a signed statement stating she understands marijuana use is 
wrong, unhealthy, and “not congruent with [her] outlook on life.” (Ex. G) She stated she 
was sorry for her past usage and resolved never to do it again. 
 
 At age 20, Applicant took out a car loan, which she paid in full. (Tr. 22) In 2005, 
she had a credit card account, which was charged off. Applicant had moved and had 
not received the billing notice on the card. Once she discovered the unpaid debt, she 
paid it in full even though the company had written off the account. (Tr. 22)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
 
4 
 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement: Use of 
an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about an individual's 
reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may impair judgment and because it 
raises questions about a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and 
regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 25 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying: (a) any drug abuse. 
 
 
5 
 
                                                          
 From July 2008 to April 2010, Applicant used marijuana five to eight times. The 
disqualifying condition in AG ¶ 25(a) applies. 
 
AG ¶ 26 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and, 
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of 
clearance for any violation; 
 
 Applicant’s last intentional use of marijuana was in 2009, more than 16 months 
ago. Applicant realizes her usage was wrong and uncharacteristic of her behavior. 
Applicant does not intend to use illegal drugs in the future and signed a statement 
reflecting her intent. Although the statement did not state she would submit to drug 
testing and any drug use would result in the loss of her clearance, it did state her intent 
never to use marijuana again. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 26(b)(4) applies. 
 
 Applicant has disassociated herself from those acquaintances who use 
marijuana. The mitigating conditions listed in AG ¶ 26(b)(1) and (2) apply.  
 
Security concerns can be mitigated based on AG ¶ 26(a) by showing that the 
drug offenses happened so long ago, were so infrequent, or happened under such 
circumstances that they are unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the individual’s 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. There are no “bright line” rules for 
determining when conduct is “recent.” The determination must be based “on a careful 
evaluation of the totality of the record within the parameters set by the directive.” ISCR 
Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). For example, the Appeal Board 
determined in ISCR Case No. 98-0608 (App. Bd. Aug. 28, 1997), that an applicant's last 
use of marijuana occurring approximately 17 months before the hearing was not recent. 
If the evidence shows “a significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,” then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates “changed circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.”2 
2 ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). In ISCR Case No. 04-09239 at 5 (App. Bd. Dec. 
20, 2006), the Appeal Board reversed the judge’s decision denying a clearance, focusing on the absence 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant’s last intentional marijuana use was more than 16 months ago. Her last 
use occurred in April 2010, but she was unaware that marijuana had been mixed with 
the tobacco until after she had smoked it. AG ¶ 26(a) fully applies, despite Applicant’s 
last illegal drug use being relatively recent. Her overall illegal drug use lasted less than 
two years (July 2008 to April 2010), and involved five to eight uses of marijuana. AG ¶ 
26(a) applies because her past drug use does not cast doubt on her current reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment. Because of her abstention from drug use for more 
than 16 months, and her recognition of the adverse impact on her life of drug abuse, 
there is reasonable certitude that she will continue to abstain from drug use. I am 
confident her illegal drug use will not recur. Because she will not use illegal drugs in the 
future, confidence in her current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment, with 
respect to drug use, is restored.  
 
AG ¶ 26(b) lists four ways Applicant can demonstrate her intent not to abuse 
illegal drugs in the future. She has disassociated from her drug-using associates and 
contacts. However, she still associates with her boyfriend, but he has also made a 
decision not to use marijuana in the future. She does not go out with friends if there is a 
possibility that those associates she knew used marijuana would be present. She has 
changed her life, and does not associate with the drug abusing associates from her 
past. AG ¶ 26(b) partially applies.  
 
In conclusion, Applicant ended her knowing use of marijuana in 2009. Her 
motivations to stop using drugs are evident.3 She understands the adverse results from 
 
of drug use for five years prior to the hearing. The Appeal Board determined that the judge excessively 
emphasized the drug use while holding a security clearance, and the 20 plus years of drug use, and gave 
too little weight to lifestyle changes and therapy. For the recency analysis the Appeal Board stated:  
 
Compare ISCR Case No. 98-0394 at 4 (App. Bd. June 10, 1999) (although the passage 
of three years since the applicant's last act of misconduct did not, standing alone, compel 
the administrative judge to apply Criminal Conduct Mitigating Condition 1 as a matter of 
law, the Judge erred by failing to give an explanation why the Judge decided not to apply 
that mitigating condition in light of the particular record evidence in the case) with ISCR 
Case No. 01-02860 at 3 (App. Bd. May 7, 2002) (“The administrative judge articulated a 
rational basis for why she had doubts about the sufficiency of Applicant's efforts at 
alcohol rehabilitation.”) (citation format corrections added). 
 
In ISCR Case No. 05-11392 at 1-3 (App. Bd. Dec. 11, 2006) the Appeal Board, considered the recency 
analysis of an administrative judge stating: 
 
The administrative judge made sustainable findings as to a lengthy and serious history of 
improper or illegal drug use by a 57-year-old Applicant who was familiar with the security 
clearance process. That history included illegal marijuana use two to three times a year 
from 1974 to 2002 [drug use ended four years before hearing]. It also included the illegal 
purchase of marijuana and the use of marijuana while holding a security clearance. 
 
3Retention of a security clearance, potential criminal liability for possession of drugs and adverse 
health, employment, and personal effects resulting from drug use are among the strong motivations for 
remaining drug free. 
 
7 
 
drug abuse. She has shown or demonstrated a sufficient track record of no drug abuse 
to eliminate drug involvement as a bar to her access to classified information.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is considerable evidence 
supporting approval of her clearance. Applicant is a valued employee with excellent 
potential. She has been working since the age of 13. Her character is revealed by how 
she handled the charged-off credit card account. Due to a move, she was unaware the 
account had become delinquent, but when so informed she paid the account.  
 
Applicant revealed her drug abuse on her security clearance application, during 
her May 2010 interview, and at her hearing. Applicant intentionally used illegal drugs 
from July 2008 to sometime in 2009. She no longer associates with drug-abusing 
acquaintances. Now that she is in the workforce, and in a job she really enjoys, the 
consequences of drug abuse will be much more severe. She knows the consequences 
should she again smoke marijuana. There is no evidence at her current employment of 
any disciplinary problems. There is no evidence of disloyalty or that she would 
intentionally violate national security. Her law-abiding character and good work 
performance shows responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. Her coworkers, friends 
and supervisors support approval of her clearance. She was truthful and forthright in 
revealing her drug abuse on her security clearance application and during her May 2010 
interview. I am satisfied that her current judgment, reliability, trustworthiness, and her 
current ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations show solid future 
potential for access to classified information.  
 
 
8 
 
Applicant’s marijuana usage is fully mitigated for the reasons previously 
discussed. After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions, and all the facts 
and circumstances, in the context of the whole person, I conclude she has mitigated the 
security concerns pertaining to drug involvement.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Drug Involvment:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant   
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
