  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02955 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gina L. Marine, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant had two charged-off accounts and three accounts placed for collection, 
which totaled approximately $22,000. One charged-off account and two collection 
accounts, which total in excess of $16,000, remain unpaid. Applicant has failed to rebut 
or mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, financial considerations. Clearance 
is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Department of Defense’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke 
his eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive 
Order and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on November 18, 2010, detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, financial considerations. 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance 
Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG).  
 
1 
  On December 9, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and elected to have the 
matter decided without a hearing. Department Counsel submitted the Government's 
case in a File of Relevant Material (FORM), dated December 23, 2010. The FORM 
contained eight attachments. On January 31, 2011, Applicant received a copy of the 
FORM, along with notice of his opportunity to file objections and submit material to 
refute, extenuate, or mitigate the potentially disqualifying conditions. On February 9, 
2011, Applicant responded to the FORM. Department Counsel did not object to the 
material. Applicant's response was admitted into the record as Items A through D. On 
February 24, 2010, I was assigned the case.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he admitted all of the factual allegations, with 
explanations. I incorporate Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations. After a 
thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following additional findings of 
fact: 
 
 Applicant is a 43-year-old engineering technician who has worked for a defense 
contractor since January 2007, and seeks to obtain a security clearance. From August 
1986 to August 31, 2006, he was on active duty with the Navy. He retired from the Navy 
as a petty officer first class (PO1, E-6) (Items 4, 5) and receives retirement pay. 
Following his retirement, he was unemployed in September 2006 and October 2006. 
(Item 4)  
 
In July 2006, Applicant divorced his first wife and in May 2009 married his 
second wife. His wife has cancer and has been receiving treatment since at least April 
2010. The record is silent as to the financial impact of her condition other than to state it 
caused Applicant to miss a payment on the debt listed in SOR 1.c. The record fails to 
show if his spouse’s condition resulted in the loss of her job or if she had a job before 
the discovery of cancer. Applicant has three children: a daughter age 21 and sons ages 
21 and 8. (Item 4) 
 
 In February 2001, Applicant purchased a $25,000 2000 Ford automobile with 
$431 monthly payments for 60 months. (Items 5, 6) He made timely payments for 
approximately two years before he was unable to continue making payments. He 
voluntarily surrendered the automobile resulting in a balance due of $19,373 (Items 5, 
6). He was unable to continue the monthly payments because his wife had a baby. (Ex. 
5) In November 2009, he contacted the creditor and agreed to make $210 monthly 
payments until the debt was paid in full. (Item 5) He provided no documentation 
showing he had made the payments as agreed. The collection agency attempting to 
collect this debt (SOR 1.e) and the $2,858 debt (SOR 1.c) are the same, but the debts 
represent two separate obligations.  
 
 In 2002, Applicant obtained a $2,000 personal loan repayable at $204 per month. 
(Item 5) As of December 2009, he owed approximately $1,900 on the debt and asserted 
he was making his monthly payments. His November 2010 credit bureau report (CBR) 
 
2 
lists $703 past due on a charged-off account (SOR 1.a). (Item 5) The CBR also lists a 
$13,123 account with the same creditor with a different account number that was being 
paid as agreed. (Item 5) In August 2010, the creditor of the $2,537 charged-off account 
(SOR 1.a) had offered to settle the account for $658, which Applicant accepted and 
paid. (Item 3, Item B) 
 
 A collection agency was attempting to collect a $2,858 bank credit card account 
(SOR 1.c). (Items 5, 6, 7, and 8) Applicant provided money order receipts indicating he 
had paid $1,948 on this debt. (Item C) An $809 credit card account (SOR 1.d) was 
reported as a collection account on Applicant’s March 2009 CBR (Item 6) The account 
had been opened in April 2000. The only account with this creditor reported on his 
December 2010 CBR was a closed account opened in January 1996 with a zero 
balance that had previously been paid as agreed. (Item 5)  
 
 On Applicant’s November 2009 Electronic Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP), he indicated that during the previous seven years he had accounts 
turned over to a collection agency. (Item 4) On his e-QIP, he indicated he was making 
payments on the $2,537 charged-off account (SOR 1.a) and acknowledged a vehicle 
had been voluntarily repossessed resulting in a $15,586 debt (SOR 1.e). He also listed 
a $2,858 debt (SOR 1.c), but indicated he had received no information about the debt 
from the creditor.  
 
 Applicant admits the $222 charged-off account (SOR 1.b). (Item 3) He indicated 
the debt was being paid through his bank under “bill pay.” (Item 3) In his February 2011 
letter, he states he owes $349 on this debt and asserts it will be paid in full by March 
2011. (Item A) In his SOR Answer, he admitted the remaining collection accounts (SOR 
1.c, $2,858; 1.d, $809; and 1.e, $15,586), but indicated they did not appear on his 
December 2010 CBR. (Item 3)  
 
 As of October 2010, Applicant’s net monthly income (including retirement pay) 
was $4,567. His monthly expenses were $3,431 and he was paying $414 on his debts. 
His net monthly remainder was $722. (Item 5)    
 
 A summary of the SOR past-due and charged-off accounts and their current 
status follows: 
 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
a Bank card charge off. $2,537 Settled in full for $658 and paid. 
(Item A)  
b Bank card charge off. $222 $349 owed on this account. No 
documentation showing payment on 
the debt.  
c Credit card collection 
account.  
$2,858 Paying. Applicant has paid $1,949 
on this debt.  
 
3 
 Creditor Amount  Current Status 
d Credit card collection 
account. 
$809 Unpaid. Applicant admits the debt, 
but asserts it does not appear on his 
December 2010 CBR. 
e Collection account on a 
2003 vehicle 
repossession.  
$15,586 Unpaid. Applicant asserted he had 
contacted the creditor in November 
2009 and agreed to make $210 
monthly payments until the debt was 
paid in full. There is no 
documentation showing payments 
have been made.  
 Total SOR debt  $22,012  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion of obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
4 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple 
prerequisites for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶18 articulates the security concerns relating to 
financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
An individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible, 
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified 
information. Behavior in one aspect of life provides an indication of how a person may 
behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with his creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts as agreed. Absent 
substantial evidence of extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an applicant with a 
history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk that is 
inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be debt 
free, but is required to manage his finances so as to meet his financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant had two charged-off accounts and three collection accounts, which 
totaled approximately $22,000. The evidence supports application of disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations.”  
 
5 
 Five financial considerations mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are 
potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; or 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Because Applicant has three unpaid delinquent accounts, his financial problems 
are continuing in nature. He receives minimal application of the mitigating conditions 
listed in AG ¶ 20(a). Applicant’s handling of his finances, under the circumstances, 
casts doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. 
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant divorced in 
July 2006 and remarried in May 2009. Additionally, his wife has cancer. Although these 
are factors beyond his control, there is little record evidence indicating how these events 
impacted his financial ability to pay his delinquent accounts. He indicated his wife’s 
cancer caused him to miss one payment, but there is no indication of other financial 
problems caused by her medical condition. His two months of unemployment following 
his retirement from the Navy are not recent having occurred more than four years ago. 
He has been employed with his current employer since January 2007, also more than 
four years ago, and the 2003 repossession of his automobile has yet to be addressed. 
The evidence is insufficient to find he has been substantially affected by circumstances 
beyond his control.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) applies to the $2,537 debt listed in 
SOR 1.a, which was settled for $658 and the $2,858 debt listed n SOR 1.c, on which he 
has paid approximately $2,000. He asserts he is making timely monthly payments on 
the $222 debt (SOR 1.b) and the $15,586 debt (SOR 1.e). Despite being questioned by 
 
6 
a DoD investigator about his financial situation in December 2009, and despite 
answering DOHA interrogatories in October 2010, Applicant has produced no evidence 
documenting that he has made timely payments on these two collection accounts, 
which he claimed he was paying. The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(d) applies to 
the two debts he has paid or is paying, but not to the other three. 
 
In Applicant’s FORM response, he admits three collection accounts, but states 
they do not appear on his December 2010 CBR. There are a variety of reasons for an 
account to appear on one CBR to not appear on another CBR. If the account or debt 
was paid, the CBR would list the account with a zero balance and indicate the account 
was settled or paid. The failure of an account to appear on a CBR is not definitive proof 
that the debt has been paid or Applicant no longer owes the debt. He acknowledged the 
2003 repossession of his automobile and said he had agreed to make monthly 
payments on the debt. He also admits the $222 collection account and the $809 
collection account.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(c) does not apply. There is no evidence 
Applicant has received financial counseling and three of the delinquent accounts, which 
total in excess of $16,000, remain unpaid.  
 
The mitigating condition listed in AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply because Applicant 
admitted all five of the debts and has not provided documented proof to substantiate the 
basis of any disputed account.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is some evidence in favor of 
 
7 
mitigating Applicant’s conduct. His wife’s medical condition and his 20 years of Naval 
service have been considered. An applicant is not required to establish that he has paid 
off each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is for him to demonstrate 
he has established a plan to resolve his delinquent debt and has taken significant action 
to implement that plan. I must reasonably consider the entirety of Applicant’s financial 
situation and his actions in evaluating the extent to which that plan is credible and 
realistic. There is no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding 
debts simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan may provide for payment on such 
debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no requirement that the first debts actually paid in 
furtherance of a reasonable debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
The issue is not simply whether all of Applicant’s debts have been paid – they 
have not – it is whether his financial circumstances raise concerns about his fitness to 
hold a security clearance. (See AG & 2(a)(1).) Applicant has settled and paid one 
charged-off account and made substantial payment on a collection account. However, 
the debt resulting from the 2003 repossession of his automobile, a charged-off account, 
and a collection account have neither been paid nor have repayment arrangements 
been made regarding these three debts. His long-standing failure to repay his creditors, 
at least in reasonable amounts, or to arrange payment plans, reflects traits which raise 
concerns about his fitness to hold a security clearance. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. This decision should not be 
construed as a determination that Applicant cannot or will not attain the state of true 
reform and rehabilitation necessary to justify the award of a security clearance. The 
awarding of a security clearance is not a once in a lifetime occurrence, but is based on 
applying the factors, both disqualifying and mitigating, to the evidence presented. Under 
Applicant=s current circumstances, a clearance is not warranted. Should Applicant be 
afforded an opportunity to reapply for a security clearance in the future, having paid the 
delinquent obligations, established compliance with a repayment plan, or otherwise 
addressed the obligations, he may well demonstrate persuasive evidence of his security 
worthiness. However, Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his 
financial considerations. A clearance at this time is not warranted.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Financial Considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant    
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
  Subparagraphs 1.d and 1.e: Against Applicant 
   
 
8 
 
9 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the interests of interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
