  This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992, as1
amended (Directive), and adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of Defense
for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:      )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-03303
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: William T. O’Neil, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence concern that existed due to his family
ties to Morocco. Clearance is granted. 
On December 14, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant.  The SOR alleges a security concern under Guideline B (foreign influence).1
Applicant’s response to the SOR was received by the DOHA on January 7, 2011.
Applicant admitted all SOR allegations except that contained in subparagraph 1.a, and
he requested a decision based on the written record without a hearing.
 Applicant’s statement, dated February 2, 2010, indicates he provides his parents and parents-in-law $2002
per month financial support. It is unclear from the statement if he provides $200 per month to each of them
or $200 per month total to them.
2
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 9,
2011, which was mailed to Applicant on February 9, 2011. Applicant was notified he had
30 days from receipt of the FORM to submit his objections thereto or any additional
information he wanted considered. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM on
February 15, 2011, but did not submit a response to the FORM or object to anything
contained in the FORM within the time allowed him. The case was assigned to me on
April 11, 2011.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following
findings of fact:
Applicant is a 46-year-old man who has been employed since September 2008
as a computer technician by a company currently providing subcontracting service to a
defense contractor. He previously worked as a cab driver from September 2001 until
September 2008. Applicant attended colleges in the United States from January until
May 2002, and from July until September 2002, from which he received certificates in
unlisted disciplines. 
Applicant is a Moroccan citizen by birth. He immigrated to the United States in
1998, and he became a naturalized United States citizen in January 2004. Applicant
had a Moroccan passport which expired in November 2004, that he has not renewed.
He obtained a United States passport in July 2004. 
Applicant married a Moroccan citizen in Morocco in August 2004. He met his wife
while she was visiting her brother, Applicant’s friend, in the United States. Applicant has
a daughter who was born in the United States in 2005. Applicant’s wife became a
naturalized United States citizen in 2010. She works in the produce department of a
grocery store.
Applicant’s father is a 75-year-old retired farmer. He receives a state pension that
is the equivalent of a United States Social Security pension. Applicant’s mother is 75
years old. She has never worked outside the home and has no source of income other
that her husband’s pension. Both of Applicant’s parents are citizens and residents of
Morocco. Applicant has about monthly telephone contact with each of them. Applicant
provides his parents with monetary support each month.2
Applicant has two brothers and four sisters who are citizens and residents of
Morocco. He has two sisters who reside in France, and one sister who resides in
Australia. Applicant’s sister who resides in Australia is a Moroccan citizen. One of
3
Applicant’s sisters who resides in France is a Moroccan citizen, and the other is a dual
French and Moroccan citizen. Applicant has telephonic contact with each of his siblings
that ranges from once or twice a year to as frequently as every three to four months.    
Applicant’s mother-in-law and father-in-law are citizens and residents of
Morocco. Applicant has telephonic contact with his father-in-law about once a year, and
with his mother-in-law about once every three to four months. Applicant’s brother-in-law
and sister-in-law are citizens and residents of the United States.
Applicant visited Morocco in 2000, 2004, and 2007. He stayed with his parents
during those trips and visited with his siblings. The trips to Morocco ranged from 26 to
45 days in duration. In 2005, Applicant attended his sister’s wedding in France and
stayed there for seven days. Because he had not yet become a United States citizen,
Applicant used his Moroccan passport for his 2000 travel to Morocco. He used his
United States passport for all other foreign travel. 
Moroccan law does not recognize the renunciation of Moroccan citizenship.
When he was interviewed on March 27, 2009, Applicant adamantly insisted that his
exclusive loyalty is to the United States and that he has severed his relationships with
the Moroccan Government. He also expressed a willingness to renounce his Moroccan
citizenship if he were allowed to do so. 
 
U.S. Department of State publications provide the following information about
Morocco:
FOREIGN RELATIONS
Morocco is a moderate Arab state which maintains close relations with
Europe and the United States. . . . It contributes consistently to UN
peacekeeping efforts on the continent.
Morocco is active in Maghreb, Arab, and African affairs. It supports the
search for peace and moderation in the Middle East. . . .
Morocco was the first Arab state to condemn Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in
1990 and sent troops to help defend Saudi Arabia. Morocco maintains
close relations with Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf states, which have
provided Morocco with substantial amounts of financial assistance.
Morocco has supported efforts to stabilize Iraq following the downfall of
Saddam Hussein.
Morocco was among the first Arab and Islamic states to denounce the
September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States and declare
solidarity with the American people in fighting terrorism. Morocco has
experienced terrorism at home as well. . . .
4
In addition to traditional security measures, King Mohammed VI has
promoted significant initiatives to counter extremism and dissuade
individuals from becoming radicalized. Each Ramadan, for example, the
King hosts a series of religious lectures, inviting Muslim speakers from
around the world to promote moderate and peaceful religious
interpretations. (Background Note: Morocco, January 2010, p. 6-7) 
U.S.-MOROCCAN RELATIONS
Morocco was the first country to seek diplomatic relations with the
Government of the United States in 1777 and remains one of our oldest
and closest allies in the region. Formal U.S. relations with Morocco date
from 1787, when the two nations negotiated a Treaty of Peace and
Friendship. Renegotiated in 1836, the treaty is still in force, constituting
the longest unbroken treaty relationship in U.S. history. As testament to
the special nature of the U.S.-Moroccan relationship, Tangier is home to
the oldest U.S. diplomatic property in the world, and the only building on
foreign soil that is listed in the U.S. National Register of Historic Places,
the American Legation in Tangier (now a museum).
U.S.-Moroccan relations, characterized by mutual respect and friendship,
have remained strong through cooperation and sustained high-level
dialogue. King Hassan II visited the United States several times during his
reign as King, meeting with Presidents John Kennedy, Lyndon Johnson,
Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, George H.W. Bush, and Bill Clinton. King
Mohammed VI has continued his father’s tradition; he made his first trip to
the U.S. as King on June 20, 2000 and visited again in 2004. Prime
Minister Driss Jettou also visited Washington in January 2004. Secretary
of State Colin Powell traveled to Morocco in December 2004 to co-chair
with Foreign Minister Mohamed Benaissa the first meeting of the G8-
BMENA “Forum for the Future.” In November 2009, Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton visited Morocco to attend the sixth G8-BMENA Forum and
met with King Mohammed VI.
As a stable, comparatively moderate Arab Muslim nation, Morocco is
important for U.S. interests in the Middle East. Accordingly, U.S. policy
toward Morocco seeks sustained and strong engagement and identifies
priorities of economic, social, and political reform; conflict resolution;
counterterrorism/security cooperation; and public outreach. In August
2007, the U.S. and Morocco signed a Millennium Challenge Compact
totaling $697.5 million to be paid out over five years. The Compact was
designed to stimulate economic growth by increasing productivity and
improving employment in high-potential sectors, such as artisanal crafts
and fishing. (Background Note: Morocco, January 2010, p. 9)
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.3
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 4
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).5
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).6
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.7
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
5
SAFETY AND SECURITY: In March and April 2007, a series of terrorist
bombings occurred in Casablanca, two of which simultaneously occurred
outside the U.S. Consulate General and the private American Language
Center. In 2003, a series of similar attacks in Casablanca targeted hotels
and restaurants. The potential for terrorist violence against U.S. interests
and citizens remains high in Morocco. Moroccan authorities continue to
disrupt groups seeking to attack U.S. or Western-affiliated and Moroccan
government targets, arresting numerous individuals associated with
international terrorist groups. . . . (Morocco, Country Specific Information,
July 15, 2010, p. 3)
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision must
be a fair and impartial decision based upon relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶
6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or
factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines
should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance.
Considering the evidence as a whole, Guideline B (foreign influence) with its
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden3 4
of proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of
evidence,  although the government is required to present substantial evidence to meet5
its burden of proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a6
preponderance of the evidence.”  7
Once the government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
him.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a8
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.9
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.10
 Id at 531.11
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.12
6
favorable clearance decision.  No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the9 10
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant11
should be allowed access to classified information must be resolved in favor of
protecting national security.   12
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this
Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the
foreign contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens
to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
Applicant’s parents, parents-in-law, and many of his siblings are citizens and
residents of Morocco. He maintains regular telephonic contact with each of these
individuals and he has visited with most of them in Morocco during three trips he has
taken to that country since 2000. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 7(a): contact with a
foreign family member . . . or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign
country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement,
manipulation, pressure, or coercion; and DC7(d): sharing living quarters with a person
or persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk
of foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion apply. 
Applicant is a first-generation immigrant American citizen. He met his wife who
was then a Moroccan citizen while she was visiting her brother in the United States.
They married in Morocco and she thereafter immigrated to the United States and
became a first-generation American citizen. Applicant and his wife have a daughter who
was born in the United States and, thus, has become a second-generation American
citizen. 
Applicant has worked steadily since coming to the United States. He has
attended two college sessions in the United States from which he earned certificates in
7
disciplines that are not identified in the record evidence. He has advanced his career
from being a cab driver to working as a computer technician.
Applicant has resided in the United States since 1998. He has been a United
States citizen since 2004. He has adamantly expressed his total and undivided loyalty
to the United States. He allowed his Moroccan passport to expire without seeking to
renew it after he became an American citizen. He has used his American passport for
all foreign travel since he became an American citizen. Applicant has asserted his
willingness to renounce his Moroccan citizenship if Moroccan law would recognize such
a renunciation.  
The length of Applicant’s residency in the United States, the length of time he
has been a United States citizenship, his work and educational pursuits in the United
States, his adamant profession of loyalty to the United States, his willingness to
renounce his Moroccan citizenship, and his wife and daughter’s citizenship status,
entitle him to application of Mitigating Condition (MC) 8(b): there is no conflict of
interest, . . . because . . . the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships in
the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor or
the U.S. interest.
Morocco is a moderate Arab state which maintains close relations with Europe
and the United States. Relations between the United States and Morocco are
characterized by mutual respect and friendship. Those relationships remain strong
through cooperation and sustained high-level dialogue, including visits by Moroccan
Kings to Presidents of the United States that date back to President John F. Kennedy’s
term in office. 
Morocco has been a friend of the United States since its beginning. It was the
first country to seek diplomatic relations with the Government of the United States in
1777, and it remains one of closest allies of the United States in the region. Morocco
was the first Arab state to condemn Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait in 1990, and it has
supported efforts to stabilize Iraq following the downfall of Saddam Hussein. Morocco
was among the first Arab and Islamic states to denounce the September 11, 2001
terrorist attacks in the United States and declare solidarity with the American people in
fighting terrorism. 
Like many countries around the world, including the United States, Morocco has
experienced terrorist attacks. Some of those attacks were directed against American
interests and personnel in Morocco. In response to the continuing terrorist threat in
Morocco, its authorities have disrupted groups seeking to attack U.S. or Western-
affiliated and Moroccan government targets, and have arrested numerous individuals
associated with international terrorist groups. Further, King Mohammed VI has
promoted significant initiatives to counter extremism and dissuade individuals from
becoming radicalized.  
8
As the adjudicative guideline directs, adjudication of potential foreign influence
concerns should consider the foreign country where Applicant’s relatives reside and
whether that country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected
information. There is absolutely no record evidence to indicate that Moroccan
authorities have ever attempted to target United States citizens to obtain protected
information or that they are likely to do so in the future. MC 8(a): the nature of the
relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or
the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the
individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a
foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S.
applies. 
I have considered all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in
this case, the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the
Directive, and the applicable disqualifying and mitigating conditions. Having done so, I
conclude Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence security concern. He has
overcome the case against him and satisfied his ultimate burden of persuasion.
Guideline B is decided for Applicant. It is clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-e: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance is granted.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
9
