                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 10-03524 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: William T. O’Neil, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant’s statement of reasons (SOR) lists twenty delinquent debts totaling 
$57,194. He did not provide proof of any payments to his SOR creditors. He failed to 
make sufficient progress in resolving his SOR debts, and financial considerations 
concerns are not mitigated at this time. Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 29, 2009, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) or security clearance application (Item 5). On October 
5, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued an SOR to 
Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information 
Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guideline F (financial considerations). 
(Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the preliminary 
affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s clearance should be 
granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
On December 20, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations and 
requested a decision without a hearing. (Item 4) A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated January 13, 2011, was provided to him on January 22, 2011. 
He was afforded an opportunity to file objections and to submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.1 Applicant did not respond to the FORM. The case was 
assigned to me on March 17, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted the debts in SOR ¶¶ 1.a-1.t.3 
His admissions are accepted as factual findings.   
 
Applicant is a 48-year-old video teleconference technician employed by a 
government contractor since early 2004.4 He attended a university from 1989 to 1992, 
and he earned a bachelor’s degree. He served in the Army from 1994 to 1999, and he 
received an Honorable discharge. Applicant is married. His children were born in 2001 
and 2003, and his two stepchildren were born in 1989 and 1993.     
 
Financial Considerations 
 
Applicant’s SOR lists twenty delinquent debts totaling $57,194. Of this total, 
$10,929 relates to overdue mortgage payments on a $221,000 mortgage.  
 
Applicant explains that his financial problems were initially caused by a seven-
month period of unemployment in 2004.5 His spouse’s health problems and travel 
expenses were also factors adversely affecting his financial situation. He traveled to 
Germany in 2006 for eight days, to Brazil in 2006 for 10 days, to Germany in 2007 for 
 
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated January 14, 2011, and Applicant’s receipt is dated January 
22, 2011. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after his receipt to submit 
information.  
 
2Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
 
3Unless stated otherwise, the information in this paragraph is from Applicant’s SOR response. 
(Item 4) 
 
4Unless stated otherwise, the information in this paragraph is from Applicant’s security clearance 
application. (Item 5) 
 
5Unless stated otherwise, the information in this paragraph is from Items 4 and 6.   
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
ten days, and to Germany in 2009 for eight days. (Item 6) His spouse traveled to 
Germany every year for the last several years. His home went into foreclosure in August 
2009.  
 
Applicant’s SOR debts resulted from his defaulting on multiple credit cards, a 
state tax lien, a telecommunications account, a signature loan, disputes with apartment 
complexes, purchases of furniture, defaulting on his mortgage, and seven medical 
debts. (Items 4, 6) The seven medical debts total $4,976. (Item 4)  
 
On November 26, 2010, Applicant’s mother passed away, and he believes he will 
receive an inheritance “six to seven times the amount of [his] debt.” (Item 4) On 
December 7, 2010, he received a beneficiary IRA in the amount of $212,821.  Applicant 
indicated he planned to pay his debts in January 2011 using his share of the 
inheritance. He wanted to wait until after January 1, 2011 to start paying his creditors for 
income tax reasons. As indicated previously, Applicant’s receipt for the FORM is dated 
January 22, 2011. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days 
after his receipt to submit information. He did not explain why he did not utilize the 
proceeds from his inheritance to resolve his SOR debts.  
 
Applicant did not provide proof of any payment plans or payments to the SOR 
creditors. There is no evidence of financial counseling. There is no evidence of 
reportable criminal offenses, drug abuse, or alcohol-related misconduct.  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guideline F (financial considerations).  
 
Financial Considerations 
 
  AG ¶ 18 articulates the security concern relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
  AG ¶ 19 provides two disqualifying conditions that could raise a security concern 
and may be disqualifying in this case: “(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts;” and 
“(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.” In ISCR Case No. 08-12184 at 7 
(App. Bd. Jan. 7, 2010), the Appeal Board explained: 
 
It is well-settled that adverse information from a credit report can normally 
meet the substantial evidence standard and the government’s obligations 
under [Directive] ¶ E3.1.14 for pertinent allegations. At that point, the 
burden shifts to applicant to establish either that [he or] she is not 
responsible for the debt or that matters in mitigation apply. 
 
(internal citation omitted). Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in his 
credit reports, his responses to DOHA interrogatories, and his SOR response. 
Applicant’s SOR lists 20 debts totaling $57,194. Some of his debts became delinquent 
in 2006. The Government established the disqualifying conditions in AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 
19(c), requiring additional inquiry about the possible applicability of mitigating 
conditions.   
   
  Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
Applicant’s conduct in resolving his debts warrants very limited application of AG 
¶¶ 20(b), 20(c), and 20(d).6 There is no evidence of financial counseling. He showed 
 
6The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good faith” effort to repay 
overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                            
some good faith when he admitted responsibility for his SOR debts in his SOR 
response. Applicant’s financial situation was damaged by insufficient income, seven 
now delinquent medical debts totaling about $4,976, and his unemployment in 2004. 
However, Applicant’s financial circumstances have been relatively stable since 2004, 
and he has not provided sufficient information about variations in his income over the 
last six or seven years to fully establish any mitigating conditions. He did not explain 
why he did not use some of his inheritance to pay his delinquent debts. 
 
Applicant did not establish that he acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
The file lacks proof that he maintained contact with all of his creditors.7 There are no 
receipts or account statements from creditors, establishing any payments to his SOR 
creditors. There is insufficient evidence that his financial problem is being resolved and 
is under control. The file lacks evidence that he has acted responsibly on any of his 
SOR debts.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good faith” mitigating condition], an applicant 
must present evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
some other good-faith action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does 
not define the term ‘good-faith.’ However, the Board has indicated that the concept of 
good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person acts in a way that shows reasonableness, 
prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ Accordingly, an applicant must 
do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally available option (such as 
bankruptcy) in order to claim the benefit of [the “good faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting 
ISCR Case No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
7“Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances 
outside his [or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a 
reasonable manner when dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. 
Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 
at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is 
whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep 
debts current. 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under Guideline F, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
approval of his access to classified information. Applicant is a 48-year-old video 
teleconference technician employed by a government contractor since early 2004. He is 
sufficiently mature to understand and comply with his security responsibilities. He 
served in the Army from 1994 to 1999, and he received an Honorable discharge. He 
deserves some credit for volunteering to support the U.S. Government as a Soldier from 
1994 to 1999 and as an employee of a Department of Defense contractor. There is 
every indication that he is loyal to the United States and his employer. There is no 
evidence that he abuses alcohol or uses illegal drugs. Applicant’s financial situation was 
damaged by unemployment in 2004, and insufficient income to address his delinquent 
debts. I give Applicant substantial credit for admitting responsibility for all 20 of his SOR 
debts in his SOR response. He has been honest about his failure to address his 
financial plight. These factors show some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
 
 The whole-person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial at this time. Applicant’s SOR lists 20 delinquent debts, totaling 
$57,194. Applicant’s employment has been stable since 2004. He did not provide proof 
that unemployment in 2002, $4,976 in delinquent SOR medical debts, or other non-SOR 
medical debts were a substantial cause of his inability to make any payments to his 
SOR creditors. He did not provide his pay statements or his income tax returns. He did 
not provide any documentation showing attempts to establish payment plans. He did not 
pay the two smallest SOR debts in SOR ¶ 1.b for $87 and in SOR ¶ 1.d for $120. There 
is no evidence that any SOR creditors have received any payments. Applicant and his 
spouse have made multiple overseas trips to Germany and Brazil over the last five 
years for personal reasons. Applicant has failed to make sufficient progress resolving 
his delinquent SOR debts to establish his financial responsibility.     
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude financial considerations 
concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraphs 1.a to 1.t:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for 
access to classified information. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
___________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
