                                                               
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04990 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Kathryn MacKinnon, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
On December 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline E. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 13, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on February 8, 2011. 
DOHA issued a Notice of Hearing on February 10, 2011. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled on March 9, 2011. The Government offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 9. 
Applicant did not object, and they were admitted into evidence. Applicant offered 
exhibits (AE) A through D into evidence. Department Counsel (DC) objected that AE A 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
was not relevant or material. Her objection was sustained and the AE A was not 
admitted. The remaining exhibits were admitted into evidence. Applicant and three 
witnesses testified on his behalf. DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.) on March 
17, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denied the sole SOR allegation. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 57 years old. He is a high school graduate and has some college 
credits, but did not earn a degree. He married in 1976 and divorced in 1983. He 
remarried in 1985 and divorced in 2004. He has three children, ages 32, 20 and 14 
years old. He pays child support for his youngest child. He served in the Navy from 
1972 to 1980, and was honorably discharged in the pay grade E-5. He has held a top 
secret security clearance since 2004 and a secret security clearance for about 20 
years.1 
 
 The sole SOR allegation relates to Applicant’s conduct during a polygraph 
examination. It is alleged that during an August 2008 polygraph examination, conducted 
by a Government agency to determine his eligibility for access to Sensitive 
Compartmented Information (SCI), he attempted to manipulate the results of the 
examination by using physical countermeasures to conceal drug-related information.2 
As a result, Applicant’s eligibility for access to SCI was denied and his security 
clearance was suspended. 
 
 In Applicant’s appeal he explained why he made movements during his 
polygraph exam. He stated:  
 
[T]he movements were not done to conceal relevant information regarding 
past drug involvement. After being told to sit totally motionless, squeezing 
my anal cavity was the only way to channel my nervousness. However, it 
educated me on the sensitivity of the [p]olygraph and given another 
opportunity I would not do that again.3 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant was asked if he used countermeasures during his 
polygraph examination. He stated:  
 
If he asked---once the examiner asked me a question, I can’t say exactly 
every question ma’am, but most of the questions that he asked me I would 
1 Tr. 132-136. 
 
2 My decision is based solely on Applicant’s conduct regarding his polygraph, and I have not considered 
any of the factual information about drug involvement for disqualifying purposes.  
 
3 GE 8. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
use a countermeasure I guess. That’s the term that he used. But not for 
every single question. And like I said I was nervous at the time.4  
 
Applicant further testified as follows:  
 
DC: So he detected this. He confronted you. You initially denied 
attempts to manipulate the polygraph but when he asked you a little bit 
more you admitted that you did manipulate your physiology, you did use 
this countermeasure, this anal sphincter squeezing thing, as you just 
said not for every question, but at various questions throughout the 
polygraph? 
 
Applicant (A): Most of the questions. 
 
DC: All right, Now in that interview you also admitted that you had 
started to research how to deal with a polygraph on the Internet after 
your first poly[graph] right? 
 
A: Yes, ma’am. 
 
DC: And that was true? 
 
A: Yes ma’am. 
 
AJ: I’m sorry, you researched what? Ask the question again, I didn’t 
quite get it. 
 
DC: You started researching how to deal with a poly[graph] on the 
Internet correct? 
 
A: Yes ma’am. 
 
DC: And specifically what did you look at on the Internet, did you do a 
Google search or something like that?  
 
A: Yes, ma’am. 
 
DC: And so you googled something like “beat polygraph test” or “how to 
beat polygraph test” or “how to take a polygraph test?”  
 
A: No, just “polygraph testing.”  
 
* * * 
 
4 Tr. 28. 
 
4 
 
 
DC: Okay, You just read the material, you read the material probably 
from antipolygraph.org. They have a lot of stuff out there.  
 
A: Ma’am, I’m not sure exactly what web site it was.  
 
DC: You don’t remember, All right. But you do remember that specific 
technique that you learned was anal sphincter contraction correct? 
 
A: Yes, ma’am. I did read something relative to that but that--- 
 
* * * 
 
AJ: And you learned that from the web site? 
 
A: Yes, ma’am.  
 
AJ: And what is that supposed to do? 
 
A: It’s supposed to help you pass the test was my thoughts. That’s all.  
 
DC: All right. Is it not true that what these articles state is that the 
contraction of the anal sphincter muscle is a countermeasure that’s to be 
applied not just with the security questions but also in the control 
questions, right?  
 
A: I can’t verify that that’s what I read. And actually, no, I can’t verify that.  
 
DC: You can’t verify that? 
 
A: No, I don’t remember reading the words. See, I wasn’t trying to fool 
anybody. I was just trying to pass the test based on things that I’d read. 
That’s all I was trying to do.  
 
* * * 
 
DC: What did you think the anal sphincter manipulation was going to do 
to help you pass the polygraph test?  
 
A: I didn’t know. I didn’t know. I didn’t know. 
 
DC. So it’s your testimony here today that you just thought that if you did 
this technique throughout the polygraph that it would somehow 
mysteriously help you pass the polygraph?  
 
A: That was my understanding, ma’am, that’s all. That was my 
understanding.  
 
5 
 
 
                                                          
* * * 
 
AJ: You thought that you needed to somehow use your body to help you 
pass the test? 
 
A: Yes, ma’am.5  
 
Applicant went on to say he was not lying about anything and all the information 
he gave during his polygraph was the truth. However, when asked directly, if he 
squeezed his anal sphincter, he stated he had no reason to do it, but yes, he did. He 
was specifically asked:  
 
AJ: So you used these body movements intentionally during your 
polygraph examination?  
 
 A: Yes, ma’am.  
 
 AJ: And the purpose was to help you pass it? 
 
A: Yes, ma’am, but the answers that I gave the examiner was the truthful 
answer. I did not lie as far as the answers that I gave. I was just falsely--- 
 
AJ: I’m sorry. What? You mumbled there. I was just what? 
 
A: I was just falsely under the impression that that you know, I don’t 
understand why but I did that and that was my error. That was my error 
in judgment.6  
 
* * *  
 
DC: Let me word it differently, You gained enough information from the 
web site that you believed that doing this anal sphincter squeeze might 
help the poly[graph] somehow look better for you? 
 
A: Yes, ma’am. That’s it.  
 
DC: All right. So you knew that you were not relying just on your answer 
to get you through the polygraph right?  
 
A: My answers [were] truthful. 
 
DC: That’s not my question. 
 
5 Tr. 29-36. 
 
6 36-39. 
 
6 
 
 
edible.  
                                                          
A: But it’s – 
 
DC: That’s not my question. You knew that you were deliberately doing 
some motions that at a minimum you thought would supplement your 
ability to pass the test, right?  
 
A: Yes, ma’am.7 
 
Applicant admitted that he was told by the polygraph examiner to sit totally 
motionless. Applicant did not follow these instructions. Instead, he intentionally moved 
his body.8 He admitted he made earlier statements and said that he made involuntary 
movements during the polygraph test because he was nervous, which is inconsistent 
with his hearing testimony.9 He did not tell the polygraph examiner before the test that 
he was nervous and would be using an anal sphincter squeeze to help him calm 
himself. He admitted he was told to sit still.10 
 
 In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he stated he was not trying to conceal 
anything during the polygraph, but it was “pure nervousness.” He confirmed at his 
hearing he was not trying to conceal anything, but he did intentionally move. He stated 
“It was done as an attempt to assist in taking the test you know.”11 
 
 Applicant was aware that he had information about a former girlfriend whom he 
unwittingly loaned money to so she could pay a bill. He learned later she used the 
money to buy cocaine. He terminated the relationship after learning this. Applicant 
stated that this information had bothered him for a long time and he wanted to be 
forthright with the polygraph examiner. He did not disclose this information during a 
previous polygraph. He did not disclose it initially during his second polygraph, but 
eventually did disclose it. He explained he failed to disclose it initially because he was 
ashamed and embarrassed.12 Applicant claims he was not trying to intentionally 
conceal this information. I did not find his testimony cr
 
 Three character witnesses testified on Applicant’s behalf. They described him as 
a person with integrity, who stays out of trouble, and has good solid values. He can be 
counted on to do the right thing. He is a team player, a patriot, and a person who can be 
trusted. A former supervisor testified that he was pleased with Applicant’s work and 
would take him back as an employee. He is known to abide by rules and was never 
7 Tr. 38-39. 
 
8 Tr. 40-41. 
 
9 Tr. 41-42, 89-93. 
 
10 Tr. 93-97. 
 
11 Tr. 45-46. 
 
12 Tr. 64-72, 100. 
 
7 
 
 
                                                          
disciplined while working for him. Another supervisor stated that Applicant was a 
dependable excellent worker who was well liked. He has never received any complaints 
about Applicant. He trusts him to provide truthful information. I have also considered the 
information in Applicant’s exhibits.13 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
13 Tr. 106-131. 
 
8 
 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the security concern pertaining to personal conduct;  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.  
 The following will normally result in an unfavorable clearance action or 
administrative termination of further processing for clearance eligibility: (a) 
refusal, or failure without reasonable cause, to undergo or cooperate with 
security processing, including but not limited to meeting with a security 
investigator for subject interview, completing security forms or releases, 
and cooperation with medical or psychological evaluations; (b) refusal to 
provide full, frank and truthful answers to lawful questions of investigators, 
security officials, or other official representatives in connection with a 
personnel security or trustworthiness determination. 
AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have specifically considered:  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules or regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person 
may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not 
limited to consideration of: (1) untrustworthy or unreliable behavior . . . ; 
and 
 
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging activities which, if known, may affect the person’s 
personal, professional, or community standing. 
 
 
9 
 
 
While taking a polygraph, Applicant intentionally engaged in countermeasures, by 
manipulating his body in order to alter the findings. Applicant was told not to make any 
movements and he deliberately failed to comply with the directions of the polygraph 
examiner. His failure to cooperate during the security process raises questions about 
his judgment, trustworthiness, reliability, and willingness to comply with rules. His 
testimony lacked candor and was at times not credible. His personal conduct created a 
vulnerability to exploitation and manipulation. I find both disqualifying conditions apply.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered the following mitigating conditions 
under AG ¶ 17: 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
There is no evidence that Applicant received improper or inadequate advice prior 
to taking the polygraph. I find AG ¶ 17(b) does not apply. Applicant intentionally 
attempted to manipulate a polygraph he took to determine his eligibility for access to 
SCI. His actions cannot be construed as minor. Although he admitted that he was using 
physical countermeasures during the polygraph, he continues to claim it was merely to 
help him better pass the test. He has failed to take full responsibility for his actions. His 
actions cast doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. He has not 
taken positive steps toward addressing his transgressions. I am not convinced his 
behavior is unlikely to recur. I find AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e) do not apply.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
 
10 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant served in the Navy and received an honorable discharge. He has 33 
years experience in his field of expertise. His supervisors and coworkers consider him a 
trusted valued employee. Applicant was required to take a polygraph to obtain access to 
SCI. He researched the Internet to learn how to pass the polygraph. He learned that by 
using certain physical movements, he could manipulate the results. He was told by the 
polygraph examiner not to make any movements. Applicant deliberately made 
movements, after being told not to, so he could manipulate the results. Applicant was 
nervous about information about a former girlfriend who was involved in drugs. He was 
initially attempting to conceal the information about his girlfriend. Applicant’s testimony 
at times was convoluted and lacked candor. Applicant was aware of the importance of 
the polygraph test and failed to follow the specific directions of the polygraph examiner. 
Applicant’s behavior creates serious doubts as to his reliability, good judgment, and 
trustworthiness. Applicant failed to meet his burden of persuasion. Overall, the record 
evidence leaves me with serious questions and doubts about Applicant’s eligibility and 
suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to 
mitigate the security concerns arising under the guideline for Personal Conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
11 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a security clearance. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
 
