1
 
                                                             
                           
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------- )       ISCR Case No. 10-01125
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Richard Stevens, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                                            
______________
Decision
______________
MARSHALL, Jr., Arthur E., Administrative Judge:
On October 15, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) noting security concerns arising under Guideline
F (Financial Considerations). The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense (DOD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the DOD on September 1, 2006. 
In a November 4, 2010, response, Applicant admitted four of the allegations
without comment and requested a decision without hearing. On January 6, 2011,
Department Counsel submitted a File of Relevant Material (FORM), which included nine
attached items. Applicant did not submit a response within the time period of 30 days
after his receipt of the FORM.  The case was assigned to me on April 4, 2011. Based
on a review of the case file, I find Applicant failed to meet his burden regarding the
security concerns raised. Security clearance denied.
 W ith regard to debt 1.a, Applicant contends that this was a joint account with his ex-wife.      1
 See FORM, Item 6 (Interrogatories) at 2-4.      2
 Id. at 8-11.      3
 Applicant was deployed both as a member of the military and as a career civilian working for a defense      4
contractor. See FORM at 4-5.
 FORM, Item 5 (Security clearance application, dated Feb. 4, 2009) at 18-19.      5
2
Findings of Fact
Applicant is a 33-year-old systems operator who has worked for the same
defense contractor since about February 2009. He attended one year of college after
he was discharged from the U. S. Army, in which he served from 1997 until 2004. He is
married and has five children.  
At issue in the SOR are seven delinquent debts attributed to Applicant: 1.a
($3,038 - denied), 1.b ($689 - admitted); 1.c ($413 - admitted); 1.d ($11,454 - admitted);
1.e ($6,745 - admitted); 1.f ($550 - denied); and 1.g ($167 - denied).  In sum, he1
admitted four of the debts (about $19,300). He provided no documentary evidence
showing that the three denied accounts (approximately $3,760) have been paid,
addressed, resolved, or formally disputed. No documentary evidence was submitted
supporting his claims that he has worked with some of his creditors by telephone.  He2
did, however, submit evidence that two delinquent accounts and a state tax liability not
shown as being at issue in the SOR were previously satisfied.3
Applicant attributed his debts, in part, to an earlier separation and divorce that
occurred in 2005 and four deployments over the past 10 years.  He was also4
unemployed from September 2008 through November 2008 and in January 2009.  No5
significant information was provided that linked these events to the debts at issue. He
also failed to provide information about his current finances. There is no evidence that
he has pursued financial counseling, or describing his overall financial situation.
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an
administrative judge must consider the AG. The AG lists potentially disqualifying
conditions and mitigating conditions. These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.
Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, they are applied in
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. An administrative judge’s
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. Under
AG ¶ 2(c), this process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a
decision.
 See also ISCR Case No. 94-1075 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Aug. 10, 1995).      6
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      7
 See also EO 12968, § 3.1(b)  and EO 10865 § 7.      8
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 at 7-8 (App. Bd. Jan. 27, 1995).      9
 Id.      10
3
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
The United States Government (Government) must present evidence to
establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. It is an applicant’s responsibility to
present  “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate facts
admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The burden of proof is6
something less than a preponderance of evidence. The ultimate burden of persuasion
is on the applicant.  7
A person seeking access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government based on trust and confidence. This relationship
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified information.
Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation about
potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  “The clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance8
determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.”  Any reasonable doubt9
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive information must be
resolved in favor of protecting such information.  A security clearance denial does not10
necessarily reflect badly on an applicant’s character. It is merely an indication that the
applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense
established for issuing a clearance.
Analysis
Guideline F – Financial Considerations 
In this case, Guideline F is the appropriate guideline for consideration. Under
that guideline, “failure or an inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
 AG ¶ 18.      11
 Id.      12
4
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or unwillingness to
abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise questions about an individual’s
reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”  It also states11
that “an individual who is financially overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal
acts to generate funds.”  Here, Applicant admitted delinquent debts amounting to12
about $19,300, and provided no documentary evidence showing that about $3,760 in
denied debts have been addressed, resolved, or formally disputed with one of the three
major credit reporting bureaus. Therefore, Financial Considerations Disqualifying
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a) (inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts) and AG ¶ 19(c) (a
history of not meeting financial obligations) apply. With such conditions raised, it is left
to Applicant to overcome the case against him and mitigate security concerns. 
There are multiple debts at issue, amounting to $23,000 in delinquent debt. As
noted above, there is no tangible evidence that any of these debts have been
addressed. Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions AG ¶ 20(a) (the behavior
happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under such circumstances that it
is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability,
trustworthiness, or good judgment) and FC MC AG ¶ 20(d), (the individual initiated a
good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts) do not apply. 
 Applicant suggests that a separation and divorce in about 2005 and four
deployments over the past decade contributed to his financial issues. He also
experienced at least two brief periods of unemployment between 2008 and 2009.
Although he failed to document a clear nexus between those events, such
unanticipated situations often disrupt one’s financial planning and joint accounts are
often unresolved in a divorce. However, in the absence of any additional information
about Applicant’s finances or budget, there is no way to discern whether he acted
responsibly during those periods, obviating application of AG ¶ 20(b) (the conditions
that resulted in the behavior were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce
or separation) and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances).
In failing to provide a clear picture of his finances, there is only scant evidence
that Applicant has worked on addressing his debt or improving his finances. The
evidence submitted addressed two apparently delinquent debts and a state tax liability
that have been resolved, but none of those accounts were shown to be among the
accounts at issue in the SOR. There is no evidence that Applicant has pursued financial
counseling. There is no documentary evidence supporting his claims that he has
worked with some or all of his creditors vis telephone. There is no evidence that he has
developed and implemented a plan to resolve his delinquent debts. Therefore, neither
AG ¶ 20(c) (the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control) nor AG
 Emphasis added.      13
5
¶ 20(d) (the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or
otherwise resolve debts) applies. 
With regard to the joint account which Applicant appears to imply may be the
responsibility of Applicant’s ex-wife, there is insufficient evidence to raise AG ¶ 20(e)
(the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt
which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to substantiate the
basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve the issue).  None of the13
other financial considerations mitigating conditions apply.
The burden for mitigation in these proceedings is placed squarely on Applicant.
Lacking evidence that he has made any progress on the debts noted in the SOR,
financial considerations security concerns remain unmitigated.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the “whole-person concept,” the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate
determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance must be an overall
commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the
whole-person concept. As noted above, the ultimate burden of persuasion is on the
applicant seeking a security clearance. 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, as well as the “whole-person”
factors. In choosing a decision without hearing, there are scant facts of record.
Applicant is a mature and experienced man who has devoted his adult life to the
military and the defense industry. He has only been subject to minor periods of
unemployment. He is married and, together with his current wife, has five children. 
Applicant was separated from his first wife, then divorced in 2005. He was briefly
unemployed twice between 2008 and 2009. There is insufficient evidence to evaluate
his current financial situation. There is no evidence as to either his current budget, if
any, or any plans he may have to address and satisfy the debts at issue. While he did
submit some documentary evidence of satisfying a few debts not at issue in the SOR,
they are impossible to assess as part of any overall personal finance strategy without
more information and evidence.   
Applicant admitted over $19,000 in delinquent debt. He denied three of the debts
at issue, amounting to about $3,760. As previously noted, the burden of persuasion in
these proceedings is placed on the Applicant. Here, Applicant failed to meet his burden.
He offered scant documentary evidence to mitigate his admitted liability or to refute
6
those debts which he denies. The clearly consistent standard indicates that security
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials. Any
reasonable doubt about whether an applicant should be allowed access to sensitive
information must be resolved in favor of protecting such information. In light of the
foregoing, security concerns remain unmitigated. Clearance is denied.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a-1.g:  Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant access to classified
information. Clearance denied.
ARTHUR E. MARSHALL, JR.
Administrative Judge
