  This action was taken under Executive Order 10865, DoD Directive 5220.6, dated January 2, 1992, as1
amended (Directive), and adjudicative guidelines which became effective within the Department of
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of:      )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-03293
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: William T. O’Neil, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se
                                                              
______________
Decision
______________
LAZZARO, Henry, Administrative Judge
Applicant mitigated the foreign influence concern that existed due to her family
ties to Jordan. Clearance is granted. 
On November 9, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant stating it was unable to find it is
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant.  The SOR alleges a security concern under Guideline B (foreign influence).1
Applicant’s response to the SOR was received by DOHA on December 20, 2010.
Applicant admitted both SOR allegations and requested a decision based on the written
record without a hearing.
2
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 6,
2011, which was mailed to Applicant on January 10, 2011. Applicant was notified she
had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to submit her objections thereto or any additional
information she wanted considered. Applicant acknowledged receipt of the FORM on
February 6, 2011. On February 18, 2011, Applicant submitted a response to the FORM,
which included three letters of recommendation. On February 28, 2011, Department
Counsel executed a memorandum indicating he did not object to the admissibility of
Applicant’s submissions. The case was assigned to me on March 14, 2011.
Findings of Fact
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations are incorporated herein. In
addition, after a thorough review of the pleadings and exhibits, I make the following
findings of fact:
Applicant is a 50-year-old woman who has been employed as a linguist by a
defense contractor since March 2009. She has worked with U.S. military forces serving
in Iraq since April 2009. Applicant’s duties as a linguist include traveling in military
logistical convoys with U.S. military forces transporting supplies to soldiers living on joint
security sites. The commanding officer of a U.S. Army command she supports wrote
that Applicant has been willing to volunteer for dangerous missions throughout Iraq.
Applicant has earned a reputation for being an outstanding translator whose integrity is
unquestioned.
Applicant is a Jordanian citizen by birth. She has been a naturalized United
States citizen since April 22, 1983. Applicant has been married to a United States
citizen since September 1982. They were married in Jordan where Applicant’s husband
was employed by a United States government contractor at the time. He has worked for
a government contractor since approximately 1977, and he currently is employed as a
quality control/quality assurance manager. 
Applicant lived in Saudi Arabia with her husband from approximately October
1998 until March 2003, and again from February 2005 until June 2005. While residing in
Saudi Arabia, Applicant was employed as a part-time special education counselor from
October 1998 until March 2003, and as a youth trip counselor from April 2001 until
March 2003. Both positions were with the same company that employed Applicant’s
husband. She also worked part-time as a postal clerk at a United States postal facility in
Saudi Arabia from April 2001 until March 2003. Applicant was unemployed from March
2003 until she began working for her current employer. Except for her brief residency in
Saudi Arabia in 2005, Applicant resided in the United States from March 2003 until April
2009.
Applicant’s current United States passport was issued in August 2007. She had a
Jordanian passport that was issued in October 1999, which expired in September 2004.
She surrendered that passport to her current employer to demonstrate her loyalty and
allegiance to the United States. When Applicant was questioned in June 2009, she
3
stated she had not renounced her Jordanian citizenship because she had family living in
Jordan and she had to remain a Jordanian citizen to receive any future inheritance. In
her responses to the SOR and to the FORM, Applicant wrote that she is ready to
renounce her Jordanian citizenship. 
Applicant’s father is deceased. Her mother is an 83-year-old naturalized United
States citizen. Her mother owns a house in the United States, and she was residing with
Applicant’s brother, who is also a naturalized United States citizen, in the United States,
until he began working as a linguist in Iraq. Applicant’s mother relocated to Jordan to
reside with Applicant’s second brother, where she was admitted to a hospital in
February 2010, with advanced cancer of the left breast. 
Applicant’s second brother is a citizen and resident of Jordan. He owns and/or
manages a paint and building material business. Applicant’s sister is a citizen and
resident of Jordan. She is a homemaker. Applicant’s brother and sister in Jordan have
applied to immigrate to the United States with their families. The United States
Department of State has acknowledged receipt of all documentation necessary to
complete the National Visa Center’s processing of their cases, and Applicant anticipates
they will be allowed to immigrate to the United States in July 2011.
Applicant speaks with her mother and sister by telephone about once every two
to three weeks. She speaks with her brother in Jordan by telephone about once every
two to three months. Applicant visited her mother for about one week in Jordan in
November 2010. Prior to that visit, Applicant last traveled to Jordan in March 2003.
Applicant opened a bank account in Jordan in 1998 with a deposit of $100. She
opened the account so she could make deposits into the account in the case of an
emergency. She has not used the account or made any deposits into the account since
it was first opened. 
U.S. Department of State publications provide the following information about
Jordan:
Relations between the United States and Jordan have been close for 6
decades, with 2009 marking the 60  anniversary of U.S.-Jordanian ties.th
U.S. policy seeks to reinforce Jordan’s commitment to peace, stability, and
moderation. The peace process and Jordan’s opposition to terrorism
parallel and indirectly assist wider U.S. interests. Accordingly, through
economic and military assistance and through close political cooperation,
the United States has helped Jordan maintain its stability and prosperity.
(FORM Item I, p. 5)    
The threat of terrorism remains high in Jordan. Transnational terrorist
groups, as well as less sophisticated local elements, have demonstrated
the capability to plan and implement attacks in Jordan. The Al-Qaida in
Iraq network in particular continues to carry out terrorist activities against
4
U.S. and Government of Jordan (GOJ) targets in Jordan. (FORM Item II,
p. 1)
The government respected human rights in some areas, but its overall
record continued to reflect problems. The government restricted citizens’
rights to change their government. . . . Domestic and international NGOs
(nongovernmental organizations) reported cases of arbitrary deprivation of
life, torture, poor prison conditions, impunity, arbitrary arrest and denial of
due process through administrative detention, prolonged detention, and
external interference in judicial decisions. Citizens continued to describe
infringements on their privacy rights. (FORM Item III, p. 1)
Through both its public statements and its actions, the Jordanian
Government demonstrated a solid commitment to countering terrorist
groups and extremist ideologies. The Jordanian government continued its
political and material support for the Palestinian Authority (PA) and for PA
President Mahmoud Abbas. King Abdullah II routinely expresses backing
for the peace process and for a negotiated settlement of the Israel-
Palestine dispute. Jordan has facilitated the regional peace process by
training five battalion-sized elements of the Palestine Security Forces at
the Jordan International Police Training Center (JIPTC) outside Amman,
including two such rotations in 2009. These Palestinian forces have since
deployed throughout the West Bank, where their motivation and
professionalism have earned praise from the different regional parties. 
* * * 
Jordan’s security forces continued programs to prevent terrorist attacks in
the country and to deny terrorists the use of its territory to launch attacks
against its neighbors. . . .
In August, Jordan, with U.S. government support, hosted a conference
establishing the Regional Biometric Partnership initiative, bringing together
law enforcement, security, and forensic experts from twelve Middle
Eastern countries. Jordan presented a tailored biometric software package
and proposed the creation of a regional biometric database for known and
suspected terrorists in the region to allow the efficient sharing of data
between governments. The proposal won an endorsement in principal [sic]
from other participants and could potentially do much to thwart terrorist
travel. Jordan welcomed U.S. training and assistance designed to
strengthen security at its ports of entry. 
Jordan’s security services remained intensely engaged against terrorist
threats. As a result of their vigilance, several planned attacks were
disrupted prior to execution. . . . (FORM Item IV, p. 3-4)    
 ISCR Case No. 96-0277 (July 11, 1997) at p. 2.2
 ISCR Case No. 97-0016 (December 31, 1997) at p. 3; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.14. 3
 Department of the Navy v. Egan 484 U.S. 518, 531 (1988).4
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (December 19, 2002) at p. 3 (citations omitted).5
 ISCR Case No. 98-0761 (December 27, 1999) at p. 2.6
 ISCR Case No. 94-1075 (August 10, 1995) at pp. 3-4; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.7
 ISCR Case No. 93-1390 (January 27, 1995) at pp. 7-8; Directive, Enclosure 3, Item E3.1.15.8
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.9
 Id. at 531.10
5
Policies
The Directive sets forth adjudicative guidelines to consider when evaluating a
person’s eligibility to hold a security clearance. Chief among them are the disqualifying
and mitigating conditions for each applicable guideline. Each clearance decision must
be a fair and impartial decision based upon relevant and material facts and
circumstances, the whole person concept, and the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶
6.3.6 of the Directive. Although the presence or absence of a particular condition or
factor for or against clearance is not outcome determinative, the adjudicative guidelines
should be followed whenever a case can be measured against this policy guidance.
Considering the evidence as a whole, Guideline B (foreign influence) with its
disqualifying and mitigating conditions, is most relevant in this case. 
  
The sole purpose of a security clearance decision is to decide if it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for an
applicant.  The Government has the burden of proving controverted facts.  The burden2 3
of proof in a security clearance case is something less than a preponderance of
evidence,  although the Government is required to present substantial evidence to meet4
its burden of proof.  “Substantial evidence is more than a scintilla, but less than a5
preponderance of the evidence.”  6
Once the Government has met its burden, the burden shifts to an applicant to
present evidence of refutation, extenuation, or mitigation to overcome the case against
her.  Additionally, an applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a7
favorable clearance decision.  No one has a right to a security clearance  and “the8 9
clearly consistent standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if
they must, on the side of denials.”   Any reasonable doubt about whether an applicant10
 Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive.11
 W hen an “Applicant has repeatedly been willing to assume a high level of risk on behalf of the U.S., [his12
behavior] constitute[s] important evidence that Applicant’s ties and sense of obligation to the U.S. could be
sufficiently strong that he [could] be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.
Directive ¶ E2.8(b). See ISCR Case No. 05-03846 at 6 (App. Bd. Nov 14, 2006) (Applicant’s work as an
6
should be allowed access to classified information must be resolved in favor of
protecting national security.      11
Analysis
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual has
divided loyalties or financial interests, may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign
person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication under this
guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign
contact or financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such considerations
as whether the foreign country is known to target United States citizens to obtain
protected information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism.
Applicant’s mother, sister, and one of her two brothers are residents of Jordan.
Applicant’s mother is a United States citizen. Her sister and her brother who resides in
Jordan are Jordanian citizens. Disqualifying Conditions (DC) 7(a): contact with a foreign
family member . . . or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if
that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation,
pressure, or coercion applies. 
Applicant has been married to a United States citizen since 1982. She became a
naturalized United States citizen in April 1983, and her mother and one of her brothers
have become naturalized United States citizens. Applicant’s sister and brother who
reside in Jordan have applied for visas to allow them to immigrate to the United States.
Applicant anticipates their visa applications will be approved in July 2011. As a
demonstration of her loyalty and allegiance to the United States, Applicant surrendered
her expired Jordanian passport to her employer. She has expressed a willingness to
renounce her Jordanian citizenship. 
Applicant maintained long-term part-time employment with a government
contractor and the U.S. Postal Service when she lived in Saudi Arabia while her
husband was employed there. She has been serving with U.S. military forces in Iraq
since April 2009. The letters of recommendation she submitted from people she has
worked with in Iraq, including the commanding officer of the command to which she is
assigned, establish that Applicant is considered to be an excellent interpreter with
unquestioned integrity who is willing to place herself in harm’s way to meet the linguistic
needs of the U.S. Army.  Mitigating Condition (MC) 8(b): there is no conflict of interest,12
interpreter in Afghanistan occurred “in the context of dangerous, high-risk circumstances in which [he]
made a significant contribution to the national security.”) ISCR Case No. 06-25928 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Apr 9,
2008).
7
. . . because . . . the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships in the
U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor or the
U.S. interest applies. 
Jordan and the United States have maintained close relations for over 60 years.
While the threat of terrorism remains high in Jordan, its security services remained
intensely engaged against those threats. As a result of their vigilance, several planned
attacks were disrupted prior to execution. Jordan, with U.S. government support, hosted
a conference establishing the Regional Biometric Partnership initiative, bringing together
law enforcement, security, and forensic experts from twelve Middle Eastern countries.
Jordan proposed the creation of a regional biometric database for known and suspected
terrorists in the region to allow the efficient sharing of data between governments. The
proposal won an endorsement in principle from other participants and could potentially
do much to thwart terrorist travel. Jordan welcomed U.S. training and assistance
designed to strengthen security at its ports of entry. 
Applicant has been a U.S. citizen for almost 30 years and there has been no
attempt during that period by anyone or any entity in Jordan or elsewhere to exploit her
relationship with her Jordanian relatives. MC 8(a): the nature of the relationships with
foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the positions or
activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual,
group, organization, or government and the interests of the U.S. applies. 
I have considered all relevant and material facts and circumstances present in
this case, the whole person concept, the factors listed in ¶ 6.3.1 through ¶6.3.6 of the
Directive, and the applicable disqualifying conditions. Having done so, I conclude
Applicant has mitigated the foreign influence security concern. She has overcome the
case against her and satisfied her ultimate burden of persuasion. Guideline B is decided
for Applicant. It is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant a
security clearance. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraphs 1.a and 1.b: For Applicant
8
Conclusion
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for
Applicant. Clearance is granted.
Henry Lazzaro
Administrative Judge
