 
1 
 
 
                                                                
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case: 10-03549   
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Gregg A. Cervi, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
  
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the record evidence, eligibility for access to classified 
information is denied. 
 
On January 18, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). On November 23, 2010, the Defense Office of 
Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
detailing security concerns under Guideline F (Financial Considerations). The action 
was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within 
Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the adjudicative guidelines effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant filed an undated answer to the SOR and requested that the case be 
decided on the written record in lieu of a hearing. On January 25, 2011, Department 
Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) containing eight Items and mailed 
 
2 
 
 
Applicant a complete copy on January 26, 2011. Applicant received the FORM on 
February 2, 2011, and had 30 days from its receipt to file objections and submit 
additional information. He submitted a letter outside of the time limit to which the 
Department had no objection. I marked that as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A and admitted it 
into the record.  On February 23, 2011, DOHA assigned the case to me. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations contained in ¶ 1. His 
admissions are incorporated into the following findings. 
 
 Applicant is a 41 years old. He is divorced and remarried since February 2010. 
He has two step-children. He has an associate degree in Art. In November 2007 he 
began a position as an aircraft mechanic with a defense contractor.  Prior to obtaining 
this employment, he worked for private companies for at least ten years with a short 
period of unemployment in January 2007. (Item 5, 7.) 
 
 In February 2010 Applicant met with a government investigator to discuss his 
delinquent accounts. During that interview, he acknowledged the debts listed on a 
February 4, 2010 credit bureau report (CBR) and indicated that he intended to pay 
them, including a $96 bill owed to an electric company. (Item 7.) In October 2010 he 
responded to Interrogatories and submitted a budget that listed his and his spouse’s 
monthly net income as $4,070 and expenses as $4,052, leaving only $18 remaining.1 
(Item 7.)  He provided a statement that he contacted five creditors about delinquent 
debts. He cannot afford repayments at this time and deferred his student loan for 
another year. (Id.) The $13,291 debt listed in ¶ 1.a is a personal loan he obtained to 
help his parents prevent a foreclosure. (Id.) 
 
Based on the February 2010 CBR, the SOR alleged nine debts totaling $58,695, 
including an $18,000 student loan, which began accumulating in 2007 and continued 
accumulating into 2010. Applicant offered no evidence of any payment or payment plan 
to resolve these debts. He has not obtained credit counseling. He provided no evidence 
concerning the quality of his job performance. He submitted no character references or 
other evidence tending to establish good judgment, trustworthiness, or reliability.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines (AG) list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
1 Applicant receives $700 per month from two rental properties. 
 
3 
 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the whole-person concept. The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
4 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 notes two disqualifying conditions that could potentially raise security 
concerns in this case: 
 
(a)  inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Based on a CBR and his statements, Applicant has been unable to satisfy his 
delinquent debts that began accruing in 2007. The evidence is sufficient to raise these 
two potentially disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove a 
mitigating condition. AG ¶ 20 sets forth conditions that could mitigate financial security 
concerns: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Because Applicant’s delinquent debts are ongoing and not isolated, there is 
insufficient evidence to support a finding that the indebtedness is unlikely to recur or 
continue. Hence, AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Applicant stated that he was out of work a 
 
5 
 
 
short time in early 2007. While that situation may have had a negative effect on his 
finances in 2007, Applicant did not present sufficient evidence that the total 
accumulation of $58,695 of debt can be attributed to conditions beyond his control or 
that he attempted to responsibly manage the debt once it accrued, as required under 
AG ¶ 20(b). 
 
Applicant established no mitigation under AG & 20(c) or AG & 20(d). He did not 
submit evidence that he received credit counseling or that that his financial situation is 
coming under control. He did not present sufficient evidence that he made a good-faith 
effort to pay or resolve his debts, including the small $96 debt. He asserted that his 
student loan is deferred, but did not submit proof.  There is no evidence to support the 
application of AG & 20(e) or AG & 20(f). 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.   
      
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature individual, who 
has worked for a defense contractor since November 2007. In February 2010 he 
learned of the Government’s concerns relating to his financial delinquencies, and 
responsibly indicated his willingness to resolve the matters. In November 2010 DOHA 
filed a SOR, listing over $58,000 of delinquent debts that consists of an $18,000 student 
loan, about $27,000 of credit card debt, and a $13,000 personal loan for his parents. In 
January 2011 the Government filed the FORM. For almost a year, he has been on 
notice that his debt was creating security concerns and potentially affecting his 
employment.  Despite that knowledge, he did not provide sufficient proof that he has 
taken steps to address the debts or even pay the smallest debt. While I recognize that 
Applicant has little money in his budget for debt reduction, he could have taken some 
steps to address the debts, such as obtaining credit counseling or financial assistance 
 
6 
 
 
through his company’s Employee’s Assistance Program, and consistently making small 
payments on the debts. The record contains insufficient other evidence about his 
character, trustworthiness, or responsibility to mitigate these concerns or make their 
continuation less likely. 
 
Overall, the record evidence creates substantial doubt as to Applicant’s present 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.i:             Against Applicant 
      
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
