 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01554 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Ray T. Blank, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James R. Klimaski, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
LYNCH, Noreen A., Administrative Judge: 
 
On October 13, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to 
deny Applicant’s application, citing security concerns under Guidelines B (Foreign 
Influence) and C (Foreign Preference). The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant timely answered the SOR and requested a hearing before an 
administrative judge. DOHA received the request on December 15, 2010, and the case 
was assigned to me on December 23, 2010. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on 
February 11, 2011, setting the case for March 3, 2011. I convened the hearing as 
scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 4 were admitted in evidence without 
objection. Applicant testified on her own behalf, and presented five witnesses. She 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibit (AX) A, which was admitted without objection. DOHA 
received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 11, 2010. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Evidentiary Ruling 
 
Department Counsel requested that I take administrative notice of adjudicative 
facts about Lebanon. The request and its enclosures were not admitted in evidence but 
are attached to the record as HX Exhibit I. The facts administratively noticed are set out 
below in my Findings of Fact.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the factual allegations in the 
SOR. Her admissions in her answer to the SOR and at the hearing are incorporated in 
my findings of fact.  I make the following findings: 
 
 Applicant is a 26-year-old program assistant of a management and engineering 
technology company. She is single and has no children.  She has been with her current 
employer since February 2009. She has never held a clearance, but initiated a security 
clearance application in 2007.  
 
Applicant was born in the United States of a Lebanese-American father and an 
American mother. The family is Christian. She moved to Lebanon in 1994 with her 
father, mother and brother. She attended a private school in Lebanon. When she was 
14 years old, her father obtained a Lebanese identity card for Applicant to maintain her 
legal status in Lebanon. She and her mother and brother returned to the United States 
in 2000. Applicant graduated from an American high school in 2002, and obtained an 
undergraduate degree from an American university in 2006. She obtained her master’s 
degree in 2008. (GX 1) 
 
Applicant lives and works in the United States. She completed a graduate 
assistantship in the international office of her university. (GX 1) She served as an 
international student advisor for the federal government prior to her current 
employment. (Tr. 51) 
 
Applicant’s father, who was a lawyer, was a naturalized United States citizen. He 
obtained his LLM from an American university. He practiced law in the United States but 
returned to Lebanon in 1994 with his family and remained there until July 2006, when 
he was evacuated as an American citizen. He died later that year in the United States 
(2006).  
 
Applicant’s mother and brother also reside in the United States. Applicant’s 
mother has dual citizenship with the United States and Lebanon due to her marriage. 
She testified at the hearing that she accompanies Applicant on trips to Lebanon. She 
acknowledged that Applicant’s father obtained an identity card for Applicant when she 
 
3 
 
 
was very young. (Tr. 74) Applicant’s mother also has a Lebanese identity card. She 
explained that she travels on her U.S. passport but carries the identity card. She 
elaborated that she carried the Lebanese identity card because it is a safeguard in the 
country in case of an emergency situation. She also had a Lebanese driver’s license but 
it expired. (Tr. 77) Applicant obtained a Lebanese driver’s license in 2003. She uses it 
as a convenience when she travels to Lebanon.  
 
Applicant’s grandmother is a citizen and resident of Lebanon. She is 94 years old 
and in poor health. Applicant acknowledged that she is close to her grandmother. When 
Applicant lived in Lebanon as a child, she saw her grandmother daily. Applicant visits 
her grandmother annually. She states that the main reason she continues to visit 
Lebanon is because her visits are meaningful to her grandmother. Applicant also 
maintained contact with her by telephone until recently. Her grandmother is too ill to 
speak on the phone. (Tr. 58) 
 
Applicant has three aunts, who are citizens and residents of Lebanon. Her uncle 
is a judge in the Lebanese judicial system. Applicant sees her aunts and uncle once a 
year when she visits her grandmother. She is not close to her uncle. (Tr. 48) Applicant 
reports that her uncle has distanced himself from the family. One aunt is a pediatrician, 
another is an elementary school director; and the third aunt is a homemaker. Applicant 
speaks to them on the telephone once a month. (Tr. 65) She sometimes emails them as 
well. 
 
Since 2002, Applicant has visited Lebanon annually, usually during the summer 
school break and Christmas to visit her father and her relatives. Her father died in 2006, 
but Applicant travelled to Lebanon in October 2006 to attend a memorial for her father. 
Since his death, she continues to travel annually to visit her grandmother and her 
relatives. Her last visit was in December 2009. She usually stays two weeks and stays 
in her father’s old residence. (Tr. 61) She used her U.S. passport for all travel. At the 
hearing, Applicant explained that she does not maintain a Lebanese passport. The 
passport expired in 2006. (GX 4) However, Applicant uses the Lebanese identity card 
for security reasons. (Tr. 55)  She states that it allows her to travel safely in the country. 
She elaborated that she could be held for questioning if something would arise. (Tr. 56) 
 
During a security interview in October 2007, Applicant told a security investigator 
she was willing to renounce her Lebanese citizenship if required to do so. (GX 3 at 3) 
She reiterated her willingness to renounce her Lebanese citizenship at the hearing. (Tr. 
56) 
 
In 2009, Applicant told the investigator that she would think seriously about 
renouncing her Lebanese citizenship in order to obtain a security clearance. The report 
notes that she would have to know the specific reasons why she would be required to 
renounce her Lebanese citizenship. (GX 2) 
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant has a Lebanese friend who works and lives in Lebanon. She has 
known her since 2000. Applicant maintains contact with her by email. She also saw her 
in Lebanon in 2009. (Tr. 65) 
 
Applicant presented a letter from her supervisor. Applicant’s supervisor describes 
her as an outstanding professional in her work with the international visitor program 
office. Applicant demonstrates a high level of integrity in her work. She maintains a 
strong work ethic and has a commitment to customer service. Applicant possesses 
strong organizational skills. She is reliable, dependable, and trustworthy. (AX A) 
Applicant’s supervisor also testified at the hearing that she is happy to have Applicant 
as part of the team. (Tr. 91) 
 
Various family friends testified at the hearing that Applicant is proud of her family 
heritage, but believe that Applicant has not expressed a preference for another country 
other than the United States. (Tr. 95)  All believe Applicant has a loyalty to the United 
States. (Tr. 104) 
 
Lebanon 
 
I take administrative notice of the following adjudicative facts about Lebanon. 
Although Lebanon is a parliamentary republic, it has some human rights problems, 
including the arbitrary arrest and detainment of individuals and instances of arbitrary 
and unlawful deprivation of life, torture, and other abuses. 
 
Its foreign policy and internal policies are heavily influenced by Syria, who 
maintains intelligence agents in Lebanon and is a state sponsor of terrorism. The 
unstable political situation in Lebanon enables foreign terrorist organizations to operate 
within its borders. Hizballah is the most prominent terrorist group in Lebanon. The 
Lebanese government recognizes Hizballah as a legitimate resistance group and 
political party. Hizballah maintains offices in Beirut and elsewhere in Lebanon, has 
liaison officers to Lebanese security forces, and is represented by elected deputies in 
the Lebanese parliament. Hizballah is closely allied with Iran, supports a variety of 
violent anti-Western groups, and has been involved in numerous anti-U.S. terrorist 
attacks.  
 
 Lebanon has a poor human rights record. Lebanese security forces have 
engaged in arbitrary arrest, murder, torture, and other abuses. There is an atmosphere 
of government corruption and lack of transparency. Militias and non-Lebanese forces 
operating outside the area of Lebanese central government authority have used 
informer networks and monitored telephones to obtain information about their perceived 
adversaries. 
 
 The terrorist group Hizballah is a Lebanese-based radical Shi’a group and is 
designated by the United States as a “Foreign Terrorist Organization.” The Lebanese 
government recognizes Hizballah as a “legitimate resistance group’ and political party 
and until recently was represented by elected officials in the Lebanese parliament. 
 
5 
 
 
Hizballah also provides support to several Palestinian terrorist organizations and is 
known to be involved in numerous anti-United States and anti-Israel terrorist attacks. 
Americans have been the targets of numerous terrorist attacks. 
 
U.S. citizens who also possess Lebanese nationality may be subject to laws that 
impose special obligations on them as Lebanese citizens. Presently, there is a travel 
warning for U.S. citizens traveling to Lebanon due to the threat against westerners.  
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
 
6 
 
 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994).  The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that 
it is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
The security concern under Guideline B is set out in AG & 6 as follows: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 A disqualifying condition under this guideline may be raised by “contact with a 
foreign family member . . . if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(a). A 
disqualifying condition also may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, 
government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest between the 
individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s 
desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information.”  AG ¶ 
7(b). 
 
Where family ties are involved, the totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign 
country as well as each individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-
22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2003). A[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person 
has ties of affection for, or obligation to, the immediate family members of the person's 
spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 
2002).   
 
7 
 
 
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States. “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.” ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.  See ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. 
 
 Applicant’s father is deceased and her mother is an American citizen who resides 
in the United States. The SOR does not allege any security concerns arising from 
Applicant’s mother’s dual citizenship with Lebanon, and Department Counsel presented 
no evidence raising such concerns. 
 
 Applicant’s grandmother is a citizen and resident of Lebanon. Applicant has “high 
affection” for her grandmother and maintains regular contact with her. She visits her 
every year with her mother and brother. The presence of her grandmother and her 
aunts and uncle in Lebanon and their vulnerability to abuse by Lebanese authorities as 
well as terrorists in Lebanon raises the “heightened risk” in AG ¶ 7(a) and the potential 
conflict of interest in AG ¶ 7(b). 
 
  Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 7(a), and (b), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts.  Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  An applicant has 
the burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts 
to the government.  See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). This condition is not established because Applicant’s relationships 
with her grandmother and aunts are close, and they reside in a country with a poor 
human rights record where terrorism is rampant and a terrorist organization is part of 
the political structure. 
 
8 
 
 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
 
Under the old adjudicative guidelines, a disqualifying condition based on foreign 
family members could not be mitigated unless an applicant could establish that the 
family members were not “in a position to be exploited.”  Directive ¶ E2.A2.1.3.1.  The 
Appeal Board consistently applied this mitigating condition narrowly, holding that an 
applicant should not be placed in a position where he or she is forced to make a choice 
between the interests of the family member and the interests of the U.S. See ISCR 
Case No. 03-17620 at 4 (App. Bd. Apr. 17, 2006); ISCR Case No. 03-24933 at 6 (App. 
Bd. Jul. 28, 2005); ISCR Case No. 03-02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2005); ISCR Case 
No. 03-15205 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005). Thus, an administrative judge was not 
permitted to apply a balancing test to assess the extent of the security risk.  Under the 
new guidelines, however, the potentially conflicting loyalties may be weighed to 
determine if an applicant “can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of 
the U.S. interest.”   
 
Applicant’s loyalty to her grandmother and relatives certainly is not “minimal.”  
She is still connected to her Lebanese heritage, as demonstrated by her visits each 
year since 2002 to see family members living in Lebanon. The evidence is insufficient to 
establish that Applicant would be likely to resolve a conflict of interest in favor of the 
U.S. interests if her grandmother or relatives were threatened by foreign agents, 
Lebanese security forces, or terrorist groups operating in Lebanon. Thus, I conclude 
Applicant has not met her burden of fully establishing this mitigating condition. 
 
Guideline C, Foreign Preference 
 
 The security concern under this guideline is as follows: “When an individual acts 
in such a way as to indicate a preference for a foreign country over the United States, 
then he or she may be prone to provide information or make decisions that are harmful 
to the interests of the United States.” AG ¶ 9. Dual citizenship standing alone is not 
sufficient to warrant an adverse security clearance decision.  ISCR Case No. 99-0454 at 
5, 2000 WL 1805219 (App. Bd. Oct. 17, 2000).  Under Guideline C, “the issue is not 
whether an applicant is a dual national, but rather whether an applicant shows a 
preference for a foreign country through actions.”  ISCR Case No. 98-0252 at 5 (App. 
Bd. Sep 15, 1999). 
 
 A disqualifying condition may arise from “exercise of any right, privilege or 
obligation of foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen,” including but not limited 
to “possession of a current foreign passport.” AG ¶ 10(a)(1). Applicant’s repeated use of 
her Lebanese identity card after becoming a U.S. citizen raises this disqualifying 
condition. 
 
9 
 
 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline may be mitigated by evidence that “dual 
citizenship is based solely on parents’ citizenship or birth in a foreign country.” AG ¶ 
11(a).  Appellant continues to exercise Lebanese citizenship by possessing and using 
her Lebanese identity card. This mitigating condition is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by if “the individual 
has expressed a willingness to renounce dual citizenship.” AG ¶ 11(b). Applicant told a 
security investigator she was willing to renounce her Lebanese citizenship, and she 
repeated her willingness to renounce it at the hearing. This mitigating condition is 
established. Foreign Preference concerns are mitigated due to the application of AG 
11(b). 
 
    Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person-concept.  Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed above, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a U. S. citizen. She spent part of her youth in Lebanon due to her 
father’s work. She returned to the United States in 2000. She obtained her 
undergraduate and graduate education in the United States. She has an excellent 
reference from her current employer. She is described as a trustworthy individual. Her 
mother and brother reside in the United States. The presence of her grandmother and 
relatives in Lebanon and the political conditions in Lebanon are beyond her control. The 
presence of her grandmother and her aunts in Lebanon, her bonds of affection for those 
family members, and her repeated visits to Lebanon, accompanied by her mother and 
brother, present a vulnerability to pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress that is not 
mitigated. 
 
 
10 
 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guidelines B and 
C, and evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude 
Applicant has mitigated the security concerns based on foreign preference, but she has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude 
she has not carried her burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to grant her eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
 
     Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:     For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:     Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:     Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline C (Foreign Preference): FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:     For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Noreen A. Lynch 
Administrative Judge 
