 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01237 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Tovah A. Minster, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 27, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. DOHA acted under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended 
(Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of 
Defense after September 1, 2006.  
 
 
2 
 
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on November 12, 2010, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on December 30, 2010. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant, and he received it on January 11, 2011. Applicant was given an opportunity 
to file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant 
did not submit a reply. The case was assigned to me on February 24, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he admitted all the allegations stated in the 
SOR. After a thorough and careful review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 32 years old. He is married, but separated, and has three children. 
Since April 2007, he has worked for a defense contractor. He is a high school graduate 
with some college. He served in the Navy from June 1997 to June 2007 and was 
honorably discharged in the pay grade of E-5. He has held a top secret security 
clearance since April 23, 1998, and sensitive compartmented information (SCI) access 
since July 22, 1998.1   
  
 Applicant’s admitted conduct raised in the SOR includes: (1) using marijuana 
between 1996 and December 2007, including while holding a top security clearance and 
SCI access (See SOR ¶¶ 1.a – 1.c); (2) being denied access to SCI in August 2008 by 
the National Security Agency; providing false information about his past drug use when 
completing his security clearance questionnaires in June 2007, May 2003, and 
December 1997, and when he was interviewed by a Department of Defense (DoD) 
investigator on November 2, 2009, July 7, 2008, and October 17, 2007; (See SOR ¶¶ 
2.a - 2.j); and (3) using marijuana after signing a workplace policy prohibiting drug use 
(See SOR ¶ 2.k).2 
  
 Applicant first used marijuana one time in 1996. From 1998 to 2000, he used it 
on two occasions; from 2000 to 2003, he used it one time; from 2003 to 2007, he used it 
one time every three months. His last use was in November 2007. He used marijuana 
while in the Navy, fully aware of its zero tolerance policy for illegal drugs. He also used it 
while holding a top secret clearance with SCI access. He used marijuana after signing a 
National Security Agency (NSA) policy in October 2007, prohibiting illegal drug use.3 
 
 The marijuana was always supplied by his wife. Although he did not really like 
marijuana, he used it because his wife enjoyed smoking it. He also thought it might help 
                                                          
1 Items 5, 8, 11. 
 
2 Item 4. 
 
3 Items 4, 11. 
 
 
3 
 
 
ease the marital tension between he and his wife. He no longer associates with his wife 
except for child visitation purposes.4 
 
 Applicant completed security clearance questionnaires on June 5, 2007, May 9, 
2003, and December 8, 1997. He falsified the questions relating to past drug use on 
each questionnaire when he denied any such use. He was also interviewed by 
investigators concerning his security clearance on November 2, 2009, July 7, 2008, and 
October 17, 2007, and asked about his prior drug use. He intentionally denied any use 
or underreported his use during these interviews. He only admitted his drug use after 
two interviews with NSA in 2008. He provided this false information because he feared 
admitting to his drug use would have a negative impact on his security clearance.5 
  
 Applicant provided no information about his Navy career or work performance 
information from his current employer. No evidence of drug counseling or treatment was 
contained in the record.6 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. 
 
                                                          
4 Item 11. 
 
5 Items 5-6, 8-11. 
 
6 Items 4-11. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 AG ¶ 24 expresses the Drug Involvement security concern: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.  
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the disqualifying conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 25 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) any drug abuse; and 
 
(g) any illegal drug use after being granted a security clearance.   
 
 Appellant used marijuana on a number of occasions including while holding a 
security clearance with SCI access. I find both disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
 I have considered all of the evidence in this case and the mitigating conditions 
under Drug Involvement AG ¶ 26 and especially considered the following: 
 
 
5 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
and 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: (1) 
disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; (2) changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used; (3) an appropriate 
period of abstinence; (4) a signed statement of intent with automatic 
revocation of clearance for any violation. 
 
 Applicant’s short period of abstinence is insufficient to demonstrate 
Applicant’s intent not to use illegal drugs in the future. This is particularly so since 
his history shows he used marijuana over an extended period of time knowing 
full-well his use while in the Navy, and while holding a security clearance, was 
prohibited. His actions cast doubt on his current reliability, trustworthiness, and 
good judgment. It is too soon to tell whether his use will recur. Although he no 
longer associates with his wife, who supplied the marijuana, this is not enough to 
show a demonstrated intent not to use marijuana in the future. Neither AG ¶ 
26(a) nor (b) applies. 
  
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the Personal Conduct security concern: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 AG ¶ 16 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case. The following disqualifying conditions are potentially 
applicable: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from any 
personnel security questionnaire; 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative; and  
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one's conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
 
6 
 
 
personal, professional, or community standing, or (2) while in another 
country, engaging in any activity that is illegal in that country or that is 
legal in that country but illegal in the United States and may serve as a 
basis for exploitation or pressure by the foreign security or intelligence 
service or other group.  
I find that Applicant intentionally gave false information on his security clearance 
applications and to DoD investigators. His explanation for falsifying, that he was afraid 
of the consequences of his drug use, confirmed his deliberate action. AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 
(b) apply to SOR ¶¶ 2.b - 2.j. Applicant’s use of marijuana while holding a security 
clearance with SCI access that was denied by NSA created a vulnerability to his 
personal standing. Additionally, his use of marijuana in violation of the NSA policy 
prohibiting such use also created a vulnerability to his personal standing. AG ¶ 16(e) 
applies to SOR ¶¶ 2.a and 2.k.  
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from personal conduct. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 17 and especially considered the following: 
 (c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; and  
 (e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation or duress. 
 I considered all of the facts and circumstances surrounding Appellant’s drug use 
while holding a security clearance and his false statements. Neither are minor offenses 
and both cast doubt on Applicant’s trustworthiness, particularly because of the multiple 
falsifications. Nothing about Applicant’s actions reduced his vulnerability to exploitation, 
manipulation or duress. AG ¶¶ 17(c) and (e) do not apply.  
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
 
7 
 
 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I considered Applicant’s honorable 
service to his country. However, I also considered that he used marijuana on multiple 
occasions, most recently while holding a security clearance with SCI access, and that 
he gave false information about his past drug use on multiple occasions. Applicant 
failed to provide sufficient evidence to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline H, 
Drug Involvement and Guideline E, Personal Conduct. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a-1.c:    Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 2.a-2.k:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
