1
 
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 10-06978
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Alison O’Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se  
______________
Decision
______________
HENRY, Mary E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings and exhibits, I deny Applicant’s eligibility
for access to classified information.
Statement of the Case
Applicant signed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-
QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF-86) on March 2, 2010. The Defense
Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) on February 4, 2011, detailing security concerns under Guideline H, Drug
Involvement, that provided the basis for its preliminary decision to deny him a security
clearance. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the Adjudicative Guidelines For
Item 6; Item 6.1
Item 4; Item 5; Item 6.2
2
Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified Information (AG) implemented on
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant received the SOR on February 9, 2011. He answered the SOR in
writing on February 24, 2011. He requested a decision on the written record in lieu of a
hearing. 
Department Counsel prepared a File of Relevant Material (FORM) and mailed
Applicant a complete copy on March 16, 2011. Applicant received the FORM on March
24, 2011. He had 30 days from receipt of the FORM to file objections and submit
material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. He submitted an undated written
response, which was received in April 2011. DOHA assigned this case to me on April
18, 2011. The Government submitted six exhibits, which have been marked as Items 1-
6 and admitted into the record. Applicant’s response to the SOR has been marked and
admitted as Item 4, and the SOR has been marked as Item 1. His written response to
the FORM is admitted into the record as Applicant exhibit A (AE A).
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR.
His admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. He also provided additional
information to support his request for eligibility for a security clearance. After a complete
and thorough review of the evidence of record, I make the following additional findings
of fact.  
Applicant, who is 25 years old, works as a technician for a Department of
Defense contractor. He began his job in May 2009.1
Applicant graduated from high school in 2003. He received awards in high school
for math, for competing on the golf team, and for participating in a State event. He
graduated from college in 2009 with a bachelor’s degree in physics. He worked during
college. He is single and lives independently.2
When he completed his e-QIP, Applicant acknowledged using marijuana from
2003 until January 2010. He first smoked marijuana as a high school student. During his
senior year of high school, he smoked marijuana four to five times a week. He
continued smoking marijuana four to five times a week throughout college. In 2004 or
2005, he received a prescription from a medical doctor for medical marijuana because
he suffered from insomnia. With the prescription, he was given a medical marijuana
Item 1; Item 4.3
AE A.4
Item 4; Item 6; AE A.5
AE A.6
Id.; GE 6.7
3
card. He purchased the marijuana with the card at a legal location. He smoked
marijuana in college to cope with stress and the fast pace of his studies.  3
After his graduation from college, Applicant started his current employment,
which changed his friends, associates, and perspective on his life. He decided to
change his lifestyle, including his marijuana use. He most recently smoked marijuana in
January 2010. He manages his stress with exercise, golf, and conversation about his
concerns. His insomnia has improved with his change in stress-management
techniques.4
Applicant used cocaine one time as a college freshman. He did not like the
effects of this drug  and has not used it again. When he met with the investigator from
the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), he indicated that he did not have any
financial or other problems because of his marijuana use. He advised that he felt better
after he stopped his marijuana use. In his response to the SOR, he indicated that he
had been presented with the opportunity to smoke marijuana since he decided to stop
using it and that he turned down the marijuana “without a second thought.” He did not
explain the circumstances under which he was offered the marijuana, nor did he explain
the conflict in this statement with his statement that he no longer associated with
individuals who use drugs.    5
In his response to the FORM, Applicant listed several people who would provide
information about the changes in his life, but he did not provide any signed statements
from these individuals. He indicated that he does not seek out his old drug-using
friends, but given that he lives in a small community, he encounters these friends on the
street or at a dinner party. He does not crave marijuana or need to use marijuana, as
his life is better without marijuana. He stated that he believed his marijuana use was a
crutch and may have prevented him from reaching his full potential in college.6
 
Applicant’s response to the FORM reflects that he read the disqualifying and
mitigating conditions under the guidelines. He noted that the guideline had a sentence
about a “signed intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation.” He then
stated: “If need be, I would have no reservation about signing a statement like this
regarding the use of illegal drugs. I have NO intention of ever using illegal drugs again; I
have closed the door to that part of my life. . .” He also told the OPM investigator that he
had no intent to smoke marijuana in the future.7
4
Policies
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based
on the evidence contained in the record.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” An
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion for obtaining a favorable security
decision.
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
the possible risk an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
5
Analysis
Guideline H, Drug Involvement
AG ¶ 24 expresses the security concern pertaining to drug involvement:
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person's ability
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations.
(a) Drugs are defined as mood and behavior altering substances, and include:
(1) Drugs, materials, and other chemical compounds
identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of
1970, as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis,
depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and
(2) inhalants and other similar substances;
(b) drug abuse is the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a
manner that deviates from approved medical direction.
Under the potential disqualifying conditions described in AG ¶ 25, the following
conditions could raise a security concern and may be disqualifying in this case:
(a) any drug abuse (see above definition); and
(c) illegal drug possession, including cultivation, processing, manufacture,
purchase, sale, or distribution; or possession of drug paraphernalia.
Applicant started smoking marijuana in high school. By his senior year of high
school, he was smoking marijuana four to five times a week. He continued his use in
college, eventually obtaining a medical marijuana card to purchase it. He used
marijuana regularly and frequently between 2002 and 2009. Because he smoked
marijuana, he had to possess it. The Government has established its prima facie case
under the above disqualifying conditions.
Under the potential mitigating conditions described in AG ¶ 26, the following
conditions may mitigate the security concerns in this case:
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt
on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment;
and
6
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as: 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts;
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used; 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of
clearance for any violation.
Applicant’s drug use is recent and occurred while he was a student in college. He
is now working in a mature work place. His daily associations are with individuals who
are different from his college friends. He does not seek out his college drug-using
friends, but he does run into them around town occasionally. He has not used marijuana
for 15 months. He also expressed an intent not to use marijuana in the future in his
response to the SOR and when he met with the investigator. While he did not sign a
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation, his
statement in his response to the SOR is sufficient to meet the requirements of mitigating
condition AG ¶ 26(b)(4). Applicant has presented some evidence of mitigation; however,
his marijuana use is too recent and extensive to fully mitigate concerns.
Whole-Person Concept
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. The decision to grant or
deny a security clearance requires a careful weighing of all relevant factors, both
favorable and unfavorable. In so doing, an administrative judge must review all the
evidence of record, not a single item in isolation, to determine if a security concern is
established and then whether it is mitigated. A determination of an applicant’s eligibility
for a security clearance should not be made as punishment for specific past conduct,
7
but on a reasonable and careful evaluation of all the evidence of record to decide if a
nexus exists between established facts and a legitimate security concern. 
Applicant started smoking marijuana regularly and frequently while a high school
student. He continued the same level of marijuana use level while a college student,
even obtaining a medical marijuana card because he believed the marijuana helped
with his insomnia problems. After college, he reassessed his marijuana use and his
friends. He no longer associates with individuals who use marijuana or other illegal
drugs. He stopped using marijuana 15 months ago, which in light of his previous
extensive use of marijuana for seven years, is insufficient time to show that he will
continue his abstinence. His cocaine use was experimental and is not a security
concern. He did not provide statements or testimony from his friends and associates
about his current lifestyle and abstinence from contacts with marijuana. While he has
presented some evidence of mitigation, he has not presented sufficient evidence to
overcome the security concerns raised by his past marijuana use.
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions or doubts as to Applicant’s
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude
Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from his drug involvement
under Guideline H.
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 2, Guideline H: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                                              
MARY E. HENRY
Administrative Judge
