 
 
1 
 
 
                                                      
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
                                                                      )  ISCR Case No. 10-05457 
                                                                      )  
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant failed to rebut or mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant completed a Questionnaire for National Security Positions (SF 86) on 
March 3, 2010. Also on March 3, 2010, he completed a Counterintelligence Screening 
Questionnaire (CI). On October 5, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals 
(DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns 
under Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and 
the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense for SORs 
issued after September 1, 2006.  
    
 Applicant submitted an answer to the SOR on October 31, 2010. He requested 
that his case be adjudicated on the written record in lieu of a hearing. The Government 
compiled its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 3, 2011. The FORM 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
contained documents identified as Items 1 through 11. By letter dated January 5, 2011, 
DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with instructions to submit any 
additional information or objections within 30 days of receipt. Applicant received the file 
on January 14, 2011. His response was due on February 13, 2011. Applicant did not 
submit any information within the 30-day time period. On March 17, 2011, the case was 
assigned to me for a decision.   
 
                                                      Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains six allegations raising security concerns under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.f.). Three allegations recite delinquent 
accounts in collection status. The amounts of alleged delinquent debt in collection 
status are: $84 (SOR ¶ 1.a.); $11,588 (SOR ¶ 1.e.); and $4,621 (SOR ¶ 1.f.). Three 
additional allegations recite delinquent credit card debt in charged-off status. The 
amounts of alleged delinquent debt in charged-off status are: $4,130 (SOR ¶ 1.b.); 
$5,808 (SOR ¶ 1.c.); and $8,717 (SOR ¶ 1.d.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted five of the six allegations. He denied the allegation at SOR ¶ 1.a. and stated 
that the debt had been paid. Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings of fact.  
(Item 1; Item 3.) 
 
 Additional facts in this case are established by the record provided by the 
Government. The record evidence includes Applicant’s SF 86 and CI, his personal 
financial statement, his personal subject interview and responses to DOHA 
interrogatories;1 and his credit reports of February 17, 2010, February 23, 2010, March 
16, 2010, and August 27, 2010. (See Items 4 through 11.) 
 
 Applicant, who is 54 years old, immigrated to the United States as a refugee in 
1982 and became a naturalized U.S. citizen in June 2004. In February 2010, he was 
hired as a linguist by his current employer, a government contractor. Before working as 
a linguist, Applicant was employed as a taxi driver, convenience store manager and 
clerk, cook, and pizza delivery person. (Item 4 at 5; Item 5 at 1-2; Item 10 at 4.) 
 
 Applicant has never married. He is the father of a daughter born in 1990. In about 
2004, Applicant, who was employed as the manager of a convenience store,   
purchased a condominium secured by a mortgage of $270,500. When he purchased the 
property, Applicant did not realize that he was responsible for homeowners’ fees and 
property taxes in addition to the monthly mortgage payment. He used credit cards to 
make his monthly mortgage payments and to pay other expenses associated with 
condominium ownership. He tried, unsuccessfully, to sell the property in 2005.  
Applicant defaulted on the mortgage, and the property went into foreclosure in about 
 
1Applicant was interviewed by an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management 
on March 23, 2010. On August 20, 2010, in response to DOHA interrogatories, Applicant reported that he 
had moved, and he provided his new address. He then signed a notarized statement affirming that he had 
read the summary of the interview and found it to be true and correct. Other than providing his current 
address and correcting the spelling of his daughter’s and his sister’s first names, he made no changes, 
corrections, or revisions to the investigator’s summary of the interview. (Item 10.) 
 
3 
 
 
                                           
2008. The condominium foreclosure was not alleged on the SOR.2 (Item 1; Item 4 at 29, 
46; Item 5 at 11; Item 10 at 4.) 
 
 In his interview with the OPM investigator, Applicant stated that he had paid the 
$84 debt alleged at SOR ¶ 1.a. He denied the debt in his Answer to the SOR and 
asserted that it had been paid. His credit report of August 27, 2010 shows the debt as 
unsatisfied. Applicant failed to provide documentation establishing that the debt had 
been paid or otherwise satisfied. (Item 10 at 4; Item 3 at 1; Item 11 at 1.) 
 
 In his interview, Applicant admitted the debts alleged at SOR ¶¶ 1.b. through 1.f. 
He told the investigator that he would satisfy the debts with money he would earn as a 
linguist. In response to financial inquiries on his CI, Applicant asserted that he would 
satisfy the five delinquent debts at a later date when he had sufficient money to do so. 
Applicant failed to provide evidence that any of the five delinquent debts alleged at SOR 
¶¶ 1.b. through 1.f. had been satisfied. (Item 5 at 11; Item 10 at 4-5.) 
 
 On March 3, 2010, Applicant provided a personal financial statement. He 
identified his occupation as “self-employed taxi driver.” His net monthly income was 
$4,300. His monthly expenses were $4,615. Included in Applicant’s monthly expenses 
was a $1,720 taxi lease. His personal financial statement showed that he made no 
monthly payments on his delinquent debts. Applicant’s March 2010 personal financial 
statement showed that each month he spent $315 more than he earned in monthly 
income. The record does not reflect that Applicant has had financial credit counseling. 
Applicant failed to provide information showing his current income as a linguist and any 
agreements he may have entered to satisfy his delinquent debts. (Item 8.) 
   
          Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
 
2 I did not consider this information in my analysis of Applicant’s financial situation under Guideline F. 
However, I did consider it in my assessment of his judgment under the whole-person analysis.  
 
4 
 
 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG & 18:       
 
 
5 
 
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. For several years, Applicant has accumulated delinquent debt which 
has not been paid. This evidence is sufficient to raise potentially disqualifying conditions 
under Guideline F. 
 
The guideline also recites conditions that could mitigate security concerns arising 
from financial difficulties. Several Guideline F mitigating conditions could apply to the 
security concerns raised by Applicant’s financial delinquencies. Unresolved financial 
delinquency might be mitigated if “it happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” (AG ¶ 20(a)). 
Additionally, unresolved financial delinquency might be mitigated if “the conditions that 
resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control,” such as 
“loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, 
divorce, or separation, and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.” 
(AG ¶ 20(b)). Still other mitigating circumstances that might be applicable include 
evidence “the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control” (AG ¶ 
20(c) or “the individual has initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts.” (AG ¶ 20 (d)).  Finally, security concerns related to financial 
delinquencies might be mitigated if “the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the 
legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue.” (AG ¶ 20 (e)). 
   
Applicant’s six unresolved delinquent debts total approximately $35,000. He 
failed to provide documentation showing that the debts had been resolved or otherwise 
satisfied. The record reflects that the delinquencies alleged on the SOR remain unpaid 
and have occurred under circumstances that are likely to recur. Applicant has not had 
financial counseling, and he lacks a clear and timely strategy for resolving his 
delinquent debts.   
 
 In March 2010, Applicant told an OPM investigator that he intended to pay his 
delinquent debts in the future with his earnings as a linguist. More than a year later, 
however, all of his financial delinquencies remain unresolved. In determining an 
individual's security worthiness, the Government cannot rely on the possibility that an 
 
6 
 
 
applicant might resolve his or her outstanding debts at some future date. ISCR Case 
No. 98-0614 at 5 (App. Bd. Jul. 12, 1999). Accordingly, I conclude that none of the 
Guideline F mitigating conditions fully applies to the facts of Applicant’s case. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a mature adult of 54 
years. He purchased a condominium and used credit cards to make his monthly 
mortgage payments and to pay other fees associated with condominium ownership. He 
lost the condominium to foreclosure. His personal financial statement reflects that each 
month he spends $315 more than he earns, and he lacks sufficient income to pay his 
monthly living expenses. He has no money available to pay the six delinquent debts 
alleged on the SOR, and they remain unaddressed. Applicant’s failure to satisfy his 
creditors raises security concerns about his judgment, trustworthiness, and reliability. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
delinquencies.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a. - 1.f.:            Against Applicant 
 
                                Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                
________________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
