1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
---------------------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 10-01849
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: James F. Duffy, Esq., Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro se   
                     
           
______________
Decision
______________
LEONARD, Michael H., Administrative Judge:
Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his
eligibility for a security clearance to work in the defense industry. The evidence shows
he has a history of financial problems or difficulties, to include an ongoing Chapter 13
bankruptcy case, which are unresolved. Other than the bankruptcy payments, he has
not made any payments on his delinquent debts. At hearing, Applicant did not present
any documentary evidence in support of his case. Applicant did not present sufficient
evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the security concerns stemming from
his history of financial problems. Accordingly, as explained below, this case is decided
against Applicant.
  This case is adjudicated under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry,1
signed by President Eisenhower on February 20, 1960, as amended, as well as DoD Directive 5220.6,
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program , dated January 2, 1992, as amended
(Directive). In addition, the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility for Access to Classified
Information (AG), effective within the Defense Department on September 1, 2006, apply to this case.  The AG
were published in the Federal Register and codified in 32 C.F.R. § 154, Appendix H (2006). The AG replace
the guidelines contained in Enclosure 2 to the Directive.   
 Tr. 66. 2
2
Statement of the Case
Acting under the relevant Executive Order and DoD Directive,  on August 25,1
2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (the Agency) issued a statement of
reasons (SOR) explaining that it was not clearly consistent with the national interest to
grant Applicant access to classified information. The SOR is similar to a complaint, and
it detailed the factual basis for the action under the security guideline known as
Guideline F for financial considerations.   
Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was assigned
to me October 7, 2010. The hearing took place November 15, 2010. The transcript (Tr.)
was received November 23, 2010.
At the close of evidence, I held the record open until December 6, 2010, to allow
Applicant to present documentary evidence, as he did not do so during the hearing. No
such documentation was received.  
Procedural Matters
Department Counsel conceded that the delinquent debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g
was included in Applicant’s Chapter 13 bankruptcy case.  Accordingly, alleging it2
separately amounts to a duplication or redundancy in the SOR. On this basis, SOR ¶
1.g is decided for Applicant. 
 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all the delinquent indebtedness
alleged except for the charged-off account alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e. His admissions are
incorporated herein as findings of fact. In addition, the following findings of fact are
supported by substantial evidence.  
Applicant is a 47-year-old employee of a federal contractor. He married for the
third time in 2003. He has worked as a coating inspector at a shipyard for his current
employer since May 2009. This is the first time he has applied for a security clearance
 Exhibit 1. 3
 Exhibit 6. 4
 Exhibit 2. 5
 Exhibits 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8. 6
 Exhibit 8. 7
3
to work in the defense industry,  although he held a clearance when he was in the3
military.  
Applicant’s employment history includes active duty military service in the U.S.
Navy. He retired in 2005 after 20 years of honorable service. He held a security
clearance (issued by the Navy) during some of this time without a negative incident. He
retired at the pay grade of E-6; his rate was petty officer first class; and his rating was
boatswain’s mate. He has had no periods of unemployment since his retirement from
the Navy. He has worked as a coating inspector for two previous companies before his
current position in 2009. 
 
Applicant has a history of financial problems or difficulties, which he does not
dispute. He traces his problematic financial history to his second marriage. He and his
second wife separated in about 1999 or 2000, and they eventually divorced in 2002.
The circumstances surrounding the separation were difficult at times. He essentially
turned over his military pay to his second wife and relied on her to make payments on a
mortgage loan. In turn, Applicant got by on little income while living in military housing.
He resumed living in the marital home in about 2001, and he then learned the mortgage
loan was in default. He continues living in that home to date. The mortgage loan was
listed as a Schedule D secured debt in his 2008 Chapter 13 bankruptcy case. He is now
in the process of trying to modify the terms of the mortgage loan.
Several years after the divorce from his second wife, Applicant decided to
address his indebtedness through a Chapter 13 bankruptcy case.  He filed the4
necessary paperwork in February 2008. The bankruptcy court approved or confirmed
the repayment plan in June 2008, at a rate of $492 monthly for 60 months. The case
included approximately $28,000 in Schedule F unsecured debts owed to multiple
creditors. As of May 2010, he had paid nearly $12,000 into the repayment plan.  At5
hearing, he testified that his payments are up-to-date, but he did not present any
documentary evidence to confirm or corroborate his testimony. 
In addition to the bankruptcy case, the SOR alleges five delinquent debts in
amounts ranging from $313 to $9,516 for a total of about $11,539. (SOR ¶¶ 1.b–1.f)
Those debts consist of two unpaid judgments and three charged-off accounts, and they
are established by the documentary evidence.  The first unpaid judgment stems from a6
July 2007 default judgment for $529.  The second stems from a December 2008 default7
 Exhibit 7. 8
 Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988) (“it should be obvious that no one has a ‘right’ to a9
security clearance”); Duane v. Department of Defense, 275 F.3d 988, 994 (10  Cir. 2002) (no right to ath
security clearance).
 484 U.S. at 531.10
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 11
 Directive, ¶ 3.2. 12
 ISCR Case No. 02-18663 (App. Bd. Mar. 23, 2004).13
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.14.14
4
judgment for $9,516.  None of these debts, including the unpaid judgments, was8
included in the bankruptcy case. To date, Applicant has not made any payments on
these debts. At hearing, he did not present any documentary evidence showing the
current status of these five debts. 
Law and Policies
This section sets forth the general principles of law and policies that apply to an
industrial security clearance case. The only purpose of a clearance decision is to decide
if an applicant is suitable for access to classified information. The Department of
Defense takes the handling and safeguarding of classified information seriously
because it affects our national security, the lives of our servicemembers, and our
operations abroad. 
It is well-established law that no one has a right to a security clearance.  As9
noted by the Supreme Court in Department of Navy v. Egan, “the clearly consistent
standard indicates that security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the
side of denials.”  Under Egan, Executive Order 10865, and the Directive, any doubt10
about whether an applicant should be allowed access to classified information will be
resolved in favor of protecting national security.  
A favorable clearance decision establishes eligibility of an applicant to be granted
a security clearance for access to confidential, secret, or top-secret information.  An11
unfavorable decision (1) denies any application, (2) revokes any existing security
clearance, and (3) prevents access to classified information at any level.  12
There is no presumption in favor of granting, renewing, or continuing eligibility for
access to classified information.  The Government has the burden of presenting13
evidence to establish facts alleged in the SOR that have been controverted.  An14
applicant is responsible for presenting evidence to refute, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.15
 Directive, Enclosure 3, ¶ E3.1.15.16
 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 17
 ISCR Case No. 01-20700 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002) (citations omitted).18
 Executive Order 10865, § 7.19
 AG ¶¶ 18, 19, and 20 (setting forth the security concern and the disqualifying and mitigating conditions). 20
 See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996) (It is well settled that “the security suitability of an21
applicant is placed into question when that applicant is shown to have a history of excessive indebtedness
or recurring financial difficulties.”) (citation omitted). 
 AG ¶ 18.  22
5
facts that have been admitted or proven.  In addition, an applicant has the ultimate15
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision.  In Egan, the Supreme16
Court stated that the burden of proof is less than a preponderance of the evidence.17
The DOHA Appeal Board has followed the Court’s reasoning, and a judge’s findings of
fact are reviewed under the substantial-evidence standard.18
The AG set forth the relevant standards to consider when evaluating a person’s
security clearance eligibility, including disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions
for each guideline. In addition, each clearance decision must be a commonsense
decision based upon consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances, the
pertinent criteria and adjudication factors, and the whole-person concept. 
The Government must be able to have a high degree of trust and confidence in
those persons to whom it grants access to classified information. The decision to deny a
person a security clearance is not a determination of an applicant’s loyalty.  Instead, it19
is a determination that an applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President has
established for granting eligibility for access.
Analysis
Under Guideline F for financial considerations,  the suitability of an applicant20
may be questioned or put into doubt when that applicant has a history of excessive
indebtedness or financial problems or difficulties.  The overall concern under Guideline21
F is:
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, and ability to
protect classified information.  22
 AG ¶ 19(a).  23
 AG ¶ 19(c). 24
 AG ¶ 20 (a)–(f). 25
6
Similarly, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be irresponsible,
unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and safeguarding classified
information within the defense industry.   
The evidence here supports a conclusion that Applicant has a history of financial
problems or difficulties. This raises security concerns because it indicates inability or
unwillingness to satisfy debts  and a history of not meeting financial obligations  within23 24
the meaning of Guideline F. The facts are sufficient to establish these two disqualifying
conditions. 
There are six mitigating conditions to consider under Guideline F.  Any of the25
following may mitigate security concerns:  
¶ 20(a) The behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not
cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good
judgment;
¶ 20(b) The conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances;
¶ 20(c) The person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is
under control;
¶ 20(d) The individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue
creditors or otherwise resolve debts;
¶ 20(e) The individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of
the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; or 
¶ 20(f) The affluence resulted from a legal source of income.
Of those mitigating conditions, the most pertinent are ¶¶ 20(b) and 20(d). I have
considered these mitigating conditions in light of the record evidence as a whole, and
none, individually or in combination, is sufficient to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate
 AG ¶ 2(a)(1)–(9).26
7
the security concerns stemming from Applicant’s history of financial problems or
difficulties.   
Applicant has experienced life events that were largely beyond his control and
were factors in his financial problems. His drawn out separation and eventual divorce
from his second wife fall into this category. Nevertheless, these circumstances took
place years ago during 1999–2002, and given the passage of time, they receive limited
consideration under ¶ 20(b). 
To his credit, in 2008, he took action via the Chapter 13 bankruptcy case to
resolve his delinquent indebtedness. He is in the middle a 60-month repayment plan,
and he paid nearly $12,000 into the plan as of May 2010. These circumstances receive
consideration under ¶ 20(d) because they show a good-faith effort. But without
documentary proof, I cannot credit Applicant with timely payments in full beyond May
2010.  
Of concern, too, is Applicant’s failure to address the five delinquent debts ranging
in amounts from $313 to $9,516 for a total of about $11,539. He has, apparently, made
no effort to resolve these debts. This circumstance militates against Applicant’s case
that he is making a good-faith effort to repay or otherwise resolve his delinquent
indebtedness.  
Further undercutting Applicant’s case in mitigation is the lack of documentary
evidence presented at hearing or post-hearing. In cases such as this—where the
ultimate burden of persuasion is on an applicant seeking access to classified
information—it is reasonable to expect an applicant to present documentary evidence
showing his efforts, both past and present, to resolve the financial matters at issue.
Here, Applicant has not done so, and I am left to speculate about these matters. And
such speculation does not help Applicant’s case.   
To conclude, the evidence as a whole justifies current doubts about Applicant’s
judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. Following Egan and the clearly-consistent
standard, I resolve these doubts in favor of protecting national security. In reaching this
conclusion, I gave due consideration to the whole-person concept  and Applicant’s26
favorable evidence, which was not insubstantial. Nevertheless, Applicant did not meet
his ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. This case is
decided against Applicant. 
8
Formal Findings
The formal findings on the SOR allegations are as follows:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: Against Applicant
Subparagraphs 1.a–1.f: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of the record as a whole, it is not clearly consistent with the national
interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to
classified information is denied.          
Michael H. Leonard
Administrative Judge 
