                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 --------------------- )  ADP Case No. 10-01145 
  ) 
Applicant for Public Trust Position ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Pamela Benson, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
Criminal conduct concerns are mitigated because Applicant’s sexual crime in 
1998 was isolated and not recent. Applicant failed to mitigate personal conduct 
concerns raised by her June 2010 deliberately false statement in which she attempted 
to minimize her culpability in her sexual activity with a 14-year-old boy in 1998. Her 
eligibility to occupy a public trust position is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 12, 2009, Applicant completed a Questionnaires for Investigations 
Processing (e-QIP) (SF 85P) (Government Exhibit (GE) 1). On October 18, 2010, the 
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) 
to her (hearing exhibit (HE) 2), pursuant to Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, 
Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated 
January 2, 1992, as amended, modified and revised; Department of Defense (DoD) 
Regulation 5200.2-R, Personnel Security Program, dated Jan. 1987, as amended 
(Regulation); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President 
on December 29, 2005.  
 
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
The SOR alleges trustworthiness concerns under Guidelines J (criminal conduct) 
and E (personal conduct). (HE 2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make 
the preliminary affirmative finding under the Regulation that it is clearly consistent with 
the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility to occupy a public trust 
position, which entails access to sensitive information. (HE 2) DOHA recommended 
referral to an administrative judge to determine whether such access to sensitive 
information should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. 
 
On November 8, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations. (HE 3) On 
January 31, 2011, Department Counsel indicated she was ready to proceed. On March 
3, 2011, I suggested April 4, 2011, as the date of Applicant’s hearing. (HE 4) On March 
8, 2011, Department Counsel responded by email and indicated that Applicant was 
available on April 4, 2011, for her hearing. (HE 4) On April 4, 2011, DOHA issued a 
hearing notice. (HE 1) Applicant’s hearing was held as scheduled on April 4, 2011, 
using video teleconference. (HE 1) Department Counsel offered four exhibits (GE 1-4) 
(Transcript (Tr.) 17), and Applicant offered three exhibits. (Tr. 18; AE A-C) There were 
no objections, and I admitted GE 1-3 (Tr. 17), and AE A-C. (Tr. 18-19). Additionally, I 
admitted the SOR, response to the SOR, hearing notice, emails arranging the hearing 
date, and the criminal statute Applicant violated. (HE 1-5) On April 12, 2011, I received 
the transcript.  
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
Applicant denied each of the SOR allegations; however, she admitted some of 
the underlying facts relating to each of the SOR allegations. (HE 2) Her admissions are 
incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the 
evidence of record, I make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 42-year-old support specialist employed by a defense contractor. 
(Tr. 6, 20; GE 1) She graduated from high school in 1986 and has not attended college. 
(Tr. 7) She has never been married. (Tr. 21, 73) Her two children are ages 21 and 23. 
(Tr. 21) She has never held a security clearance. (Tr. 21)  
 
On November 13, 1998, Applicant pleaded “no contest” to corruption of a minor 
in state court, which is a felony in the fourth degree.2 (Tr. 33; GE 3 at 14-15; SOR ¶¶ 
1.a and 2.a) The court found her guilty of corruption of a minor after conducting a 
providence inquiry. (GE 3 at 14-15) The court required her to register as a sex offender 
for 10 years. (Tr. 34; GE 3 at 16) She is no longer required to register as a sex offender. 
(Tr. 36; SOR response) Her 1998 arrest and conviction are her only criminal arrest and 
conviction. (Tr. 73; SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 2.a) The court was required to determine that 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits.   
 
2The pertinent statute provides, “No person who is eighteen years of age or older shall engage in 
sexual conduct with another, who is not the spouse of the offender, when the offender knows the other 
person is thirteen years of age or older but less than sixteen years of age, or the offender is reckless in 
that regard.” (HE 4) 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
Applicant knew CC, the person who engaged in sexual activity with her, was under the 
age of 16 or she was reckless in regard to CC’s age, when she engaged in sexual 
activity with him. (Tr. 75-76; HE 4) Applicant was unsure about what happened in court 
because she was taking medication, and she was ill. (Tr. 77) Her conviction was 
publicized in the local newspaper. (Tr. 82) She felt remorse and took some 
responsibility for the offense. (Tr. 86)   
 
Applicant’s June 9, 2010 statement to DOHA 
 
 On June 9, 2010, Applicant made a written sworn statement to DOHA that CC, 
the 14-year-old boy, who engaged in sexual activity with her, was drinking a beer at a 
party, and she assumed he was 19 or 20 years old. (GE 4; SOR ¶ 2.b) They went into a 
shed, and the doors were open all of the time. (GE 4) CC began to get “grabby” so she 
pushed him away. (GE 4) He continued to grab her, and she saw him unzip his pants. 
(GE 4) She did not see him, hear him, or feel him sexually climax. (GE 4) She denied 
that she was saw a condom on his penis; however, she did not disagree with the police 
statement that he had a condom. (GE 4) She did not know that CC was 14 until the 
police informed her of his age. (GE 4; SOR ¶ 2.c) 
  
CC’s 1998 statement to the police 
 
Around January 1998 in karate class, CC told Applicant that he was in the 8th 
grade. (Tr. 42; GE 3 at 27, 36-37) On June 30, 1998, he was drinking soda and not beer 
at the karate-belt promotion party. Applicant drank a mixed drink and half of a beer. (GE 
3 at 28, 40-41) Applicant invited CC to go for a walk with her. (GE 3 at 28, 41) They 
started walking towards the shed, and CC asked, “Where are we going, to the shed?” 
(GE 3 at 41) She responded, “Yes.” (GE 3 at 41) Inside the shed, her shorts were off; 
her shirt was open; and her breasts were outside of her bra. (GE 3 at 28, 41-42) She 
gave CC a condom, which he put on his penis. (GE 3 at 28, 42) They engaged in sexual 
intercourse while standing up. (GE 3 at 28, 41, 43) Afterwards, he removed the condom 
and threw it into the weeds outside the shed. (GE 3 at 28)   
 
Applicant’s statement at her hearing 
 
Applicant said CC lied about his role in their sexual activity because he wanted to 
please his parents. (Tr. 45-47) He previously had trouble with his parents for having sex 
with his 17 or 18-year-old girlfriend, and he wanted to shift blame and responsibility to 
Applicant for their sexual activity. (Tr. 45-47)  
  
Applicant and CC were in the same karate class for a year.3 (Tr. 23, 40; GE 3 at 
30, 35) She occasionally talked to CC during karate classes. (Tr. 23) She denied that 
CC told her in about January 1998 that he was 14 years old or that he was in the 8th 
 
3In June 1998, CC was 14-years-old (date of birth: October 5, 1983), 68 inches tall and weighed 
150 pounds. (GE 3 at 30-31, 49) Applicant was 30 years old, was 61 inches tall, and weighed 105 
pounds. (GE 3 at 30-31, 49)   
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
grade. (Tr. 41) She denied that she knew how old CC was; however, she assumed he 
was at least 19 because he was consuming alcohol. (Tr. 24-25; SOR response)    
 
On June 30, 1998, Applicant went to a party after a karate belt-promotion party 
(Tr. 22). About 15 people, including CC, other children, and mostly adults, attended the 
party. (Tr. 22) Applicant noticed that CC was drinking beer from a plastic cup. (Tr. 23-
24) She denied that she consumed any alcohol at the party. (Tr. 43) CC asked 
Applicant if she wanted to go for a walk because the rain had stopped. (Tr. 24)  
 
Applicant told the police that before she and CC went on a walk, Applicant 
mentioned to a friend that she was going on a walk with CC. (Tr. 52) Applicant’s friend 
asked Applicant what she was going to do with CC, and Applicant responded nothing 
because CC was 15. (Tr. 52; GE 3 at 53) At her hearing, Applicant said that she did not 
recall the conversation with her friend where she stated CC was 15. (Tr. 52) She 
insisted that at the time of the sexual incident, she believed CC was 18 or 19. (Tr. 52, 
68, 72; SOR response)  
 
While out on their walk, the rain resumed. (Tr. 24) After the walk started, she 
briefly went to her car to put her shoes in her car.4 CC indicated the shed was a place to 
get out of the rain, and they went into a shed. (Tr. 24, 44)  
 
In the shed, CC started kissing Applicant. (Tr. 24; GE 3 at 53-54) She 
participated in the kiss. (Tr. 44) CC partially pulled down her shorts. (Tr. 25, 27) When 
he pulled them down, she pulled them back up. (Tr. 27; GE 3 at 54) She said that she 
did not recall CC touching her breasts, and she asserted that he only touched her 
shoulders. (Tr. 53; GE 3 at 54) She said that she did not remember him touching her 
vagina or rubbing his penis on the outside of her vagina.5 (Tr. 27, 55) She denied that 
she sexually abused CC because “I didn’t know it happened. I didn’t know he did it. I 
don’t see him [as] a victim.” (Tr. 38) She denied that she had sexual contact with CC. 
(Tr. 39) She denied that she gave CC a condom. (Tr. 45) She denied that she knew CC 
had a condom on his penis during their sexual activity.6 (Tr. 25, 57-58) She said she 
first learned that CC was wearing a condom when a detective informed her about it. (Tr. 
25) She was unaware whether he had ejaculated. (Tr. 57)  
 
Someone called CC’s name because his parents were there to pick him up. (Tr. 
28) CC and Applicant exited the shed. (Tr. 28) J, an adult who had attended the party, 
repeatedly called Applicant a bitch outside the shed, and threatened to contact the 
 
4The police did not accuse her of getting the condom from her car. (GE. 3 at 57) 
  
5Applicant told the police that CC rubbed the outside of her vagina with his penis and that he put 
his penis into her vagina. (GE 3 at 29) However, it was painful because she had female problems. (GE 3 
at 29)  
 
6Applicant told the police officer that CC obtained a condom, put it on, attempted to penetrate her 
vagina, and rubbed his penis on the outside of her vagina. (GE 3 at 55-56) She did not permit more 
penetration because it was painful to her. (GE 3 at 55) She was unaware that he ejaculated until the 
police told her. (GE 3 at 56) 
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
police about Applicant’s conduct.7 (Tr. 29, 49-50) CC’s mother confronted Applicant and 
Applicant denied she said to CC’s mother, “I’m thirty, he’s fifteen, there ain’t no way.” 
Compare Tr. 64-66 with GE3, CC’s mother’s statement to police at 73. Applicant left the 
area. (Tr. 29)  
 
The next Monday after the sexual activity, Applicant returned to karate class, and 
the karate instructor informed her that CC was 15 years old. (Tr. 29) When the police 
questioned Applicant, the detective asked her if she knew CC’s age, and she responded 
“You said 14, I thought 15.” (Tr. 50; GE 3 at 52) The police officer followed up with the 
question, “Okay, so, but you knew he wasn’t eighteen years old?” (GE 3 at 52) She 
responded, “Yeah.” (GE 3 at 52) She insisted that she found out after the sexual activity 
that CC was 15. (Tr. 51) 
 
In the 1990s, Applicant was prescribed medication to treat her anger, depression, 
and hyper-sexuality or overactive sexuality. (Tr. 59-61) She began receiving counseling 
in about 1994. (GE 3 at 59) She was not on any medication when she engaged in 
sexual activity with CC. (GE 3 at 58) She “had the sex drive of four teenage boys” and 
she wanted to get it under control. (Tr. 61-62) Her sex drive was derived from anger and 
a desire for violence because she was sexually abused as a child. (Tr. 59-62) Her only 
sexual involvement with a minor related to her sexual involvement with CC. (Tr. 74) She 
ended her counseling and therapy several years ago because her counselor moved and 
did not recommend that she continue her counseling. (Tr. 78-80) 
  
Character evidence 
 
 Applicant provided three character statements. (AE A-C) They lauded her 
honesty, trustworthiness, caring nature, diligence, kindness, and dependability. (AE A-
C) 
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). The government’s authority to restrict access to 
classified information applies similarly in the protection of sensitive, unclassified 
information. As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to control access 
to information bearing on national security or other sensitive information and to 
determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such 
information. See Id. at 527.  
 
Positions designated as ADP I and ADP II are classified as “sensitive positions.”  
Regulation ¶¶ C3.1.2.1.1.7 and C3.1.2.1.2.3. “The standard that must be met for . . . 
 
 
7Another witness indicated Applicant’s blouse only had one or two buttons buttoned when she 
exited the shed. 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
assignment to sensitive duties is that, based on all available information, the person’s 
loyalty, reliability, and trustworthiness are such that . . . assigning the person to 
sensitive duties is clearly consistent with the interests of national security.” Regulation ¶ 
C6.1.1.1. Department of Defense contractor personnel are afforded the right to the 
procedures contained in the Directive before any final unfavorable access determination 
may be made. See Regulation ¶ C8.2.1.  
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a public trust position, an 
administrative judge must consider the disqualifying and mitigating conditions in the AG. 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of 
human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the 
whole person. An administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial 
and commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
A person who seeks access to sensitive information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
sensitive information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard sensitive 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of sensitive information.   
 
Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant which may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to sensitive information. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531. 
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security and trustworthiness suitability. See 
ISCR Case No. 95-0611 at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security clearance 
[or access to sensitive information].” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 
2002). The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the government. 
See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance [or 
trustworthiness] determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 
484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
[sensitive] information will be resolved in favor of national security.” Section 7 of 
Executive Order (EO) 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.” 
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal factors and conditions, I conclude the relevant trustworthiness 
concerns are under Guidelines J (criminal conduct) and E (personal conduct). 
 
Criminal conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the trustworthiness concern pertaining to criminal conduct, 
“Criminal activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness 
to comply with laws, rules and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes six conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern and 
may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; 
 
(b) discharge or dismissal from the Armed Forces under dishonorable 
conditions;  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation; 
 
(e) violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program; and 
 
(f) conviction in a Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a 
crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and 
incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than a year.  
 
AGs ¶¶ 31(a) and 31(c) apply. On November 13, 1998, Applicant pleaded “no 
contest” to corruption of a minor, which is a fourth degree felony. The court found her 
guilty of this offense after conducting a providence inquiry. She is no longer a registered 
sex offender, and she has completed all probation and community monitoring.    
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate trustworthiness 
concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d) fully apply. Applicant’s most recent criminal offense 
occurred on June 30, 1998, almost 13 years ago. She served her probation, paid her 
fines, received counseling, and did not re-offend. She presented strong evidence of 
remorse, job training, and solid support from three character witnesses. A sufficient 
period has elapsed after her most recent offense. She has had time to contemplate her 
poor judgment and to respond to therapy. She understands her criminal offense had a 
devastating impact on her lifestyle, family, and career. Her demonstrated intent not to 
commit future crimes is encompassed in these two mitigating conditions. She accepted 
some responsibility for her misconduct. Criminal conduct is fully mitigated.  
 
Personal conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 expresses the trustworthiness and security concern pertaining to 
personal conduct: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
AG ¶ 16 describes two conditions that could raise a trustworthiness concern in 
this case: 
 
(a) deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities; and 
 
(b) deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent 
medical authority, or other official government representative.  
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                           
AG ¶¶ 16(a) and 16(b) apply. On June 9, 2010, Applicant made a deliberately 
false sworn statement to DOHA that CC was drinking a beer at a party, and she 
assumed he was 19 or 20 years old, when she actually believed he was 15-years-old. 
She repeated this false claim about CC’s age in her SOR response and at her hearing. 
CC told her he was in 8th grade in about January 2010. Applicant told a friend that she 
knew CC was 15 shortly before she went into the shed with him, and she again stated 
he was 15 shortly after leaving the shed to an adult who confronted her about going into 
the shed with CC. During her initial interview with the police, she said she knew he was 
15 years old. Her claim in her June 9, 2010 statement, in her SOR response, and at her 
hearing that she believed he was 18 or 19 is not credible.  
 
SOR ¶ 2.c alleges that Applicant’s June 9, 2010 statement indicates she denied 
knowledge of the condom and feeling the sexual contact. Actually, her statement is 
ambiguous. A reasonable reading of her statement is that she denied seeing the 
condom and feeling CC ejaculate. Her statements on these two issues are consistent 
and the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.c is refuted. However, her hearing statement denying that 
she felt CC’s penis touch or rub her vagina and not recalling whether his penis touched 
or rubbed her vagina, is not credible. I find her statement to the police that she felt his 
penis rub and partially penetrate her vagina, causing her some pain, to be credible.8       
 
AG ¶ 17 provides seven conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
 
8Applicant’s statement at her hearing about not feeling CC’s penis touch or rub her vagina and 
her statement in her SOR response and at her hearing, claiming to believe CC was 18 or 19 when she 
engaged in sexual contact with him is not alleged in the SOR. In ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 26, 2006) the Appeal Board listed five circumstances in which conduct not alleged in an SOR may be 
considered stating:  
 
(a) to assess an applicant’s credibility; (b) to evaluate an applicant’s evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; (c) to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; (d) to decide whether a particular provision of 
the Adjudicative Guidelines is applicable; or (e) to provide evidence for whole person 
analysis under Directive Section 6.3.  
 
(citing ISCR Case No. 02-07218 at 3 (App. Bd. Mar. 15, 2004); ISCR Case No. 00-0633 at 3 (App. Bd. 
Oct. 24, 2003)). I have considered the non-SOR misconduct for the five above purposes, and not for any 
other purpose. 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress; 
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
  
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply to all personal conduct concerns. AG 
¶ 17(f) applies to SOR ¶ 2.c for the reasons discussed previously. Her June 9, 2010 
statement to DOHA about not seeing CC’s condom and not feeling him ejaculate is not 
contradicted by sufficient evidence to conclude she engaged in an intentional attempt to 
deceive the Government about these two issues.  
 
Applicant’s deliberately false statement to DOHA on June 9, 2010, about her 
knowledge of CC’s age when she engaged in sexual activity with him cannot be 
mitigated. I conclude that when Applicant made her statement to DOHA about believing 
CC was 18 or 19, she was making a deliberate and intentional attempt to avoid full 
responsibility for her offense. Personal conduct concerns raised by her intentionally 
false statement to DOHA on June 9, 2010 are not mitigated.   
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 In all adjudications, the protection of our national security is the paramount 
concern. The adjudicative process is a careful weighing of a number of variables in 
considering the “whole-person” concept. It recognizes that we should view a person by 
the totality of his or her acts, omissions, and motivations as well as various other 
variables. Each case must be adjudged on its own merits, taking into consideration all 
relevant circumstances and applying sound judgment, mature thinking, and careful 
analysis.  Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant Applicant 
authority to occupy a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment 
based upon careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I 
have incorporated my comments under Guidelines J and E in my whole-person analysis. 
Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some 
warrant additional comment. 
 
Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support access to sensitive information at this time, there are several factors tending to 
support approval of her access to such information. She is a 42-year-old support 
specialist employed by a defense contractor. She graduated from high school in 1986, 
and has not attended college. She has never been married, and her two children are 
ages 21 and 23. She has never held a security clearance. She has not committed any 
criminal offenses since June 1998. On November 13, 1998, she pleaded “no contest” to 
corruption of a minor, which is a felony in the fourth degree. Three character witnesses 
praised her honesty, trustworthiness, caring nature, diligence, kindness, and 
dependability. There are no allegations of compromise of sensitive information. She is 
sufficiently mature to understand and comply with her trustworthiness responsibilities. 
She does not use illegal drugs. She deserves substantial credit for volunteering to 
support the Department of Defense and for her service to a Department of Defense 
contractor. There is every indication that she is loyal to the United States and the 
Department of Defense. 
 
The whole-person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s access to 
sensitive information are more substantial at this time. On June 9, 2010, she made a 
false sworn statement to DOHA that CC was drinking a beer at a party, and she 
assumed he was 19 or 20 years old, when she actually believed he was 15-years-old. In 
addition, she repeated her false statement about CC drinking alcohol and believing CC 
was 18 or 19 years old in her SOR response and at her hearing. She falsely stated that 
she did not feel CC touch her vagina at her hearing. She was attempting to minimize 
her culpability by claiming she believed CC was old enough to engage in sexual activity, 
and the sexual activity was very limited. Her false statements on June 9, 2010, in her 
SOR response, and at her hearing are not mitigated.    
 
 I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 12968, the Directive, the Regulation, the AGs, and other 
cited references to the facts and circumstances in the context of the whole person. For 
the reasons stated, I conclude Applicant has mitigated criminal conduct concerns; 
however, she has not mitigated personal conduct concerns. She is not eligible for 
access to occupy a sensitive position. 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                       
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
   
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant or continue Applicant eligibility for a 
public trust position. Eligibility for access to sensitive information is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
 
   
