                                                              
 
1 
 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 10-03999 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Philip D. Cave, Esquire 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
On May 27, 2009, Applicant violated information technology (IT) security 
protocols, when he went to a gaming-fan website using his Government-issued 
computer. His use of the gaming-fan website potentially exposed the Department of 
Defense (DoD) network to malware and viruses. He received additional training and 
expressed remorse. He learned from his mistake, and violations of IT security rules will 
not recur. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 26, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security clearance application (SF 86) 
(GE 1). On October 28, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
2 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines M (use of IT systems) and 
E (personal conduct). (Hearing Exhibit (HE) 2) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA 
could not make the preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant and recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether 
Applicant’s clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (HE 2) 
 
On November 27, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR. (HE 3) Applicant 
requested a hearing. (HE 3) On February 23, 2011, Department Counsel indicated she 
was ready to proceed on Applicant’s case. On March 14, 2011, DOHA assigned 
Applicant’s case to me. On March 14, 2011, DOHA issued a hearing notice. (HE 1) 
Applicant waived his right to 15 days notice of his hearing. (Tr. 10-11) On March 15, 
2011, Applicant’s hearing was held. At the hearing, Department Counsel offered nine 
exhibits (Tr. 14-15), and Applicant offered 18 exhibits (Tr. 16-24). (GE 1-9; AE A-R) 
There were no objections, and I admitted GE 1-9. (Tr. 15, 24-26) Additionally, I admitted 
the hearing notice, SOR, and Applicant’s response to the SOR as hearing exhibits. (HE 
1-3) On March 21, 2011, I received the transcript.   
 
Findings of Fact1 
 
In Applicant’s response to the SOR, he admitted the three SOR allegations with 
explanations. (HE 3) His admissions are accepted as findings of fact.  
 
Applicant is a 38-year-old employee of a defense contractor, who provides 
technical training for Air Force personnel.2 (Tr. 33-35; GE 4) He joined the Navy in 
September 1996, and he served on active duty in the Navy until 2001. (Tr. 28-29) He 
continued his service in the Navy active reserve until 2003. (Tr. 29) He left the Navy 
inactive reserve in October 2008. (Tr. 50) His rating was electronic technician. (Tr. 28-
29) He left active duty as an E-5. (Tr. 50) He has never married. In 2004, his son was 
born. In 2005, he received a bachelor’s degree. (Tr. 32) He did not disclose any illegal 
drug use or alcohol-related offenses on his February 26, 2010 SF 86. He disclosed his 
conviction of disturbing the peace in 2007 and his violation of IT security rules, which 
resulted in his termination of employment. He held a top secret clearance from 1997 
through most of his Navy service. (Tr. 31-32, 51) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1Some details have not been included in order to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific 
information is available in the cited exhibits. 
  
2Unless stated otherwise, the source for the information in this paragraph is Applicant’s February 
26, 2010 SF 86. (GE 1) 
 
 
3 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
Use of information technology (IT) systems and personal conduct3 
 
In May 2009, Applicant received a gaming-website link from someone he met on 
the internet. He had not had an in-person meeting with the person who provided the 
gaming-website link, and could not describe a basis for believing the person was 
reliable and trustworthy. (Tr. 52) On May 27, 2009, he received a spam email at work 
that included the same gaming-website link.4 (Tr. 36, 52-53) His home printer was 
broken, and he wanted to print some information from the gaming website at the office 
to improve his ability to play a computer game. (Tr. 36, 52; GE 9) During a break from 
his Government work and while in a Government building and using his Government-
issued unclassified computer, Applicant clicked the link in the span email, which opened 
a link to the gaming website. (Tr. 54) At the gaming website, he opened a link to a 
window in a gaming-fan website. (Tr. 56; GE 9) He had no work-related reason to go to 
either website. He had some concern about what he was doing at the time he did it; 
however, his concern was insufficient to deter him from clicking the link to the gaming-
fan website because he did not think harm or malware was present on the gaming-fan 
website and he did not believe his actions would damage the DoD network. (Tr. 56-57) 
Although he had never experienced a computer virus, he had no basis for believing the 
gaming-fan website should be trusted not to contain malware or a harmful virus. (Tr. 57)  
 
Applicant was not specifically alerted that the gaming-fan website was a 
prohibited, blocked or particularly risky website to access. The DoD pop-up notice 
asking about whether a site is trusted did not appear. Applicant had no reason to 
believe the command-blocking software would be ineffective. He did not know clicking 
the link to the gaming-fan website would open a link to proxy server, and he did not 
intend to expose the DoD system to malware. (Tr. 55-56; GE 9 at 2) Applicant did not 
download any software or open any executable files from the gaming-fan website. (Tr. 
38) 
 
Because the gaming-fan website was an untrusted website, malware could have 
potentially entered Applicant’s computer from the gaming-fan website link,5 and then the 
malware could have entered the DoD network from Applicant’s computer. As soon as 
the malware was detected, IT security blocked Applicant’s computer access, and he 
contacted his supervisor and IT security. (Tr. 40) IT Security notified Applicant that 
 
3The descriptions of Applicant’s breach of information technology rules are consistent. (Tr. 36-58; 
GE 1 at 39, 41, 61, and 65-67; GE 2; GE 9; SOR response) The most thorough descriptions of this 
incident are Applicant’s April 9, 2010 statement to an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator and his hearing statement. (Tr. 36-58; GE 2)  
 
4Later, Applicant learned the organization that sent the spam email is known for their creation of 
proxy servers. (Tr. 53) On May 27, 2009, Applicant did not know anything about the span organization, 
and he opened the email because the subject line was the gaming-website address. (Tr. 54)   
 
5The incident report relating to Applicant’s IT security breach indicates that after examination of 
the DoD network, “the good news is that the host computer (command) is not infected with any malware.” 
(GE 3 at 4) 
 
4 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
malware was traced to his computer. Security escorted Applicant out of the Government 
building. Applicant cooperated with the investigation of his breach of IT security.  
 
Normally, command network security devices are effective in blocking untrusted 
websites. (GE 3 at 1) However, in this instance, when Applicant went to the gaming-fan 
website, he connected his Government computer to a “cutting-edge web anonymizer” or 
proxy server, which was designed to hide or “obfuscate” traffic from monitoring devices 
and avoid the blocking effects of DoD network security devices. (GE 3 at 1, 5) Applicant 
was not aware that that the gaming-fan website would cause a proxy server to avoid or 
evade the command’s website’s blocking software. (GE 9 at 1) Further investigation 
revealed that Applicant only went to one “fan site dedicated to a very old video game. 
Applicant printed some screen shots, and he did not download anything on to his 
Government computer.” (GE 9 at 1) “The game is available for download at the site.” 
(GE 3 at 5) The proxy is also a “malware delivery device” which caused the security 
software to detect the proxy. (GE 3 at 5)  
 
On May 29, 2009, DoD added the gaming-fan website to the list of untrusted 
websites, which are blocked. (GE 3 at 1) DoD developed security measures to detect 
and block this type of proxy system. (Tr. 43) The proxy server “was used predominately 
to visit  .  .  .  a site dedicated to a decade old-video game. There appears to be nothing 
malicious about the website.” (GE 3 at 2; GE 7 at 1) No malware actually received 
access to the DoD network. (Tr. 41-42) “The malware failed to execute against” the DoD 
network. (GE 3 at 5)        
 
On June 20, 2008, Applicant digitally signed his organization’s Computer User 
Agreement (CUA), which makes Applicant responsible for his use of his Government-
issued computer and subjects him to administrative disciplinary action for failure to 
comply with his CUA. (GE 5; GE 6) His CUA authorizes him to use his Government-
issued computer “for limited personal use” that conforms with DoD and local command 
policies. Such personal use must be of “reasonable duration and frequency, and 
whenever possible, is made during personal time (such as after-duty hours or lunch-
time).” (GE 5 at 2 ¶ 9) His CUA does not restrict his access to any particular website.6     
 
On July 29, 2009, Applicant’s Senior Contracts Director, on behalf of his 
employer, wrote that Applicant has been “an exceptional employee” since April 2008 
and concluded he did not have a malicious intent when he went to an untrusted website. 
(GE 4) Applicant received counseling on appropriate use of Government computers, 
and received ethics training. On December 14, 2009, he completed security education 
and refresher training, including IT security training. (Tr. 44, 48; GE 4; GE 7 at 2; AE R; 
SOR response) Initially, his employer placed him on probation for 180 days. (GE 4; GE 
7 at 2; SOR response) Applicant “understands he made a huge mistake and is 
extremely upset with himself for his poor judgment.” (Tr. 49-50; GE 4) He has educated 
himself about proxy servers and malware, and he promised his decision to access an 
 
6After the hearing, I requested input from the parties concerning the federal Government’s efforts 
to generate a list of trusted websites. Department Counsel objected to consideration of this information, 
and I sustained that objection. The pertinent emails and attachments are attached to the record. (HE 4)     
 
5 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
untrusted website will never occur again. (GE 4; GE 9 at 2; SOR response) He would be 
reluctant to access websites unless he was absolutely sure they would be safe. (Tr. 58-
59)  
 
On August 10, 2009, the command’s chief of staff and on August 17, 2009, the 
command’s contracting officer permanently revoked Applicant’s access to all command 
facilities.7 (GE 6) On August 18, 2009, Applicant’s employer terminated him from his 
employment because of his “improper use of government equipment” following the 
command’s permanent termination of his access to Government facilities and network 
access. (GE 8; SOR ¶ 2.b)   
 
Character evidence 
 
 Applicant submitted 17 character references, which supported reinstatement of 
his access to classified information. (AE A-Q) Some of his character references have 
known him for as long as 17 years. Others have more limited knowledge about his work 
performance and have known him for about 18 months. Several commissioned officers, 
contractor employees, systems engineers, a certified public account, and former Navy 
enlisted persons lauded his contributions to the Navy and his employer.  
 
Applicant’s character witnesses describe him as honest, hardworking, 
dependable, responsible, conscientious about compliance with rules, and dedicated to 
mission accomplishment. Several letters are particularly noteworthy. For example, a 
rear admiral, who commanded a submarine and served with Applicant on that 
submarine from July 1998 to March 2001, described his conduct as “always top notch,” 
and Applicant never caused any doubt about his trustworthiness, reliability, or continued 
access to highly classified information. (AE B) A Navy commander, who served with 
Applicant aboard a submarine from July 1999 to August 2002, lauded Applicant’s 
effectiveness, honesty, engaging personality, competence, value to mission 
accomplishment, and trustworthiness. (AE C) His character witnesses repeatedly 
emphasized their willingness to serve with Applicant in the future under dangerous and 
demanding circumstances because of his integrity and professionalism. (AE A-Q)        
  
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
 
7The letters revoking access indicate Applicant signed an April 17, 2008 CUA. (GE 6) The CUA in 
the record was a form generated on June 19, 2008, which was digitally signed on June 20, 2008. (GE 5) 
 
6 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not inflexible rules 
of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An 
administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, 
past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in 
no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this 
Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in 
part, on any express or implied determination as to applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or 
patriotism. It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the 
President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 08-
06605 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 4, 2010); ISCR Case No. 08-07290 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 
2009).   
   
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b). The DOHA 
Appeal Board may reverse the administrative judge’s “decision to grant, deny, or revoke 
a security clearance if it is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.” ISCR Case No. 07-
 
7 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
16511 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 4, 2009) (citing Directive ¶¶ E3.1.32.3 and E3.1.33.3.).8 The 
federal courts generally limit appeals to whether or not the agency complied with its own 
regulations.   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, I conclude the relevant security 
concerns are under Guidelines M (use of IT systems) and E (personal conduct).  
 
Use of information technology (IT) systems 
 
  AG ¶ 39 articulates the security concern relating to use of IT systems problems: 
 
Noncompliance with rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations 
pertaining to information technology systems may raise security concerns 
about an individual's reliability and trustworthiness, calling into question 
the willingness or ability to properly protect sensitive systems, networks, 
and information. Information Technology Systems include all related 
computer hardware, software, firmware, and data used for the 
communication, transmission, processing, manipulation, storage, or 
protection of information. 
 
AG ¶ 40 lists eight conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying including: 
 
(a) illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or 
component thereof; 
 
(b) illegal or unauthorized modification, destruction, manipulation or denial 
of access to information, software, firmware, or hardware in an information 
technology system; 
 
(c) use of any information technology system to gain unauthorized access 
to another system or to a compartmented area within the same system; 
 
(d) downloading, storing, or transmitting classified information on or to any 
unauthorized software, hardware, or information technology system; 
 
(e) unauthorized use of a government or other information technology 
system; 
 
 
8See ISCR Case No. 09-03773 at 7 n. 4-6 (A.J. Jan. 29, 2010)(discussing appellate standards of 
review). 
 
8 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
(f) introduction, removal, or duplication of hardware, firmware, software, or 
media to or from any information technology system without authorization, 
when prohibited by rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations; 
 
(g) negligence or lax security habits in handling information technology 
that persist despite counseling by management; and 
 
(h) any misuse of information technology, whether deliberate or negligent, 
that results in damage to the national security. 
 
AG ¶¶ 40(a) and 40(b) do not apply because Applicant did not engage in any 
“illegal or unauthorized entry into any information technology system or component 
thereof,” or any “illegal or unauthorized modification, destruction, manipulation or denial 
of access to information, software, firmware, or hardware in an information technology 
system.” AG ¶¶ 40(c) and 40(d) do not apply because he did not use “any information 
technology system to gain unauthorized access to another system or to a 
compartmented area within the same system,” and he did not download, store, or 
transmit any “classified information on or to any unauthorized software, hardware, or 
information technology system.” AG ¶ 40(h) does not apply because there is no 
evidence of any “damage to the national security.” 
 
AG ¶¶ 40(e), 40(f), and 40(g) apply because IT security personnel did not 
authorize Applicant’s access to the gaming-fan website using his Government-issued 
computer while connected to a DoD network. He did not have a basis for trusting the 
safety of the gaming-fan website, and thus, his use of gaming-fan website is prohibited 
by “rules, procedures, guidelines or regulations.” (SOR ¶ 1.a) When he went to the 
gaming-fan website, malware and viruses had the opportunity to be either duplicated or 
to obtain entry to the DoD network. Applicant had previously received counseling about 
proper IT procedures and security. Nevertheless, he went to the gaming-fan website, 
which was a breach of security protocols. Further inquiry about potential applicability of 
mitigating conditions is required.  
 
Three conditions under AG ¶ 41 are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the misuse was minor and done only in the interest of organizational 
efficiency and effectiveness, such as letting another person use one's 
password or computer when no other timely alternative was readily 
available; and 
 
(c) the conduct was unintentional or inadvertent and was followed by a 
prompt, good-faith effort to correct the situation and by notification of 
supervisor. 
 
9 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
Applicant’s conduct warrants full application of AG ¶ 41(a). The first phrase, “so 
much time has elapsed since the behavior happened,” has limited application because 
his misuse of the Government IT system occurred on May 27, 2009, which is relatively 
recent. Applicant’s access to the gaming-fan website “happened under such unusual 
circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” DoD employees will not access the 
gaming-fan website because DoD has blocked access using DoD networks. Applicant 
received a significant penalty for his poor decision, and he is an intelligent person who 
has learned from this mistake. He will be very careful in the future about accessing 
websites using his Government computer. He expressed sincere remorse. He has 
received additional training and has a much better understanding of the risks of viruses 
and malware. Applicant’s conduct did not cause any damage to national security or the 
DoD network. I am convinced that Applicant is fully committed to complying with 
security requirements. His presentation of mitigation evidence fully mitigates use of IT 
systems security concerns under Guideline M. However, assuming Guideline M 
mitigating conditions are insufficient to fully mitigate Guideline M security concerns, 
security concerns are separately mitigated under the whole-person concept, infra.    
 
Personal conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern stating, “Conduct 
involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations can raise questions about an individual’s reliability, 
trustworthiness and ability to protect classified information.”  
 
Four personal conduct disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 16 are potentially 
applicable. Those four disqualifying conditions provide:   
 
(c) credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is 
not sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single 
guideline, but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information;  
 
(d) credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any 
other guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse 
determination, but which, when combined with all available information 
supports a whole-person assessment of questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply 
with rules and regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the 
person may not properly safeguard protected information. This includes 
but is not limited to consideration of:  .  .  . (2) disruptive, violent, or other 
inappropriate behavior in the workplace; and (3) a pattern of dishonesty or 
rule violations. 
 
 
10 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
(e) personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, 
that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such 
as (1) engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing.  .  .  ; and 
 
(f) violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to 
the employer as a condition of employment. 
 
On May 27, 2009, Applicant’s accessed a gaming-fan website using his 
Government-issued computer, while connected to a DoD network and violated a rule. 
He also violated his CUA, which required him to comply with command policies. This 
rule violation shows “questionable judgment, untrustworthiness and unreliability” and 
demonstrates that Applicant on that occasion did “not properly safeguard protected 
information.” Violation of command IT security policies adversely affected Applicant’s 
personal, professional, and community standing. AG ¶¶ 16(c), 16(d), 16(e)(1), and 16(f) 
apply and further analysis concerning applicability of mitigating conditions is required.    
 
Three mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 17 are potentially applicable:  
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; and  
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. 
 
Any security concerns raised are mitigated under AG ¶¶ 17(c), 17(d), and 17(e). 
Applicant’s May 27, 2009, accessing of a gaming-fan website using his Government-
issued computer, while connected to a DoD network, was a serious rule and CUA 
violation. On that single occasion, he showed “questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness and unreliability.” His behavior (accessing an untrusted website) was 
infrequent, and it happened under unique circumstances. I am confident from 
Applicant’s sincere statement of remorse, his remedial training, and the negative 
consequences he suffered ensure that he will not make the same or similar mistake. He 
fully cooperated with the IT security investigation from the beginning and fully 
acknowledged his improper behavior. Even though violation of command IT security 
policies adversely affected his personal, professional, and community standing, his 
disclosure eliminated any vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress. I am 
convinced that Applicant is fully committed to complying with security requirements. 
Personal conduct concerns under Guideline E are fully mitigated. However, assuming 
Guideline E mitigating conditions are insufficient to fully mitigate Guideline E security 
 
11 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           
concerns, security concerns are separately mitigated under the whole-person concept, 
infra. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c). I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines M and E in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 The whole-person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
significant; however, they do not warrant revocation of his security clearance. 
Applicant’s May 27, 2009, accessing of a gaming-fan website using his Government-
issued computer, while connected to a DoD network, was a serious rule and CUA 
violation. He knew that accessing a gaming-fan website was risky behavior because 
such a website was untrusted. Accessing this gaming-fan website likely had a greater 
risk of accessing viruses and malware than going to well-known newspaper, corporate, 
legal, technical, and other non-Government sites, which are generally known to be 
trustworthy. His misuse of his Government-issued computer was imprudent, 
irresponsible, and improper. On that single occasion, he showed questionable 
judgment, untrustworthiness and unreliability.  
      
The rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is more substantial. He was 
forthright and candid in his IT security interview, his OPM interview, his SOR response, 
and at his hearing about his accessing the gaming-fan website.9 Applicant is a 38-year-
old technical trainer, who provides services to the Air Force. He has achieved some 
important educational and employment goals, demonstrating his self-discipline, 
responsibility and dedication. He earned a bachelor’s degree in 2005. He served 
successfully on active duty in the Navy, rising to the grade of E-5. He served in the 
 
9ISCR Case No. 05-03554 at 4-6 (App. Bd. Aug. 23, 2007) (discussing factors an administrative 
judge should consider when making credibility determinations including consistency of statements). 
 
12 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
Navy from September 1996 until 2003 on active duty or in the active reserves. His rate 
was electronic technician.  
 
 Applicant is an intelligent person, and he understands that his accessing the 
gaming-fan website was improper. He does not have a sophisticated knowledge of 
computers and was not fully aware of the risks to DoD networks from using Government 
computers to access untrusted websites. His intent when he accessed the gaming-fan 
website was not to damage the DoD network or to use a proxy server to avoid IT 
security detection. His intent was to access information about a 10-year-old computer 
game, and to print screen shots to assist his game-playing techniques. His actions did 
not cause malware or a virus to damage the DoD network. He received remedial IT 
security training, and he has educated himself about the perils of going to untrusted 
websites. He understands the security and network problems resulting from proxy 
servers, viruses, and malware. He acknowledges that he showed poor judgment, and 
he deeply regrets his bad decision. He is sincerely remorseful, and promise such poor 
judgment will not recur. He has held a top secret security clearance from 1997 through 
most of his Navy service without any other non-SOR security-related allegations of 
misconduct. Applicant’s 17-character references emphasize his integrity, honesty, 
trustworthiness, and reliability. His character references included an active duty Navy 
rear admiral and Navy commander as well as several professional engineers, who 
served in close proximity to him. They have personal knowledge and the judgment 
necessary to accurately assess Applicant’s character, integrity, trustworthiness, and 
reliability. He has demonstrated his loyalty, patriotism, and trustworthiness through his 
service to the Navy and to the DoD as a contractor. He is an asset to his employer. His 
security clearance application does not list any reportable incidents involving illegal 
drugs or alcohol. There is no non-SOR derogatory information about his financial history 
or abuse of IT systems. 
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. I conclude use of information 
technology systems and personal conduct security concerns are fully mitigated, and he 
is eligible for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline M:    FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraph 1.a:   For Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:     FOR APPLICANT 
Subparagraphs 2.a and 2.b:  For Applicant 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                        
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
MARK HARVEY 
Administrative Judge 
