                                                              
 
 
1 
 
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ---------------------- )  ISCR Case No. 10-04191 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Braden M. Murphy, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
HARVEY, Mark, Administrative Judge: 
 
From April to August 2009, Applicant sexually abused his 17-year-old 
stepdaughter on seven or eight occasions. The court gave him deferred adjudication in 
exchange for his guilty plea to a felony child abuse offense. The court-ordered probation 
is currently scheduled to continue until April 1, 2020. He failed to mitigate security 
concerns regarding his sexual behavior and criminal conduct. His eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On February 5, 2010, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaires for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of security clearance application (SF 86). 
(Item 4) On October 28, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued an SOR to Applicant, pursuant to Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information Within Industry, dated February 20, 1960, as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as amended; and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
2                                                                                             
                                           
The SOR alleged security concerns under Guidelines D (sexual behavior) and E 
(personal conduct). (Item 1) The SOR detailed reasons why DOHA could not make the 
preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent with the 
national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant, and 
recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether Applicant’s 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked. (Item 1) 
 
On November 17, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR allegations. (Item 3) He 
waived his right to a hearing. (Item 3) A complete copy of the file of relevant material 
(FORM), dated February 8, 2011, was provided to him on February 14, 2011. He was 
afforded an opportunity to file objections and to submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation.1 He did not respond to the FORM. The case was assigned to 
me on April 4, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact2 
 
Applicant admitted that on or about August 29, 2009, he engaged in conduct that 
resulted in his arrest and order of probation without adjudication of guilt for injury to a 
child.3 (Items 3, 7) He denied that his conduct raised security concerns and explained 
why he believes he is reliable and trustworthy. His admissions are incorporated herein 
as findings of fact. After a complete and thorough review of the evidence of record, I 
make the following findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is a 52-year-old aircraft mechanic employed by a defense contractor 
(Tr. 106; GE 1). In 1979, he received an associate’s degree in vehicle mechanics. From 
1982 to present, he has been employed as an aircraft mechanic. He has never been 
fired from his employment. He has never served in the military. He was married to his 
first spouse from 1992 to 2000. He married his current spouse in 2002. His son was 
born in 1986. He did not disclose any incidents involving alcohol abuse or illegal drug 
use on his SF 86.  
 
Sexual behavior and criminal conduct 
   
On March 30, 2010, Applicant told an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) 
investigator during his personal subject interview (PSI), which he authenticated and 
updated on July 14, 2010: 
 
 
 
1The DOHA transmittal letter is dated February 8, 2011, and Applicant’s receipt is dated February 
14, 2011. The DOHA transmittal letter informed Applicant that he had 30 days after the date on his receipt 
to submit information.  
 
2Some details were not included to protect Applicant’s right to privacy. Specific information is 
available in the cited exhibits.   
 
3Unless stated otherwise, the basis for the facts in this paragraph and the next paragraph is 
Applicant’s February 5, 2010 SF 86. (Item 4) 
 
3                                                                                             
[Subject’s stepdaughter] was a 17-year-old senior [in] high school when 
[she] began having an intimate relationship, 4/09. Subject’s wife was away 
from home quite a bit and subject was lonely for companionship. Subject’s 
stepdaughter participated in sports, and often came home tired and sore. 
Subject would offer to rub down [her] tired muscles which eventually 
escalated into sexual activity. Subject estimates participating in sexual 
encounters with [his] stepdaughter seven to eight times between April and 
August of 2009 before [his] stepdaughter told subject’s wife of the conduct 
in 9/09. All sexual encounters took place at subject’s residence when only 
subject and [his] stepdaughter were at the home. (Item 5 at 3) 
 
Applicant explained that his spouse discovered his sexual relationship with his 
stepdaughter during a discussion between Applicant’s spouse and stepdaughter about 
whether his stepdaughter had an ongoing lesbian relationship with a fellow high school 
student and whether his stepdaughter should be required to move to a different high 
school. (Item 5 at 3) In September 2009, Applicant’s stepdaughter told her mother about 
Applicant’s sexual relationship with her. (Item 5 at 3-4) Applicant’s spouse and 
stepdaughter moved out of Applicant’s home, and his spouse reported his conduct to 
police. (Item 5 at 3-4) 
 
The district attorney’s office charged Applicant with Injury to a Child with Intent to 
Commit Bodily Injury, a felony of the third degree. (Item 6) On April 1, 2010, Applicant 
pleaded guilty and received court costs of $265, and an order of probation without 
adjudication of guilt. (Items 6, 7) The court adjudged probation for 10 years beginning 
on April 1, 2010. (Item 5 at 7; Item 7) Applicant can apply to end his probation after five 
years. (Item 5 at 7)  
 
Applicant notified security and his supervisor about his arrest. (Item 5 at 4) When 
Applicant completed his February 5, 2010 SF 86, he disclosed his arrest for indecency 
with a child and sexual assault and noted he was pending trial. (Item 4)   
 
 Applicant’s spouse filed for divorce. (Item 5 at 4) However, Applicant hopes to 
reconcile with his spouse. (Item 5 at 4) Applicant’s spouse, co-workers, parents, 
security officials, law enforcement, and the courts are aware of Applicant’s offense. 
(Item 5 at 3-4)  
  
 Applicant sought counseling through the employee assistance program and 
through his church. (Item 5 at 4) He is currently seeing a therapist for moral 
rehabilitation therapy. (SOR response, Item 3) Applicant has held a security clearance 
for 27 years. (Item 5 at 7) He acknowledged he had “made terrible choices,” but 
contended he had “learned much” from his bad decisions. (Item 5 at 7) He has renewed 
his faith in God. (Item 5 at 7) Because of his changes after his arrest, he argues he is 
“better qualified today than ever before to possess a security clearance.” (SOR 
response, Item 3)  
  
 
 
 
 
4                                                                                             
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended.    
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines. These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be 
a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), § 3.1. Thus, nothing in this Decision 
should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole or in part, on 
any express or implied determination about applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, or patriotism. 
It is merely an indication the applicant has not met the strict guidelines the President 
and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).      
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
 
5                                                                                             
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
  Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the relevant security concerns are under Guidelines D (sexual 
behavior) and J (criminal conduct).   
 
Sexual behavior 
 
AG ¶ 12 describes the concern about sexual behavior stating: 
 
Sexual behavior that involves a criminal offense, indicates a personality or 
emotional disorder, reflects lack of judgment or discretion, or which may 
subject the individual to undue influence or coercion, exploitation, or 
duress can raise questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness 
and ability to protect classified information .  .  .  .  
 
AG ¶ 13 provides four conditions relating to sexual behavior that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying: 
 
(a) sexual behavior of a criminal nature, whether or not the individual has 
been prosecuted; 
 
(b) a pattern of compulsive, self-destructive, or high risk sexual behavior 
that the person is unable to stop or that may be symptomatic of a 
personality disorder; 
 
(c) sexual behavior that causes an individual to be vulnerable to coercion, 
exploitation, or duress; and 
 
(d) sexual behavior of a public nature and/or that reflects lack of discretion 
or judgment. 
 
Applicant admitted that he sexually abused his 17-year-old stepdaughter on 
seven or eight occasions from April to August 2009. His sexual abuse of his 
stepdaughter is a felony. He received deferred adjudication in return for his guilty plea. 
He does not have a criminal conviction. His court-ordered probation began on April 1, 
2010, and is currently scheduled to continue until April 1, 2020. He is not vulnerable to 
coercion because his spouse, family members, the police, courts, and his employer are 
aware of his offense. Applicant has stopped his criminal, sexual behavior. Although his 
sexual behavior was in private, he showed an exceptional lack of judgment and 
discretion. AG ¶¶ 13(b) and 13(c) do not apply; however, AG ¶¶ 13(a) and 13(d) apply.     
 
6                                                                                             
AG ¶ 14 lists four conditions that could mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) the behavior occurred prior to or during adolescence and there is no 
evidence of subsequent conduct of a similar nature; 
 
(b) the sexual behavior happened so long ago, so infrequently, or under 
such unusual circumstances, that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(c) the behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and 
 
(d) the sexual behavior is strictly private, consensual, and discreet. 
  
 Applicant committed the offenses when he was 50 years old, and AG ¶ 14(a) 
does not apply because Applicant was not an adolescent when he committed the sexual 
crimes. In regard to the issue of whether the sexual offenses were recent or infrequent, 
they occurred on seven or eight occasions from April to August 2009. Applicant 
contends the offenses are unlikely to recur. He is on probation for ten years, and if he 
violates probation, he will face severe repercussions from the court. His stepdaughter is 
no longer present in his residence and is unavailable for his exploitation and abuse. He 
is receiving therapy, and he has not committed any sexual crimes since August 2009. 
There is still a possibility of recurrence (which is one of the reasons the court ordered 
probation) and AG ¶ 14(b) can only be partially applied. As indicated previously, the 
behavior no longer serves as a basis for coercion, exploitation, or duress and AG ¶ 
14(c) applies. Applicant sexually abused a 17-year-old child, and she could not legally 
consent to the sexual activity. Therefore, AG ¶ 14(d) does not apply. However, the 
whole-person concept, infra, elaborates on whether Sexual Behavior under Guideline D 
can be mitigated under all of the circumstances.  
 
Criminal conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct, “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person’s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules 
and regulations.” 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes three conditions that could raise a security concern and may 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses;   
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the 
person was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
 
7                                                                                             
AGs ¶¶ 31(a), 31(c), and 31(d) apply because Applicant sexually abused his 17-
year-old stepdaughter on seven or eight occasions from April to August 2009. Under 
state law, he committed Injury to a Child with Intent to Commit Bodily Injury, a felony of 
the third degree. He pleaded guilty and received deferred adjudication. He received 10 
years of probation, which will not end under the terms of the court order until April 1, 
2020.    
 
AG ¶ 32 provides four conditions that could potentially mitigate security concerns: 
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment; 
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person's life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
None of the mitigating conditions fully apply. AG ¶¶ 32(b) and 32(c) do not apply 
because Applicant admitted the offenses and no one pressured him into committing the 
offenses. AG ¶ 32(a) mirrors AG ¶ 14(b), supra, and the same discussion is applicable, 
resulting in partial mitigation. AG ¶ 32(d) is also partially applicable because there is 
significant evidence of successful rehabilitation. His offenses ended in August 2009 and 
criminal conduct has not recurred. He expressed remorse, has a 27-year history of 
successful employment, and has never violated security rules or abused illegal drugs. 
He is receiving rehabilitation therapy or counseling. He understands his criminal 
offenses had a devastating impact on his lifestyle, family, and career. He accepted 
responsibility and culpability for his offenses. His demonstrated intent not to commit 
future crimes is encompassed in the partial application of AG ¶¶ 32(a) and 32(d).   
 
Notwithstanding these positive attributes, more progress is necessary to assure 
Applicant has the improved reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment necessary to 
safeguard classified information. When he was sexually abusing his 17-year-old 
stepdaughter on seven or eight occasions from April to August 2009, he had ample time 
to recognize that what he was doing was wrong and damaging to his family and 
stepdaughter. He continued to sexually abuse his stepdaughter over and over again. 
His multiple offenses are still relatively recent, and criminal conduct concerns are not 
fully mitigated under Guideline J.   
 
 
 
 
 
8                                                                                             
Whole-person concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guidelines D and J in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) 
were addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
Although the rationale for reinstating Applicant’s clearance is insufficient to 
support a security clearance at this time, there are several factors tending to support 
reinstatement of his access to classified information. Applicant notified security and his 
supervisor about his arrest. When Applicant completed his February 5, 2010 SF 86, he 
disclosed his arrest for indecency with a child and sexual assault and noted he was 
pending trial. His spouse, co-workers, parents, security officials, law enforcement, and 
the courts are aware of Applicant’s offense. His offense is a matter of public record. His 
spouse has filed for divorce, and his stepdaughter is no longer living in Applicant’s 
residence. He sought counseling through the employee assistance program and 
through his church. He is currently seeing a therapist for moral rehabilitation therapy. He 
has held a security clearance for 27 years. He acknowledged he had “made terrible 
choices,” and learned from his bad decisions. He has renewed his faith in God. He 
significantly contributes to his company and the Department of Defense. There is no 
evidence at Applicant’s employment that he had any work-related disciplinary problems. 
There is no evidence of disloyalty or that he would intentionally violate national security. 
There is no evidence of alcohol or drug abuse. His 27-year history of good work 
performance shows some responsibility, rehabilitation, and mitigation. 
  
The whole-person factors against reinstatement of Applicant’s clearance are 
more substantial at this time. Applicant was 50 years old when he committed the sexual 
offenses with his 17-year-old stepdaughter. He made multiple decisions over several 
months to abuse his position of trust in the family. He knew before he engaged in the 
sexual misconduct that there would be negative consequences, and he chose to 
sexually abuse his stepdaughter anyway. His sexual misconduct was committed less 
than two years ago. He is not scheduled to complete probation until April 1, 2020, which 
 
9                                                                                             
is a manifestation that the court believes he will pose some risk to reoffend for a 
substantial period of time.   
 
I have carefully applied the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518 (1988), Exec. Or. 10865, the Directive, and the AGs, to the facts and 
circumstances in the context of the whole person. Applicant’s sexual offenses in 2009 
show a lack of judgment and raise an unmitigated, serious security concern. I conclude 
sexual behavior and criminal conduct concerns are not mitigated. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings For or Against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline D:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline D:     AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant  
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for access to 
classified information. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
Mark W. Harvey 
Administrative Judge 
