 
1 
                                      
 
                                                          
   DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
       DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -----------------------  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01803 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GALES, Robert Robinson, Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns regarding financial 
considerations. Eligibility for a security clearance and access to classified information is 
denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On October 26, 2009, Applicant applied for a security clearance and submitted 
an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) version of a security 
clearance application (SF 86).1 On an unspecified date, the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) issued him a set of interrogatories. He responded to the 
interrogatories on April 22, 2010.2 On another unspecified date, DOHA issued him 
another set of interrogatories. He responded to the interrogatories on April 22, 2010.3 
1 Government Exhibit 1 (SF 86), dated October 26, 2009. 
 
2 Government Exhibit 2 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated April 22, 2010).  
 
3 Government Exhibit 3 (Applicant’s Answers to Interrogatories, dated June 29, 2010).  
 
2 
                                      
 
                                                          
On July 9, 2010, DOHA issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to him, pursuant to 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 
20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended and 
modified (Directive);  and the Adjudicative Guidelines for Determining Eligibility For 
Access to Classified Information (December 29, 2005) (AG) for all adjudications and 
other determinations made under the Directive. The SOR alleged security concerns 
under Guideline F (Financial Considerations), and detailed reasons why DOHA could 
not make a preliminary affirmative finding under the Directive that it is clearly consistent 
with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. The 
SOR recommended referral to an administrative judge to determine whether a 
clearance should be granted, continued, denied, or revoked.  
 
 Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on July 20, 2010. In a written 
statement, notarized on September 8, 2010, Applicant responded to the SOR 
allegations and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. Department 
Counsel indicated the Government was prepared to proceed on October 14, 2010, and 
the case was assigned to me on November 9, 2010. A Notice of Hearing was issued on 
January 4, 2011, and I convened the hearing, as scheduled, on January 27, 2011. 
 
 During the hearing, five Government exhibits (1-5) and eight Applicant exhibits 
(A-H) were admitted into evidence without objection. Applicant testified. The transcript 
(Tr.) was received on February 3, 2011. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted three of the factual allegations (¶¶ 
1.b. through 1.d.) of the SOR. Applicant's admissions are incorporated herein as 
findings of fact. He denied the remaining allegations (¶¶ 1.a., and 1.e. through 1.g.). 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, and upon due 
consideration of same, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is 37-year-old employee of a defense contractor, currently serving as a 
staff engineer,4 and he is seeking to obtain a security clearance, the level of which was 
not revealed. A high school graduate, he worked for an unspecified period to enable him 
to attend college. He initially earned an associate’s degree in pre-engineering from a 
local community college, and eventually obtained a bachelor’s degree in civil 
engineering from the state university.5 Applicant was employed over the years as a 
designer, project engineer, and project coordinator, until he obtained his current 
position.6  
 
4 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 16. 
 
5 Tr. at 24-25. 
 
6 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 17-14. 
 
3 
                                      
 
                                                          
In April 1996, Applicant married his first wife, and they had one daughter (born in 
March 1996).7 They divorced in January 2003.8 In August 2005, Applicant married his 
second wife, and they divorced in October 2006.9 He married his current wife in April 
2007, and they have one daughter (born in April 2007).10 Applicant’s current wife also 
has a daughter (born in September 2001).11   
 
Financial Considerations 
 
There was nothing unusual about Applicant’s finances until about 2006. He was 
initially laid off briefly in December 2006, obtained new employment one month later at 
the same salary, and was laid off again in May 2009 for another month.12 His next job 
was at a salary about 50 percent lower than his earlier one.13 He accepted his current 
position in October 2009, at a salary equivalent to his original salary.14 Applicant’s wife 
was also laid of in December 2006, but it took a little longer for her to find new 
employment. She tried running a day care center in an effort to earn some money, but 
that venture closed as the economy deteriorated. Finally, she returned to school with 
the hopes of improving her employment opportunities.15  
 
At some unspecified point in 2006, accounts started to become delinquent, and 
some were placed for collection with a variety of collection agents, and some of the 
accounts were charged off. His residence lapsed into foreclosure status and one 
automobile was repossessed.  
 
In October 2009, Applicant attributed his current financial difficulties as follows:16  
 
Our present financial situation is directly related to an unstable career 
environment within the land development/civil engineering business . . . . 
When the housing/development market spiraled downward in 2005, my 
wife and I (both in the same field) found ourselves fighting to remain 
employed. Since that time, we have each been laid off twice (total of four 
 
7 Id. at 37. 
 
8 Id. at 33. 
 
9 Id. at 32-33. 
 
10 Id. at 30-31, 38. 
 
11 Id. at 38. 
 
12 Tr. at 25, 27, 46-47, 52-53. 
 
13 Id. at 52. 
 
14 Id. at 29. 
 
15 Id. at 25-27, 29. 
 
16 Government Exhibit 1, supra note 1, at 55. 
 
4 
                                      
 
                                                          
times in the family) and have depleted all savings trying to remain true to 
our financial obligations. My switch to the defense contracting field and 
employment with [Applicant’s current employer] is an effort to regain a 
stable career platform and begin to repair all that has been lost over the 
last five years. Please note that a possible bankruptcy in my name may be 
required depending on the outcome of our discussions with [the mortgage 
lender], but all efforts are being applied to avoid this from occurring. 
 
The SOR identified seven purportedly continuing delinquencies, as reflected by 
credit reports from 2009 and 2010, totaling approximately $222,992, in collection or 
charged off accounts. Some accounts reflected in the credit reports have been 
transferred, reassigned, or sold to other creditors or collection agents. Other accounts 
are referenced repeatedly, in many instances duplicating other accounts listed, either 
under the same creditor name or under a different creditor name. Some accounts are 
identified by complete account numbers, while others are identified by partial account 
numbers, in some instances eliminating the last four digits and in others eliminating 
other digits. Some accounts reflect no account number. The information reflected is not 
necessarily accurate or up to date.  
 
Of the seven accounts in the SOR, Applicant is the authorized user, as opposed 
to the joint holder, of three of them. The accounts are those of his wife that existed 
before their marriage (SOR ¶¶ 1.e. 1.f., and 1.g.).17 A joint holder is a co-owner of an 
account and essentially shares legal responsibility for the account, having previously 
entered into a contractual relationship with the account grantor. An authorized user, on 
the other hand, is one who is permitted by the owner of the account to use it to make 
charges to the account, and such individual has no contractual relationship with the 
account granter. A joint holder may request a higher credit limit and will be responsible 
for the debt, but an authorized user may not alter the original account terms. As 
Applicant noted, one of the accounts is in his wife’s previous married name.18 Although 
the accounts are listed in Applicant’s credit reports, as merely the authorized user, 
Applicant is not personally liable for the account balances. 
 
Applicant is not aware of the nature of one of the accounts or the identity of the 
original creditor (SOR ¶ 1.a.).19 The 2010 credit report is of little assistance in furnishing 
meaningful information as the original creditor is not identified, the nature of the account 
is not specified, and no contact information for the collection agent is provided.20 The 
account is not listed in the 2009 credit report. Applicant was disinterested in the account 
17 Government Exhibit 4 (Combined Experian, TransUnion, Equifax Credit Report, dated November 17, 
2009), at 8, 16, 18-19; Government Exhibit 5 (Equifax Credit Report, dated May 25, 2010), at 1-2; Applicant’s Answer 
to the SOR, dated August 27, 2010, at 1; Tr. at 65-67. 
 
18 Tr. at 66. 
 
19 Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, supra note 17, at 1. 
 
20 Government Exhibit 5, supra note 17, at 2. 
 
 
5 
                                      
 
                                                          
because he could not pay it; he never sought the specifics of the account, and did not 
dispute it.21 
 
In October 2007, Applicant financed the purchase of a home, in the amount of 
$201,438.22 When he fell behind in his monthly mortgage payments, in an effort to 
reduce them, Applicant sought a loan modification. In September 2008, with the 
mortgage loan in default, the bank offered Applicant a special forbearance designed “to 
demonstrate [Applicant’s] financial ability and willingness to make [Applicant’s] monthly 
payment in a timely manner.”23 Applicant was pre-approved for a loan modification, and 
the initial plan called for four monthly payments, each in the amount of $1,446.97, to be 
made by the first day of the next four months.24 Applicant subsequently failed to make 
some of his monthly payments and the default resolution was denied.25 Negotiations 
between the mortgage lender and Applicant continued until March 2009, when Applicant 
was, once again, offered a special forbearance.26 Applicant was again unable to comply 
with the required monthly payments and the process started anew, only to fail.27 
Applicant vacated the residence in January 2010.28 The residence was foreclosed and 
sold at auction, and it is unclear what Applicant’s remaining financial responsibility may 
be.29 
 
Applicant purchased an automobile financed with a loan of approximately 
$24,000 from a bank.30 At some unspecified point, he was unable to continue making 
his $560 monthly payments, and the account became delinquent.31 Applicant sought a 
loan extension from the bank in June 2008,32 but the record is silent as to what the 
response, if any, the bank made to Applicant’s request. Upon receiving a notice that if 
he did not make an immediate payment of the delinquent balance of about $1,200 the 
21 Tr. at 56-60. 
 
22 Government Exhibit 4, supra note 17, at 5. 
 
23 Applicant Exhibit B (Various communications from the mortgage lender – in this instance, a letter, dated 
September 10, 2008), at 1. 
 
24 Id. 
 
25 Applicant Exhibit B (Letter from the mortgage lender, dated January 6, 2009). 
 
26 Applicant Exhibit B (Letter from the mortgage lender, dated March 9, 2009), at 1-2. 
 
27 Applicant Exhibit B (Letter from the mortgage lender, dated August 7, 2009), at 1; (Applicant Exhibit B 
(Letter from the mortgage lender, dated October 3, 2009). 
  
28 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2 (Personal Subject Interview, dated January 24, 2010), at 12, attached 
to Applicant’s Answers to the Interrogatories. 
  
29 Tr. at 60-61. 
 
30 Id. at 62. 
 
31 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2 (Personal Subject Interview), at 1. 
 
32 Applicant Exhibit C (Letter to bank, dated June 19, 2008). 
 
 
6 
                                      
 
                                                          
vehicle would be repossessed, Applicant advised the bank to do so.33 The vehicle was 
repossessed and sold at auction, leaving an unpaid balance of approximately 
$11,000.34 Several days before the hearing, Applicant received an offer of settlement in 
the range of $5,000 - $5,400, but Applicant did not reply to the offer because he had 
insufficient funds to make the payment.35 
 
Applicant opened a charge account with a home improvement center with a 
credit limit of $1,000.36 He used the maximum amount available on two occasions and 
managed to pay off the balances each time within about eight months.37 Applicant 
subsequently used the account and maintained a small balance to improve his credit, 
but the limit was reduced and further use of the account was denied.38 Applicant was so 
angered by the credit denial, without more notice, that he intentionally did not address 
the remaining $248 balance.39 
 
In April 2010, Applicant had a monthly net income of $3,174;40 monthly 
expenses, including $600 child support, of $2,355;41 monthly debt payments of $813;42 
and a monthly remainder of $6 available for discretionary spending.43 By the date of the 
hearing, Applicant was able to sell his boat to pay off his loan, and reduce his monthly 
debt payments by $260 each month,44 thereby increasing his monthly remainder to 
$266. Applicant intends to eventually pay off or settle all of his delinquencies “as soon 
as possible,” or whenever his wife graduates and becomes gainfully employed.45 
 
Applicant has never received financial counseling for budgeting, debt repayment, 
and handling finances.46 
 
33 Government Exhibit 2, supra note 2 (Personal Subject Interview), at 1. 
 
34 Tr. at 62-63. 
 
35 Id. at 63. 
 
36 Id. 
 
37 Id. at 63-64. 
 
38 Id. at 64. 
 
39 Id. at 64-65. 
 
40 Government Exhibit 3, supra note 3 (Personal Financial Statement, dated April 15, 2010), attached to 
Applicant’s Answers to the Interrogatories. 
 
41 Id. 
 
42 Id. 
 
43 Id.  
 
44 Id.; Tr. at 40. 
 
45 Tr. at 30. 
 
46 Id. at 55. 
 
7 
                                      
 
                                                          
Character References and Work Performance 
 
 The president and the human resources director of the employer that laid 
Applicant off in May 2009 due to a personnel reduction, arising from the current 
economic conditions, were highly impressed by Applicant’s performance. Applicant was 
“identified as a team member on whom we can depend to make key contributions.”47 
Applicant received performance reviews that entitled him to regular increases as a 
result of his “stellar performance.”48 It was noted that Applicant received a final bonus in 
excess of nine percent of his base pay as well as a fair severance package.49 A friend, 
who has known Applicant for over 20 years, said Applicant has maintained a high 
regard for moral values that he would not compromise due to his current financial 
condition.50 Other friends, who have known Applicant between six and ten years, 
characterize Applicant as intelligent, capable, dedicated, and personable,51 as well as 
loyal and trustworthy.52  
 
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security 
emphasizing, “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.”53 As Commander in Chief, 
the President has the authority to control access to information bearing on national 
security and to determine whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access 
to such information. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his 
designee to grant an applicant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a 
finding that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”54   
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the AG. In addition to brief introductory explanations 
for each guideline, the AG list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating 
conditions, which are used in evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified 
information. 
 
47 Applicant Exhibit G (Letter from president, dated March 17, 2008). 
 
48 Applicant Exhibit H (Letter from human resources director, dated January 26, 2011). 
 
49 Id.; Applicant Exhibit G, supra note 47. 
 
50 Applicant Exhibit E (Character reference, dated January 26, 2011). 
 
51 Applicant Exhibit F (Character reference, undated). 
 
52 Applicant Exhibit D (Character reference, dated January 26, 2011). 
 
53 Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
 
54 Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended 
and modified.    
 
 
8 
                                      
 
                                                          
An administrative judge need not view the guidelines as inflexible, ironclad rules 
of law. Instead, acknowledging the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines 
are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The 
administrative judge’s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and 
commonsense decision. The entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a meaningful decision. 
 
In the decision-making process, facts must be established by “substantial 
evidence.”55 The Government initially has the burden of producing evidence to establish 
a potentially disqualifying condition under the Directive, and has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Once the Government has produced 
substantial evidence of a disqualifying condition, under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the 
applicant has the burden of persuasion to present evidence in refutation, explanation, 
extenuation or mitigation, sufficient to overcome the doubts raised by the Government’s 
case. The burden of disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government.56  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours as 
well. It is because of this special relationship that the Government must be able to 
repose a high degree of trust and confidence in those individuals to whom it grants 
access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information.  
Furthermore, “security clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of 
denials.”57 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”58 Thus, nothing 
in this decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, in whole 
or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, loyalty, 
or patriotism. It is merely an indication the Applicant has or has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. In reaching this decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are 
55 “Substantial evidence [is] such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to 
support a conclusion in light of all contrary evidence in the record.”  ISCR Case No. 04-11463 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 
2006) (citing Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1).  “Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  
See v. Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). 
 
56 See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
57 Egan, 484 U.S. at 531 
 
58 See Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. 
 
 
9 
                                      
 
                                                          
reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I 
have avoided drawing inferences grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. . . . 
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG ¶ 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly, under AG ¶ 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. As noted above, there was nothing unusual about Applicant’s 
finances until about 2006. At some point, he failed to keep up with his monthly 
payments, and accounts started to become delinquent. Some accounts were placed for 
collection, and some accounts were charged off. He lost his home to foreclosure and his 
automobile to repossession. AG ¶¶ 19(a) and 19(c) apply. 
 
The guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate security 
concerns arising from financial difficulties. Under AG ¶ 20(a), the disqualifying condition 
may be mitigated where Athe behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt 
on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.@ Also, under AG 
¶ 20(b), financial security concerns may be mitigated where Athe conditions that resulted 
in the financial problem were largely beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of 
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce 
or separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances.@ Evidence 
that Athe person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or there are 
clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control@ is potentially 
mitigating under AG ¶ 20(c). Similarly, AG ¶ 20(d) applies where the evidence shows 
Athe individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise 
resolve debts.@59 Also, AG ¶ 20(e) may apply where “the individual has a reasonable 
59 The Appeal Board has previously explained what constitutes a “good-faith” effort to repay overdue 
creditors or otherwise resolve debts: 
 
In order to qualify for application of [the “good-faith” mitigating condition], an applicant must present 
evidence showing either a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or some other good-faith 
action aimed at resolving the applicant’s debts. The Directive does not define the term ‘good-faith.’ 
However, the Board has indicated that the concept of good-faith ‘requires a showing that a person 
 
10 
                                      
 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due debt which is the cause of the problem 
and provides documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue.” 
 
Applicant’s financial problems commenced sometime in 2006, when he and his 
wife were both laid off. He managed to find another position within a month, but it took 
her a little longer. They were both laid off again. Applicant subsequently obtained 
another job, but his wife turned first to operating a day care center, and then when the 
economy deteriorated even further, she returned to school to better her opportunities for 
eventual employment. Although Applicant currently is gainfully employed, the financial 
problems have continued. Applicant made some efforts to address two of his accounts 
by seeking loan modifications, but his efforts were subsequently unsuccessful. His 
actions pertaining to one account were clouded by his anger over the loss of credit 
privileges. In light of Applicant’s five years of continuing financial problems, it is unlikely 
that they will be resolved in the short term, and are likely to recur. Accordingly, Applicant 
failed to mitigate his financial situation, and under the circumstances, his actions do cast 
doubt on Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.60 AG ¶ 
20(a) only partially applies.  
 
AG ¶ 20(b) partially applies because there were several conditions, largely 
beyond Applicant’s control, that made a substantial negative effect on Applicant’s 
financial situation. The recession in the economy and lack of available work negatively 
effected Applicant’s ability, as well as his wife’s ability, to maintain their employment on 
several occasions, at least in the short term, until the present. While those events were 
clearly beyond Applicant’s control, it should be remembered that Applicant’s 
unemployment or underemployment were of short durations, and he received a final 
bonus in excess of nine percent of his base pay as well as a fair severance package, 
following one lay off. Despite a continuing salary, Applicant did not act responsibly to 
address the debts that resulted.61 
 
AG & 20(c) does not apply because Applicant never received financial 
counseling, and there is clear and abundant evidence that his financial problems are not 
being resolved and are not under control. He still has delinquent accounts, and has not 
presented a repayment plan to reduce his delinquencies, other than waiting for his wife 
to graduate and become gainfully employed.  
 
 
acts in a way that shows reasonableness, prudence, honesty, and adherence to duty or obligation.’ 
Accordingly, an applicant must do more than merely show that he or she relied on a legally 
available option (such as bankruptcy [or statute of limitations]) in order to claim the benefit of [the 
“good-faith” mitigating condition].  
 
(internal citation and footnote omitted) ISCR Case No. 02-30304 at 3 (App. Bd. Apr. 20, 2004) (quoting ISCR Case 
No. 99-9020 at 5-6 (App. Bd. June 4, 2001)). 
 
60 See ISCR Case No. 09-08533 at 3-4 (App. Bd. Oct. 6, 2010). 
 
61 Id. at 4. 
 
 
11 
                                      
 
                                                          
AG ¶ 20(d) only partially applies because Applicant attempted to address only 
two of his delinquent debts well before the SOR was issued. Nevertheless, 
circumstances were such that he was unable to resolve either the mortgage or the 
automobile loan by settling them or by paying them off.62 He has not paid off or settled, 
or otherwise resolved the accounts with his mortgage lender, automobile loan lender, or 
the account with the home improvement center, and has not pursued repayment plans 
because he either did not have sufficient money to do so or he was too angry to do so. 
He failed to address the remaining account simply because he did not recognize the 
creditor. 
 
AG ¶ 20(e) partially applies because Applicant is listed in his credit reports as 
merely the authorized user of three accounts, as opposed to joint-owner of those 
accounts, and, as such, he is not personally liable for the account balances. He 
disputed those accounts in his personal subject interview, in his answers to 
interrogatories and the SOR, as well as during the hearing. While he did not follow 
through with the credit reporting agencies or the creditors themselves, the evidence 
developed from Government exhibits and Applicant’s stated positions, document the 
basis of the dispute. The Government did not challenge Applicant’s position and offered 
no evidence to contradict it.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
62 “Even if Applicant’s financial difficulties initially arose, in whole or in part, due to circumstances outside his 
[or her] control, the Judge could still consider whether Applicant has since acted in a reasonable manner when 
dealing with those financial difficulties.” ISCR Case No. 05-11366 at 4 n.9 (App. Bd. Jan. 12, 2007) (citing ISCR Case 
No. 99-0462 at 4 (App. Bd. May 25, 2000); ISCR Case No. 99-0012 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 1, 1999); ISCR Case No. 03-
13096 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 29, 2005)). A component is whether he or she maintained contact with creditors and 
attempted to negotiate partial payments to keep debts current. 
 
 
12 
                                      
 
                                                          
There is some evidence in favor of mitigating Applicant’s conduct. Applicant has a 
history of financial delinquencies commencing in 2006. He and his wife went through 
repeated periods of unemployment of underemployment and his accounts became 
delinquent and placed for collection or charged off. He lost his home to foreclosure and 
his automobile to repossession. As a worker and a friend, he was highly thought of and 
characterized in favourable terms. 
The disqualifying evidence under the whole-person concept is substantial. 
Applicant’s financial delinquencies were the unfortunate consequence of a devastated 
economy and a lack of work which resulted in multiple layoffs. He attempted to obtain 
mortgage modification on several occasions but was unable to keep up with the 
necessary payments even when the bank granted him the opportunities to do so. 
Despite a substantial bonus and a fair severance package, he was unable to address 
his delinquent debts. His current permanent position pays him a salary equal to what he 
was earning before his initial layoff.  
 
Claiming he had insufficient funds to make any payments, Applicant simply 
chose not to address them. He did not pay off or settle or otherwise resolve even the 
smallest of his accounts. The $248 delinquent balance remains because of Applicant’s 
anger over the loss of credit privileges. The $253 delinquent balance was not addressed 
because Applicant claimed to have no knowledge of the creditor. I have evaluated the 
various aspects of this case in light of the totality of the record evidence and have not 
merely performed a piecemeal analysis.63 Applicant’s lack of a substantial good-faith 
effort is not sufficient to mitigate continuing security concerns. See AG ¶ 2(a)(1) through 
AG ¶ 2(a)(9). 
The Appeal Board has addressed a key element in the whole-person analysis in 
financial cases stating:64 
In evaluating Guideline F cases, the Board has previously noted that the 
concept of “‘meaningful track record’ necessarily includes evidence of 
actual debt reduction through payment of debts.” However, an applicant is 
not required, as a matter of law, to establish that he [or she] has paid off 
each and every debt listed in the SOR. All that is required is that an 
applicant demonstrate that he [or she] has “ . . . established a plan to 
resolve his [or her] financial problems and taken significant actions to 
implement that plan.” The Judge can reasonably consider the entirety of 
an applicant’s financial situation and his [or her] actions in evaluating the 
extent to which that applicant’s plan for the reduction of his outstanding 
indebtedness is credible and realistic. See Directive ¶  E2.2(a) (“Available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, should be considered in reaching a determination.”) There is 
no requirement that a plan provide for payments on all outstanding debts 
63 See U.S. v. Bottone, 365 F.2d 389, 392 (2d Cir. 1966); See also ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. 
Bd. Jun. 2, 2006). 
 
64 ISCR Case No. 07-06482 at 2-3 (App. Bd. May 21, 2008) (internal citations omitted). 
 
13 
                                      
 
simultaneously. Rather, a reasonable plan (and concomitant conduct) may 
provide for the payment of such debts one at a time. Likewise, there is no 
requirement that the first debts actually paid in furtherance of a reasonable 
debt plan be the ones listed in the SOR. 
 
Applicant failed to establish a meaningful track record of the type discussed 
above. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all of these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.f:    For Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.g:    For Applicant 
     
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
________________________ 
ROBERT ROBINSON GALES 
Administrative Judge 
