  
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
  DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
  
  
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-00660 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. Delaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant was born in Russia. In 1994, Applicant came to the United States for 
post-graduate schooling. In 2009, he became a naturalized United States citizen. His 
sister, parents, and parents-in-law are citizens and residents of Russia. Applicant has 
rebutted or mitigated the security concerns under foreign influence. Clearance is 
granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s (DoD) intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines 
(AG) effective within the DoD on September 1, 2006. 
 
1 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on June 23, 2010, detailing security concerns under 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence and Guideline C, Foreign Preference. 
  
 On June 29, 2010, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
October 12, 2010, I was assigned the case. On November 2, 2010, DOHA issued a 
Notice of Hearing for the hearing held on November 8, 2010. The Government offered 
Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 3, which were admitted into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified and submitted Exhibits A through C, which were admitted into 
evidence without objection. Applicant testified as did one additional character witness. 
On November 18, 2010, DOHA received the hearing transcript (Tr.). 
 
Decision not to Proceed under Guideline C 
 
 Department Counsel stated that the Government did not intend to proceed under 
the allegations reflected in Guideline C, Foreign Preference. (Tr. 19) Guideline C is 
found for Applicant.  
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
 Department Counsel asked administrative notice be taken of certain facts relating 
to the Russian Federation (Russia). (Tr. 16) The request and the attached documents 
were not admitted into evidence, but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits 
(HEx.). The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In Applicant’s Answer to the SOR, he denied the factual allegations in SOR ¶ 1.a. 
related to the Guideline C concern, on which the Government did not proceed. He 
admitted the factual allegations, with explanations, in SOR ¶¶ 2.a – 2.g. I incorporate 
Applicant’s admissions to the SOR allegations. After a thorough review of the record, 
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following additional findings of fact: 
 
Applicant is a 40-year-old principal systems engineer, who has worked for a 
defense contractor since January 2000, and he seeks to obtain a security clearance. 
Applicant’s supervisor stated Applicant could have stayed where he was but chose to 
find a technical route that would allow him to expand his skills, understanding, and 
capabilities with the company. (Tr. 39) Applicant is looked to for guidance, direction, and 
support in the long term growth initiative. (Tr. 39) His supervisor believes Applicant’s 
character to be of “extremely high caliber.” (Tr. 43) Applicant is hard working, intelligent, 
dedicated, compassionate, honest, and trustworthy. He places the value of his employer 
and work assignment at the same level as his personal wants and needs. The Applicant 
is dedicated to the company. (Tr. 44)  
   
Applicant and his wife were born in Russia. His two daughters, ages four and ten, 
were born in the United States and live with him. His oldest daughter was selected as 
recreational player of the year. (Ex. B) In April 2009, he became a naturalized United 
 
2 
States citizen. Applicant’s wife is a Russian citizen who lives with him in the United 
States. He has lived in the same community for more than 15 years. (Tr. 23)  
 
In 2004, Applicant’s wife became a permanent resident of the United States. She 
did not initially apply to become a naturalized United States citizen due to the $750 filing 
fee. He told his wife the money was not an issue to stop her from becoming a United 
States citizen. He said, 
 
So finally I had told her no, this is insane. We both live here. We both like 
living here. We’re not going anywhere, it’s important for us so go do it, so . 
. . This is a testament about the good life in the United States. You don’t 
have to be a citizen and still be respected neighbor of the country and the 
community and to live here. So it’s not like this in Russia, for example. So 
we did not fee obligated to apply and become citizen. So that would 
happen, and we are very happy about this. (Tr. 84-85) 
 
The day of the hearing, Applicant’s wife was at the state capital proceeding with 
the naturalization process. (Tr. 93) She was being fingerprinted, which was the next 
step in her citizenship process. (Ex. A, Tr. 52) Following a background check, she will 
take the citizenship test. (Tr. 53)  
 
It was always Applicant’s plan to become a United States citizen. (Tr. 86) At age 
seven or eight Applicant started to formulate doubts about working and living in Russia. 
(Tr. 47) The doubts increased as he got older. He graduated from high school and 
university in Russia. He received a diploma, which is the equivalent of a Bachelor’s 
degree, in chemistry. (Tr. 58) Due to his university attendance, he had no requirement 
for military service and has no obligation to repay the Russian government for the 
education he received. (Tr. 59) 
 
In 1994, Applicant applied and was accepted as a full-time Ph.D. student and 
came to the United States to attend university. (Tr. 49) He was twenty-four years old 
and came to the United States on an F12 student visa. (Tr. 61) He was married to a 
Russian citizen at the time. His wife remained in Russian and visited him twice while he 
was a student. (Tr. 63) She did not like it in the United States. The marriage ended. (Tr. 
63)  
 
Applicant’s sister, mother, and father are citizens and residents of Russia. He 
has bi-monthly telephone contact with his parents and weekly or bi-week email contact 
with his sister. (Ex. 3, Tr. 56) His mother is a retired typist and his father is a retired 
construction worker. (Ex. 3) He has a very close relationship with his father and does 
“not feel particularly close with” his mother. (Tr. 55, 72) He has a fairly close relationship 
with his sister. (Ex. 3) His 28-year-old sister is a homemaker, and she does not work 
outside the home. (Ex. 3) She is married to a car salesman. (Tr. 57) She was an office 
                                                          
2 His wife had a G1 visa which required her to leave the United States after her studies and prevented her 
return for two years. (Tr. 61) 
 
3 
worker before her first child was born. (Tr.77) She has not worked outside the home in 
two years. Applicant routinely sends his sister holiday gifts. 
 
Applicant sent his father $5,000 to pay medical bills and some additional funds to 
have a gas line bought into his parent’s home. (Tr. 54) Other than these payments, he 
has not sent his parents any funds since 2000. (Tr. 78) His father is 65-years-old and 
lives on a Russian government pension. His father has been retired for ten years. (Tr. 
73) Applicant and his father have come to terms, and his father realizes he may not see 
his son again before he dies. (Tr. 55) Applicant visited Russia in 2003 and 2005. (Tr. 
76) His mother has visited him in the United States twice and his father has visited him 
once. Except for his sister and parents, he has no communication with others in Russia.  
 
When asked how he would react to pressure on his parents and sister, Applicant 
stated, “I have made my choices. I’m staying in this country.” (Tr. 87) Applicant realizes 
it is better for him and his family to be in the United States.  
 
After marrying in 1998, Applicant’s wife came with him to the United States to 
attend post-graduate studies. During his education from 1994 to 1999, he returned to 
Russia two or three times. Since their marriage, his wife has returned to Russia four or 
five times. (Tr. 65) His wife received her Bachelor’s degree equivalent while living in 
Russia and her post-graduate studies at the same university as Applicant did in the 
United States. (Tr. 68) His wife works for a firm that designs instructional manuals for 
schools. His wife is close with her relatives in Russia. (Tr. 65) Her mother and father are 
citizens and residents of Russia. Her father is a retired auto parts salesman, and her 
mother is a homemaker who never worked outside the home. (Ex. 3, Tr. 57, 69) She 
communicates with her mother weekly. Her parents have visited Applicant and his wife 
in the United States two or three times. (Tr. 66) The latest visit was in 2006, which was 
the last time Applicant saw them. (Ex. 3) His wife still has a Russian passport. Once a 
year, his wife talks to her aunt in Russia. (Tr. 71)  
 
Applicant paid for his education by his job as a research assistant. (Tr. 62) He 
saved sufficient funds to purchase a computer. That computer purchase changed his 
life. He changed his major from chemistry to computer sciences. (Tr. 50) In 1999, he 
obtained two Master’s degrees in science and was no longer able to pursue his Ph.D. in 
chemistry. (Tr. 50) While in school, he accepted an internship with his present company. 
(Tr. 51) The following summer, he obtained a second internship with the same 
company. The internships led to a job offer and he began working for the company in 
January 2000. (Tr. 52) As soon as he obtained his job, he applied for an H1V visa.  
 
Applicant came to the United States on a Russian passport issued in 1993, which 
expired in November 2009. He used that passport three times. In 2001, he traveled to 
the Netherlands on company business for one week. (Ex. 3) In 2003, he traveled to 
Moscow on company business for one week. In 2005, he spent two weeks with his wife 
and daughters, visiting family in Russia. (Ex. 3) 
 
 
4 
In April 2009, Applicant became a naturalized United States citizen. (Tr. 83) In 
December 2009, he followed the formal process of Russian citizenship renunciation. To 
complete the process he needed a valid Russian Federation passport. In December 
2009, he obtained a Russian Federation passport. He has not used the passport for 
travel. In June 2010, he surrendered his Russian passport to his Facility Security Officer 
(FSO).  
 
Applicant volunteers at a local hospital doing hospice services. (Tr. 32) Four 
years ago he had a stroke and was treated at the hospital. The doctor told him he had 
three hours to live. (Tr. 89) Once so informed, he was a bit ashamed of how happy and 
content he was. He could see the fear in his wife’s eyes, but he was not worried. He 
knew his wife was in the right place and knew his children would grow up and become 
productive members of society. (Tr. 89) The bleeding stopped. The lesson he took from 
this was the need to do more for the community, not just his family, but for the people. 
He started volunteering at the hospice center doing work others could not or would not 
do. (Tr. 90) Volunteering has become very important to him.  
 
Russian Federation 
 
The Russian Federation is a vast and diverse nation composed of 21 republics. 
(HEx I) Its population of 142 million people is multinational and multi-ethnic. Id. Russia 
achieved independence with the dissolution of the Soviet Union in August 1991. Russia 
has retained a powerful military and remains a nuclear superpower. (HEx I at 12) The 
Russian government consists of a strong executive branch, a bicameral legislature and 
a weak judiciary. (HEx. I, III) 
 
 “Although there is a general risk of U.S. citizens being subjected to 
indiscriminate acts of terror in Russia, there is no current indication that Americans are 
targets.” (HEx V) Terrorist activity in Russia includes suicide bombings, hostage taking, 
especially in connection with the Chechen conflict. (HEx. VI) Russian human rights 
abuses in the Chechen conflict include torture, summary executions, use of 
indiscriminate force and arbitrary detentions. (Id.) In addition to problematic behavior in 
the Chechen conflict, Russian authorities engage in arbitrary arrest and detention as 
well as torture and abuse to obtain confessions. Officials have illegally employed 
electronic surveillance, monitored internet, telephone and email communications, and 
entered residences without a warrant. ((Id.) There is widespread government corruption 
and prison conditions are extremely harsh. (HEx. IV) Government pressure and 
censoring of the media and endemic crime are also significant Russian problems. The 
Russian legislature has passed a series of reforms in Russian criminal procedural laws, 
making their law more consistent with Western standards. (HEx. II) Russian human 
rights performance has improved in some areas. (Id.)  
 
Russia has an active, ongoing collection program targeting sensitive U.S. 
industrial and military technology as well as commercial and dual-use technology. (HEx. 
V) Russia also targets national security and environmental researchers as well as signal 
intelligence. (Id.) Russia provides technology to other countries that has the potential to 
 
5 
be used in the construction of weapons of mass destruction, biotechnology and 
missiles. (Id.) “Regional branches of the [Federal Security Service] reportedly continued 
to exert pressure on citizens employed by foreign firms and organizations, often to 
coerce them into becoming informants.” (HEx. VII) 
 
Russia and the United States are frequently aligned on political initiatives and 
have joined in numerous international agreements, including efforts to resolve 
international political problems at the United Nations. (HEx. III) For example, the United 
States and Russia entered into a bilateral World Trade Organization accession 
agreement in 2006. (Id.) In 2007, Russia imported U.S. goods valued at $7.4 billion. 
Russia and United States are allies in the war on terrorism, and both seek to suppress 
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Both countries have specially 
emphasized the reduction of strategic arsenals. (HEx. III) “Since 1992, the United 
States has spent over $7 billion in CTR3 (or “Nunn-Lugar”) funds and related programs 
to help Russia dismantle nuclear weapons and ensure the security of its nuclear 
weapons, weapons grade material, other weapons of mass destruction, and related 
technical know-how.” (Id.) 
 
In August 2008, Russia attacked Georgia. See President’s “Remarks on the 
Situation in Georgia,” August 18, 2008: “It now appears that an effort may be underway 
to depose Georgia’s duly elected Government. Russia has invaded a sovereign 
neighboring state and threatens a democratic government elected by its people.” See 
also Joint Statement on Georgia by Foreign Ministers of Canada, France, Germany, 
Italy, Japan, the United States and the United Kingdom, Department of State Media 
Note, August 27, 2008: “Russia’s recognition of the independence of South Ossetia and 
Abkhazai violates the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Georgia and is contrary to 
U.N. Security Council Resolutions supported by Russia. Russia’s decision has called 
into question its commitment to peace and security in the Caucasus.” 
 
In June 2010, the U.S. Department of Justice arrested ten alleged Russian secret 
agents who carried out long-term deep-cover assignment in the United States on 
Russia’s behalf. (Tr. 98, HEx. VIII) All ten pleaded guilty to conspiracy to act as an 
agent of a foreign government within the United States. (Tr. 98, HEx. IX)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which must be considered in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
                                                          
3 The Cooperative Threat Reduction (CTR) program, popularly known as “Nunn-Lugar” after the two 
senators – Sam Nunn (D-GA) and Richard Lugar (R-IN) – who shepherded it through Washington, is an 
initiative to secure and dismantle nuclear and other weapons in Russia and other states of the former 
Soviet Union. 
 
6 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the interests of security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation of potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the interests of interest and shall in no sense be a determination of the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
 Upon consideration of all the facts in evidence, and after application of all 
appropriate legal precepts, factors, and conditions, including those described briefly 
above, I conclude the following with respect to the allegations set forth in the SOR: 
 
Foreign Influence 
 
 AG ¶ 6 explains the security concern about “foreign contacts and interests” 
stating: 
 
7 
 
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, [he or 
she] may be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, 
organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is 
vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any foreign interest. Adjudication 
under this Guideline can and should consider the identity of the foreign 
country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign 
country is known to target United States citizens to obtain protected 
information and/or is associated with a risk of terrorism. 
 
AG ¶ 7 indicates three conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case: 
 
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion; 
 
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and 
 
(d) sharing living quarters with a person or persons, regardless of their 
citizenship status, if the potential for adverse foreign influence or duress 
exists. 
 
Applicant’s sister, parents, and parents-in-law are citizens and residents of 
Russia. His wife is also a Russian citizen who lives with him in the United States. The 
disqualifying condition listed in AG ¶ 7(d) applies to his wife. The occupations of his 
relatives in Russia are typist, retired construction worker, retired auto parts salesman, 
and two homemakers. Applicant started to formulate doubts about working and living in 
Russia when he was seven or eight years old. In 1994, he moved to the United States 
for post-graduate schooling. He has visited his relatives in Russia in 2003 and 2005. In 
order to formally renounce his Russian citizenship, he needed a valid Russian 
Federation passport. In December 2009, he obtained a Russian Federation passport, 
which has not been used for travel, but used in the process to surrender his Russian 
citizenship, and in June 2010 he surrendered his Russian Federation passport to the 
company’s FSO.  
 
The mere possession of close family ties with a person in a foreign country is not, 
as a matter of law, disqualifying under Guideline B. However, if only one relative lives in 
a foreign country and an Applicant has frequent, non-casual contacts with that relative, 
this factor alone may be sufficient to create the potential for foreign influence and could 
 
8 
potentially result in the compromise of classified information. See ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006); ISCR Case No. 99-0424 (App. Bd. Feb. 8, 2001).  
 
The nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the United States, and 
its human rights record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an Applicant’s family 
members are vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or 
duress is significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a 
family member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is 
known to conduct intelligence operations against the United States. The complicated, 
competitive relationship of Russia with the United States places a significant, but not 
insurmountable burden of persuasion on Applicant to demonstrate that his relationship 
with his sister, parents, and his spouse’s family do not pose a security risk and he is not 
in a position to be forced to choose between loyalty to the United States and these 
persons. With its mixed human rights record, and political, economic, and military rivalry 
with the United States, and history of espionage against the United States, it is 
conceivable that Russia would target any Russian citizen or former citizen living in the 
United States in an attempt to gather valuable information from the United States. 
 
There is evidence that Russian intelligence operatives seek classified or 
economic information from U.S. businesses and/or government agencies. Applicant’s 
connections to his sister, parents, and his spouse’s family create a potential conflict of 
interest because these relationships are sufficiently close to raise a possible security 
concern about his desire to help his and his spouse’s relatives living in the Russia by 
providing classified information.  
 
Applicant has contact with his sister and parents, has a close relationship with 
them, and traveled to Russia in 2003 and 2005. These events raise the issue of 
potential foreign pressure or attempted exploitation. AG ¶¶ 7(a), 7(b), and 7(d) apply.  
 
AG ¶ 8 lists six conditions that could mitigate foreign influence security concerns 
including: 
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest;  
 
 
9 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority; 
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual. 
    
The mitigating factors listed in AG ¶¶ 8(a) and 8(c) cannot be applied with 
respect to his sister, parents, and spouse’s relatives. Applicant has an emotional bond 
with them and his spouse has an emotional bond with some of her relatives in Russia. 
Applicant’s wife has been a permanent resident of the United States since 2004 and is 
proceeding with the naturalization process. Following a background check, she will take 
the citizenship test in her quest to become a United States citizen. She has lived in the 
United States since 1998. His relationship with his wife and in-laws is not a security 
concern. “It is unlikely [he] will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of his wife and her parents and the interests of the U.S.” He does not have a 
particularly close relationship with his in-laws, which creates low potential of forcing him 
to choose between the United States and Russia. He met his burden of showing there is 
“little likelihood that [his relationship with wife and in-laws] could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.” See generally ISCR Case No. 03-04300 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 
16, 2006) (citing ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002)).  
 
Applicant communicates with them regularly and frequently. He has a very close 
relationship with his father and sister, but does “not feel particularly close with” his 
mother. Although Applicant’s close relationship with these family members is an 
important positive reflection of his character, the same close relationships raise security 
concerns for possible foreign influence.  
 
Applicant’s sister was a typist before she became a homemaker. His father is a 
retired construction worker and his mother is a homemaker. There is no evidence that 
his sister or his parents have been political activists, challenging the policies of the 
Russian Government. There is no evidence these relatives currently work for or have 
ever worked for the Russian Government or military or any news media. There is no 
evidence that terrorists or the Russian Government have approached or threatened 
Applicant, his or his spouse’s family living in Russia for any reason. There is no 
evidence that these family members living in Russia currently engage in activities which 
would bring attention to them or that they or other Russian elements are even aware 
that Applicant works for a government contractor or might have access to classified 
 
10 
information. As such, there is a reduced possibility that these relatives would be targets 
for coercion or exploitation. However, because Government has no burden to prove 
such information limited weight that can be given to the absence of such information. 
 
Applicant deserves some credit because of the reduced possibility that Russia 
will exploit his or his spouse’s family living in Russia because of the low profile they 
have in Russian society. Applicant and his spouse’s close relationship with them, their 
frequent contacts with them, and the nature of the Russian Government and its 
complicated and sometimes contentious relationship to the United States, all weigh 
against mitigating security concerns. See ADP Case No. 05-17812 at 2, 3 n.2 (App. Bd. 
Jun. 11, 2007) (finding contacts with siblings in PRC “once every two or three months” 
not to be casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 2, 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 
2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s parents and sisters a total of about 20 times per 
year not casual and infrequent); ISCR Case No. 04-09541 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Sep. 26, 
2006) (finding contacts with applicant’s siblings once every four or five months not 
casual and infrequent). 
 
Applicant’s close relationship with his daughters and his strong connections to 
the United States tends to mitigate the foreign interest security concerns. Applicant has 
“such deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., [he] can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” His daughters 
are U.S. citizens, and reside in the United States. Applicant has lived in the United 
States since 1994. His family has lived in the same community for 15 years. He, his 
wife, and daughters are fully inculcated with U.S. values. Applicant has worked for 
government contractors with dedication and distinction. He has no property or 
investments in Russia. He has many friends and colleagues in the United States. He is 
a loyal, dedicated U.S. citizen.  
 
Applicant’s 2006 stroke was a life altering event. At the time of his stroke, he 
knew his wife and children were in the right place and knew his children would grow up 
and become productive members of United States society. He realized he had to do 
more for the community, not just his family, but for the people who live around him. 
Since recovering from his stroke, he has been volunteering at the hospice center doing 
work others could not or would not do.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
 
11 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. There is some evidence in favor of 
mitigating Applicant’s conduct.  
 
Applicant realizes it is better for him and his family to be in the United States and 
his future and his family’s future is in the United States. He has formally renounced his 
Russian citizenship. In response to how he would react to pressure brought to bear on 
his or his spouse’s family living in Russia, he stated, “I have made my choices. I’m 
staying in this country.” I found this statement to be sincere and credible. However, in 
ISCR Case No. 06-24575 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007), the Appeal Board reversed an 
administrative judge’s decision to grant a PRC Applicant’s clearance because he gave 
too much weight to the Applicant’s “strong ties to the U.S.” and determined there was 
insufficient evidentiary support for the conclusion that he “can be trusted to resolve any 
conflict of interest . . . in favor of the U.S.” The Applicant in ISCR Case No. 06-24575 
said he would not act against the U.S. if faced with the choice. However, the Appeal 
Board gives such promises little weight in their review of the evidence, stating: 
 
An Applicant’s stated intention as to what he would do in the future is of 
relatively little weight, given the record in this case. See ISCR Case No. 
03-09053 at (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2006) (“An applicant’s stated intention 
about what he or she might do in the future under some hypothetical set of 
circumstances is merely a statement of intention that is not entitled to 
much weight, unless there is record evidence that the applicant has acted 
in a similar manner in the past under similar circumstances.”) 
 
Id. at 4. See also ISCR Case No. 07-00029 at 4 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2007) (criticizing the 
administrative judge’s reliance on PRC-Applicant’s promise to choose the U.S. over 
PRC should a conflict arise, and reversing the administrative judge’s decision to grant a 
clearance). I respect the Appeal Board’s position and give little weight to Applicant’s 
promise to resolve any conflict in favor of the United States. I do however give weight to 
the objective descriptions of his strong connections to the United States, and limited 
connections to Russia.  
  
A Guideline B decision concerning Russia must take into consideration the 
geopolitical situation in Russia, as well as the dangers existing in Russia.4 Russia is a 
                                                          
4 See ISCR Case No. 04-02630 at 3 (App. Bd. May 23, 2007) (remanding because of insufficient 
discussion of geopolitical situation and suggesting expansion of whole-person discussion).  
 
12 
diplomatic and strategic partner of the United States in some areas where both 
countries have mutual interests. For example, Russia is a key partner in efforts to 
reduce proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and control of nuclear materials. 
Russia’s relationship with the United States has significantly changed over the decades 
and is likely to change again in the future. Russia was an important U.S. ally in World 
War II, and then an enemy of the United States during the Korean and Vietnam Wars. 
Russia was the United States’ primary antagonist through the Cold war. Russia has a 
mixed to poor human rights record. Russia is one of the most aggressive nations in the 
collection of U.S. intelligence and sensitive economic information. Although terrorists in 
Russia are not known to target relatives of Americans such as his family and his 
spouse’s family, there is a significant problem in Russia with terrorists which is a factor 
in the analysis. 
 
One element increasing the foreign influence security concern is Applicant and 
his spouse’s frequent contacts with their relatives, and his mother’s two visits and his 
father’s one visit to the United States. He and his spouse clearly have close 
relationships with their family, and they are vulnerable to Russia coercion and non-
coercive measures because of where they live. His father receives a social security type 
pension, and the Russian government could exert pressure on them by threatening to 
stop his father’s pension. Because Russian government and intelligence personnel may 
violate Russian law, they are more likely to use improper and/or illegal means to obtain 
classified information through his family and his spouse’s family.  
 
There are significant factors supporting approval of Applicant’s access to 
classified information. Applicant has lived in the United States since 1994. His wife has 
been a permanent resident of the United States since 2004 and is in the process of 
becoming a naturalized United States citizen. Applicant’s closest relatives are his 
daughters, who are U.S. citizens. Applicant is an excellent employee and U.S. citizen. 
He prefers the United States, rather than to the Russia because the United States 
follows the Rule of Law, and Russian authorities do not. He thoroughly presented the 
evidence showing his connections to the United States and to the Russia. I found his 
statements to be honest, candid and credible. He provided corroborating statements 
concerning his loyalty and trustworthiness. He provided a favorable recommendation 
from his employer.  
 
In a 2006 decision, the Appeal Board held the Judge properly determined under 
the “whole person” concept that an applicant with very significant connections to Russia 
had mitigated security concerns under Guideline B. In ISCR Case No. 03-04300, 2006 
DOHA Lexis 264 at *17-*21 (App. Bd. Feb. 16, 2006),5 the applicant had weekly contact 
with her mother (who lives in Russia), contact three times per year with her aunt (who 
lives in Russia); contact about four times per year with her father-in-law (who lives in 
Russia); and multiple annual contacts with other relatives living in Israel. She had visited 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
5The Appeal Board reversed the Judge’s decision to grant a clearance because of the strict requirements 
of the Money Memorandum (Applicant in ISCR Case No. 03-04300 had not turned in her Russian 
passport to the Russian government by the close of evidence).  
 
13 
her family in Russia and Israel, on more than one occasion, after immigrating to the 
United States. Moreover, she owned a half interest in her mother’s apartment in Russia, 
and provided financial support to her mother and aunt. The Judge’s whole-person 
analysis (that the Appeal Board determined was sufficient to mitigate such significant 
foreign influence security concerns) provides: 
  
Looking at all of [whole person] factors, I conclude Applicant has 
overcome foreign influence security concerns. Given her strong ties to the 
U.S. and her limited contact with Russia and Israel since she became a 
U.S. naturalized citizen, there is limited potential for coercion, exploitation 
or duress. (E.2.2.1.8. The potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress.) All of her immediate family are in the U.S., and the majority of her 
financial ties are in the U.S. Applicant has been a naturalized U.S. citizen 
for over fifteen years. She returned to Russia in April 2005 to abjure her 
Russian citizenship and has had limited visits with her mother, aunt and 
father-in-law in 1995 and 2002. She provides minimal support to her 
mother and aunt. She has only visited her sister and family in Israel in 
1991, 1994, and 1997. While she has contact with her relatives in Russia 
and her relatives in Israel, that contact is limited. While her niece serves in 
the Israeli military, she has limited contact with her. Clearly, she put her 
interests in the U.S. ahead of her loyalty to her elderly mother when she 
chose to renounce her Russian citizenship. 
 
Given her long history with her employer since April 2000, it is unlikely that 
she could be exploited by coercive or non-coercive means by the 
government in Russia or in Israel in a way that could force Applicant to 
choose between loyalty to her mother, aunt, father-in-law, her sibling and 
family and her loyalty to the United States. She stated that should any 
such attempt be made she would immediately contact the appropriate 
U.S. authorities. Thus, any risk of either coercive or non-coercive foreign 
duress or influence on Applicant and/or her immediate family would 
appear to be slight and clearly manageable. Contacts with citizens of other 
countries are relevant to security determinations only if they make an 
individual potentially vulnerable to coercion, exploitation, or pressure 
through threats against those foreign relatives. 
 
 While clearance decisions are inherently based on numerous facts, and as such 
are made after a case-by-case analysis, the applicant in ISCR Case No. 03-04300 had 
similar connections to Russia as Applicant does in this case.6  
 
                                                          
6In ISCR Case No. 03-04300 the applicant’s connections to the U.S. are as follows: (1) the applicant’s 
husband and son live in the United States, and they are both dual citizens of Russia and the U.S.; and (2) 
The applicant has lived in the U.S. since 1989. The applicant in ISCR Case No. 03-04300 is a 
professional with post-doctorate teaching employment. 
 
 
14 
 
15 
                                                          
 After carefully weighing the evidence of his connections to Russia, and to the 
United States, I conclude Applicant has carried his burden of fully mitigating the foreign 
influence and foreign preference security concerns.  
 
  I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”7 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. For the 
reasons stated, I conclude he is eligible for access to classified information.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Freign Preference:  FOR APPLICANT.  
 
The Government chose not to proceed under Guideline C, Foreign 
Preference.  
 
 Paragraph 2, Foreign Influence:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a–2.g:  For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted.  
 
 
 
_______________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
7See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
