 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-07951 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Paul M. DeLaney, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
COACHER, Robert E., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns under Guideline F, Financial 
Considerations. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 19, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG), effective within the Department of Defense on September 
1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on December 17, 2010, and elected to have his 
case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the Government’s 
 
2 
 
 
File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 11, 2011. The FORM was mailed to 
Applicant and he received it on January 24, 2011. Applicant was given an opportunity to 
file objections and submit material in refutation, extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did 
not provide additional information. The case was assigned to me on March 18, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In Applicant’s answer to the SOR, he failed to specifically admit or deny the 
allegations; therefore, I will treat his responses as denials. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings and exhibits submitted, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 45 years old. He is single, has never been married, and has no 
children. He has worked for his current employer, a defense contractor, since December 
2009. He is an apprentice technician. He is a high school graduate. He has no history of 
military service.1   
  
 The debts listed in the SOR are supported by a credit reports dated November 
10, 2010, and July 9, 2010. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.x are 24 state tax liens 
totaling $21,335. The debts alleged in SOR ¶¶ 1.y – 1.aa and 1.cc are consumer debts 
totaling $845. The debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.bb is a past due mortgage payment in the 
amount of $896. Applicant presented no proof of payment for any of these debts. These 
debts remain unresolved.2 
  
 Prior to working for his current employer, Applicant operated his own business 
starting in January 1992. He closed the business in December 2007. No further facts 
are provided concerning the business. Applicant states that he is “working with”, and 
has been “in contact with” the Department of Revenue about the tax liens. Additionally, 
he believes that many of the liens are based upon estimated taxes for which he is not 
liable. He failed to supply any documentation for his position or any other information 
concerning the status of the tax liens.3 
 
 Applicant claims that non-tax lien debts have been resolved. However, he does 
not provide any documentary evidence to support his claim. Additionally, the record 
contains no information about Applicant’s current income and expenses or any other 
current financial information including whether he sought any financial counseling.4   
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 Item 5. 
 
2 Items 4, 6, 7. 
 
3 Item 4. 
 
4 Id. 
 
 
3 
 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s overarching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, an “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk that an applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation about potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
AG & 18 expresses the security concern for financial considerations:  
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. I have 
considered all of them under AG & 19 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations.  
 
Applicant has delinquent debts that remain unpaid or unresolved. I find both 
disqualifying conditions are raised.  
 
The guideline also includes conditions that could mitigate security concerns 
arising from financial difficulties. I have considered all of the mitigating conditions under 
AG ¶ 20 and especially considered the following: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual=s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person=s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
5 
 
 
 (e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented 
proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of 
actions to resolve the issue. 
  
 Applicant provided no evidence that he paid or resolved his delinquent debts. 
Therefore, his behavior is recent and remains a concern. I find mitigating condition AG ¶ 
20(a) does not apply because Applicant’s debts remain unresolved. Applicant provided 
no explanation for the cause of his financial troubles, other than he once owned a 
business. I find AG ¶ 20(b) does not apply. Applicant failed to present evidence of 
financial counseling and there is no clear evidence that Applicant’s financial problems 
are being resolved or under control. There was no documented evidence that he has 
made a good-faith effort to pay or has attempted to resolve any of the debts. I find AG 
¶¶ 20(c) and 20(d) do not apply. No documentary evidence was presented to support 
Applicant’s disputed tax lien liability or his claim that all the non-tax lien debts have been 
paid. I find AG ¶ 20(e) does not apply. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. He has not shown a track record of 
financial stability. The record lacks any evidence that Applicant has made any type of 
good-faith effort to resolve his debts. Therefore, he failed to provide sufficient evidence 
to mitigate the security concerns.  
 
Overall the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
6 
 
 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under Guideline F, 
Financial Considerations. 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1.a – 1.cc:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Robert E. Coacher 
Administrative Judge 
