 
 1 
 
                                                              
                        DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE    
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
   )     ISCR Case No. 10-02894 
 ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Alison O‟Connell, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: James P. Roche, Esquire 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
MATCHINSKI, Elizabeth M., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has an extensive criminal record, including several convictions for assault 
and battery, and a felony conviction of possession of a controlled substance with intent to 
distribute. In the last 10 years, he was convicted of only one offense, resisting arrest and 
detention in August 2008, although he also assaulted his current girlfriend. He was not 
candid about his arrest record when he applied for his security clearance in December 2008 
and in October 2009. Clearance denied. 
 
 Statement of the Case  
 
On July 8, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing the security concerns under Guideline J 
(Criminal Conduct) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct), which provided the basis for its 
preliminary decision to deny him a security clearance. The action was taken under 
Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); 
 
 
 2 
and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective within the Department of Defense on 
September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on July 22, 2010, and requested a 
hearing. On August 24, 2010, the case was assigned to me to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for Applicant. 
On September 2, 2010, I scheduled a hearing for October 8, 2010. 
 
I convened the hearing as scheduled. Eleven Government exhibits (Ex. 1-11) were 
entered into evidence without objection. Applicant testified, as reflected in a transcript (Tr.) 
received on October 14, 2010. 
 
       Summary of SOR Allegations 
 
The SOR alleged under Guideline J, Criminal Conduct, that Applicant was arrested 
on 38 occasions between February 1975 and August 2008 (SOR 1.a-1.n, 1.p-1.mm) for 
various criminal offenses, and that he sold heroin and cocaine from at least December 
1989 to January 1990 (SOR 1.o). While some of the charges were dismissed or otherwise 
disposed of without a conviction, he was fined for being a disorderly person in June 1982 
(SOR 1.c) and July 1986 (SOR 1.h); for operating a vehicle after suspended license (SOR 
1.y) and open container (SOR 1.z) in May 1995; and for resisting arrest and detention in 
August 2008 (SOR 1.mm). He was sentenced to one year in jail (suspended) for a January 
1983 possession of a Class D controlled substance (SOR 1.d); to three months in jail for 
January 1987 assault and assault and battery on a police officer (SOR 1.i); to probation on 
November 1989 for assault and battery and assault and battery with a dangerous weapon 
charges (SOR 1.n); to ten years in prison on two counts of possession of a controlled 
substance with intent to distribute in February 1990 (SOR 1.q); to one year in jail for 
assault and battery in June 1995 (SOR 1.aa), to 270 days confinement for an October 
1999 simple assault with an additional 12 months for violating sentencing terms (SOR 
1.gg). He was also found guilty of September 1991 charges of assault and battery on a 
police officer, threatening to murder, liquor law violation, and a city ordinance (loud noise) 
(SOR 1.w);  and of a September 1995 operating a vehicle after suspended license (SOR 
1.bb), although these charges were later filed. A warrant was issued for his arrest on an 
April 1990 firearms violation charge that was later not prosecuted because he was 
incarcerated for another offense (SOR 1.r). 
 
Under Guideline E, Personal Conduct, Applicant allegedly falsified his December 
2008 Questionnaire for National Security Positions (QNSP) for denying that he had ever 
been charged with or convicted of a felony offense (SOR 1.a); that he had ever been 
charged with or convicted of a firearms offense (SOR 1.b); that he had any charges then 
pending (SOR 1.c); that he had ever been charged with or convicted of any offense related 
to alcohol or drugs (SOR 1.d); and that he had been charged with or convicted of any 
offense not otherwise listed in the last seven years (SOR 1.e). Applicant was alleged to 
have also falsified an October 2009 QNSP by not disclosing that he had been arrested in 
November 2006 and in December 2006 for simple assault and convicted of resisting arrest 
 
 3 
and detention in 2008 (SOR 1.f); and by falsely denying any felony charges (SOR 1.g), any 
firearms charges (SOR 1.h), and any charges related to alcohol or drugs (SOR 1.i). 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer, Applicant admitted the criminal arrests and convictions as alleged 
under Guideline J. He acknowledged the discrepancy between his responses on the 
security clearance applications and his criminal record, but he denied any intent to falsify. 
Applicant‟s admissions are incorporated as findings of fact. After considering the pleadings, 
exhibits, and transcript, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is 45 years old and works as a project specialist subcontracted to perform 
component or mechanical work for defense contractors. He has been with his present 
employer only since the summer of 2010. (Tr. 23-25.) Applicant applied for a security 
clearance during his previous employments as a technician from November 2008 to 
October 2009 (Ex. 1.) and then as a hybrid assembler technician placed with a major 
defense contractor. (Ex. 2.) Applicant held a security clearance as a part-time security 
guard for a defense contractor from 1997 to 1999 (Tr. 25.), and he was granted an interim 
Secret clearance in December 2008. (Ex. 2.) He has never been married, but has fathered 
four children who range in age from 15 to 24. None of the children live with him. (Ex. 1; 2.) 
Applicant currently resides with his significant other in a home that they purchased in 
December 2008. (Ex. 2; Tr. 26.) 
 
Applicant grew up in a rough neighborhood, and he “started running the streets” with 
his peers. (Tr. 27-28.) Criminal records indicate that that in February 1975, when he would 
have been only nine years old, he was arrested for disturbing the peace (SOR 1.a). The 
charge was dismissed. A June 1977 arrest for gaming (SOR 1.b) was continued without a 
finding. In June 1982, he was reportedly fined for being a disorderly person (SOR 1.c). (Ex. 
7.) However, Applicant denies any arrest before January 1983, when he was arrested for 
possession of a class D controlled substance (marijuana) (SOR 1.d). (Tr. 37-38.) He was 
found guilty in district court in March 1983 and given a one year suspended sentence. (Ex. 
3; 7; Tr. 38.) 
 
In October 1983, he was arrested for indecent assault and battery on a child over 14 
(two counts) (SOR 1.e and 1.f). Applicant and his friend had given a ride to a female friend. 
She complained Applicant had sexually assaulted her, which he denies. (Ex. 3.) On 
November 23, 1983, the indictments were dismissed in district court, and he was charged 
as an adult in superior court with felony assault with intent to rape, indecent assault and 
battery, and assault and battery. The assault and battery charge was continued without a 
finding until May 30, 1986. The other charges were “nolle prosequi” (not prosecuted). (Ex. 
7.) 
 
In May 1984, Applicant was arrested for possession with intent to distribute a Class 
D controlled substance (SOR 1.g). The charge was dismissed. In July 1986, he was fined 
$125 on a disorderly conduct charge (SOR 1.h). In early January 1987, he was charged 
with assault and battery on a police officer and with assault (SOR 1.i). Applicant was pulled 
 
 4 
over while driving for a reason that he cannot now recall. He maintains that he accidentally 
struck the officer when he opened his car door (Ex. 3.); although in October 1987 he was 
committed to the house of corrections for three months on both charges. (Ex. 7.) 
 
In mid-March 1988, Applicant was charged with threatening to commit crime and 
with two counts of assault and battery with a dangerous weapon (knife) (SOR 1.j). The 
charges were dismissed in mid-April 1988. (Ex. 7.) 
 
In June 1988, Applicant was charged in district court with burglary (assault in 
dwelling), assault and battery, and malicious destruction of property less than $250 (SOR 
1.k and 1.l). He failed to appear in court in September 1988, and a default warrant was 
issued for his arrest in October 1988. In late November 1988, the charges were dismissed 
in district court and Applicant was bound over to the superior court. In March 1989, 
Applicant was charged in superior court with assault and battery, felony assault and battery 
with a dangerous weapon, burglary, threatening to murder, and malicious destruction of 
property.
1
 In August 1989, a “nolle prosequi” was entered as to the burglary charge. The 
remaining charges were continued without a finding to February 25, 1991, and then 
dismissed. (Ex. 7.) 
 
 In August 1989, Applicant was charged in district court with witness intimidation and 
with assault and battery. He failed to appear in court and a default warrant was issued for 
his arrest (SOR 1.m). While those charges were pending, he was arrested in November 
1989 for assault and battery and two counts of assault and battery with a dangerous 
weapon (brass dove and telephone cord) (SOR 1.n). A default warrant was issued for 
Applicant‟s arrest when he failed to appear. In September 1990, the district court dismissed 
the August 1989 charges, but sentenced Applicant to one year probation on the November 
1989 assault and battery and assault and battery with a dangerous weapon (brass dove) 
charges. The other count of assault and battery with a dangerous weapon was dismissed. 
(Ex. 7.) Applicant testified that the assault and battery offenses in 1988 and 1989 involved 
his then girlfriend, and that he had hit her. (Tr. 41.) 
 
 Around December 1989, Applicant began selling heroin and cocaine on the streets 
and in the city parks (SOR 1.o). He denies he was “an experienced pusher or anything like 
that” (Tr. 64.), but admits he sold between $1,200 and $1,500 of the illicit substances in 30 
to 60 drug transactions within that month. In January 1990, the police searched his 
apartment. In addition to heroin and cocaine, they seized two handguns (a 357 magnum 
and a 25-caliber pistol). (Ex. 3.) Applicant was arrested and charged in district court with 
possession to distribute a class A controlled substance (heroin); possession to distribute a 
                                                 
1
 Under the pertinent state law, a crime punishable by death or imprisonment in the state prison is a felony and 
all other crimes are misdemeanors.  Mass. Gen. Laws ch. 274 §1. The punishment for assault and battery with 
a dangerous weapon is imprisonment in the state prison for not more than 10 years or in the house of 
correction for not more than 2 ½ years, or by a fine or not more than $5,000, or by both such fine and 
imprisonment.  Mass Gen. Laws ch. 265 § 15A. (Ex. 8.) Simple assault and battery is a misdemeanor, as the 
crime is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 2 ½ years in a house of correction or by a fine of not 
more than $1,000. Mass Gen. Laws ch. 265 § 13A. (Ex. 8.) Burglary in the nighttime while armed is a felony, 
as the crime is punishable by imprisonment for life or for any term not less than ten years. Mass. Gen. Laws 
ch. 266 § 14. 
 
 5 
class B substance (cocaine); conspiracy to violate the Controlled Substances Act to 
possess heroin with intent; possession of a firearm without identification; and possession of 
ammunition without identification (SOR 1.p and 1.q). In February 1990, the charges were 
dismissed by the district court and he was indicted in superior court on charges of 
possession of a Class A controlled substance with intent to distribute; possession of a 
Class B controlled substance with intent to distribute; possession of a controlled substance 
with the intent to distribute cocaine or PCP; possession of ammunition; and two counts of 
possession of a firearm without identification. On January 25, 1991, he was convicted of 
possession of a Class A controlled substance with intent to distribute and of possession of 
a Class B controlled substance with intent to distribute, both felonies. He was sentenced to 
ten years in prison for each offense, to serve five years and 11 months. (Tr. 43.) The 
possession of a controlled substance with intent to distribute cocaine or PCP was not 
prosecuted, and the firearms violations were filed. (Ex. 7.) Applicant served two years in 
prison and then was paroled only to violate his parole by committing assault and battery. 
(Tr. 43.) He testified he served an additional three years and 11 months. (Tr. 70.)  
 
 While Applicant was awaiting trial in superior court on the drug and firearms 
charges, he was charged in district court in late April 1990 with a firearms violation (false 
identification in his application for a firearm) (SOR 1.r). Default warrants were issued for his 
arrest, including in May 1991, but in September 1991, the charge was not prosecuted 
because he was incarcerated on the felony drug charges. (Ex. 7.) On June 8, 1990, again 
while the felony charges were pending, Applicant was charged in district court with 
threatening to commit a crime and with assault and battery on a police officer (SOR 1.s 
and 1.w). Later in June 1990, he was arrested for a liquor law violation (keeping) and with 
violating a city ordinance against loud, unreasonable noise (SOR 1.t and 1.w). In 
November 1990, all the charges were bound over for a “first instance jury trial” of six 
persons. (Ex. 7; 10.) In September 1991, he was found guilty by a jury of six and the 
charges were filed. (Ex. 7.) 
 
 In July 1990, Applicant was charged in district court with two counts of armed 
robbery; assault and battery with a dangerous weapon (knife); assault and battery; 
threatening to commit murder; and knowingly receiving stolen property valued at less than 
$250 (SOR 1.u). Applicant maintains that while he sat in a friend‟s car, unbeknownst to 
him, his friend stole some jewelry. The police stopped their vehicle and Applicant was 
arrested for being an accomplice. (Ex. 3.) The charges were not prosecuted. In February 
1991, Applicant was arrested or assault and battery (SOR 1.v). In August 1991, his case 
was continued without a finding and then dismissed one year later. (Ex. 7.) 
 
 The criminal records indicate that Applicant was arrested in November 1994 and 
charged with larceny and uttering a forged instrument (SOR 1.x). The state elected not to 
prosecute on the charges, although not until after several warrants had been issued for his 
arrest. (Ex. 7.) 
 
 In May 1995, Applicant was arrested for operating a motor vehicle after his license 
had been suspended (SOR 1.y). He was found guilty and fined $625. Later in May 1995, 
 
 6 
Applicant was charged with violating an open container law (SOR 1.z). He was fined $50 
for the offense in June 1995. (Ex. 7.) 
 
 In June 1995, Applicant had an argument with his then girlfriend while out at a local 
swimming area. He forced her into the car and once they were back at their residence, he 
threw a coat hanger, which struck her. She called the police, and he was arrested for 
assault and battery with a dangerous weapon; kidnapping; and assault and battery (SOR 1. 
aa). (Ex. 3.) In August 1995, he was found not guilty of assault and battery with a 
dangerous weapon, and the kidnapping charge was “nolle prosequi.” But he was 
sentenced to one year in jail for assault and battery. He was incarcerated until September 
or October 1997 for violating his parole on the 1990 felony drug charges. (Tr. 43.) Criminal 
records report that Applicant was charged in September 1995 with operating after his 
license had been suspended (SOR 1.bb), that he was found guilty, and that the charge was 
filed. (Ex. 7.) Apparently, he was re-imprisoned after that offense, although the available 
criminal records do not show the dates of his confinement. 
 
 Around October 1997, Applicant moved to his present locale. In four separate 
incidents occurring in late October 1997 (SOR 1.cc), November 1997 (SOR 1.dd), March 
1998 (SOR 1.ee), and September 1999 (SOR 1.ff), Applicant was arrested for simple 
assault. He was not convicted of any of those charges. (Ex. 5.) He recalls only with respect 
to the November 1997 incident that he and his then girlfriend pushed each other during an 
argument. He had been drinking alcohol at the time. (Ex. 3.) The March 1998 and 
September 1999 incidents involved his current girlfriend, who was not willing to testify 
against him. (Tr. 44.) 
 
 In early November 1999, he was arrested for a misdemeanor simple assault on his 
current girlfriend that occurred in late October 1999 (SOR 1.gg). (Tr. 44-45.) He was found 
guilty and his case was continued for sentencing. In June 2000, he was sentenced to 270 
days, with one additional year deferred for two years conditioned on not committing any 
felony or misdemeanor, and no contact with the victim. (Ex. 5; 11.) 
 
 In December 1999, Applicant was arrested for witness tampering, a felony (SOR 
1.hh) for an incident that allegedly occurred in late November 1999. He was found not 
guilty. (Ex. 5.) In May 2000, Applicant was arrested for second degree assault, a felony, 
and for two counts of misdemeanor simple assault, following an incident that allegedly 
happened in April 2000 involving his children (SOR 1.ii and 1.jj). (Tr. 60, 68.) In January 
2001, Applicant was found not guilty (Ex. 5.); although he admits that he hit his daughter 
with a belt. (Tr. 60.) 
 
 In February 2001, Applicant was sentenced to 12 months confinement for 
apparently assaulting a neighbor. (Tr. 62.) Applicant testified that he served only eight 
months, so the term must have been concurrent with the 270 days for assaulting his 
girlfriend. (Tr. 45.) Following his release from incarceration, Applicant began working in 
April 2002 as an inspector in the circuit board industry. After two years, he left that job for a 
position as a research and development technician. (Ex. 2.)  
 
 
 7 
 Applicant appeared in court in April 2007 on two simple assault charges stemming 
from separate incidents that occurred in early November 2006 (SOR 1.kk) and December 
2006 (SOR 1.ll). Applicant admits that he struck his current girlfriend in the face while they 
were arguing, causing her lip to swell. Both charges were dismissed when his girlfriend 
refused to press charges. (Ex. 3; 5; Tr. 46.)  
 
 In August 2008, Applicant was arrested for misdemeanor resisting arrest or 
detention (SOR 1.mm). He had just finished his shift at a local bar when the police 
investigating a “hit and run” accident summoned him to the scene. Applicant claims that he 
had only walked a short distance away from the officer when the officer called for backup 
and he was arrested. While he denies any basis for the charge (Ex. 3; Tr. 48.), Applicant 
maintains that he pleaded no contest and agreed to pay a $250 fine to put the incident 
behind him (Tr. 49.), although criminal record checks indicate he pleaded guilty on 
December 18, 2008. (Ex. 3; 5.)  
 
 In November 2008, Applicant was laid off from his employment as a research and 
development technician that he had held since April 2004. (Ex. 1; Tr. 29.) He was hired as 
a technician for a company involved in defense work. On December 11, 2008, Applicant 
completed an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing (e-QIP) incorporating 
a QNSP version of the security clearance application. Applicant responded “No” to the 
police record inquiries, including 24.a., “Have you ever been charged with or convicted of 
any felony offense?”; 24.b, “Have you ever been charged with or convicted of a firearms or 
explosives offense?”; 24.c, “Are there currently any charges pending against you for any 
criminal offense?”; 24.d, “Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s) 
related to alcohol or drugs?”; and 24.f, “In the last 7 years, have you been arrested for, 
charged with, or convicted of any offense(s) not listed in response to a, b, c, d, or e 
above?” (Ex. 1.) Applicant was apparently granted an interim Secret clearance in 
December 2008. (Ex. 2.) 
 
 On January 26, 2009, Applicant was interviewed by an Office of Personnel 
Management (OPM) investigator about his unlisted arrests. He admitted that he did not 
disclose his arrests because he was “desperate” for the job that he wanted to keep, and he 
felt that his arrests would be addressed sometime. When asked about the specific 
offenses, Applicant detailed what he could recall about the arrests in SOR 1.d, 1.p 
(disposition shown in SOR 1.q), 1.kk, and 1.mm. Applicant told the investigator that for the 
1990 felony drug offenses, he was committed to state prison for one year and then placed 
on probation for nine years after his release. He denied any recall of the arrests identified 
in SOR 1.g, 1.s, 1.w, and 1.z. (Ex. 3.) The evidence does not show whether he was asked 
about the assault and burglary charges that had been dismissed, and Applicant testified 
that he was asked about offenses based on the information the investigator had before 
him. (Tr. 56.) When confronted at this hearing about the discrepancy between time actually 
served for his 1990 felony drug offenses and the one-year reported during his interview, 
Applicant testified that he “picked up what they call a jail house ticket, which is a conduct 
ticket in jail.” (Tr. 70.) 
 
 
 8 
 Applicant was re-interviewed by an OPM investigator on March 12, 2009, about 
some of the arrests that were not discussed during his first interview. Applicant explained 
that he intentionally omitted his arrests from his QNSP because there were so many 
arrests and he knew they would be discovered during his investigation. Applicant claimed 
to have no knowledge of those arrests alleged in SOR 1.b, 1.j-1.n, 1.s, 1.v-1.x, 1.ff, 1.hh, 
1.jj, or 1.kk. However, he admitted that some of the unrecalled arrests might well be valid. 
(Ex. 3.) 
 
 Applicant was laid off while his clearance investigation was pending. (Tr. 52.) In 
October 2009, Applicant began working for an avionics corporation, where he was placed 
with a major defense contractor. On October 5, 2009, he completed another QNSP. He 
responded “Yes” to questions 22.a, “Have you been issued a summons, citation, or ticket 
to appear in court in a criminal proceeding against you; are you on trial or awaiting a trial on 
criminal charges; or are you currently awaiting sentencing for a criminal offense?,” and 
22.b, “Have you been arrested by any police officer, sheriff, marshal, or any other type of 
law enforcement officer?.” He indicated that he had been arrested around October 2008 
[sic] for disorderly conduct, and in April 2003 for a traffic citation, but the charges had been 
dropped. He answered “No” to questions concerning whether he had ever been charged 
with a felony offense, any firearms or explosives offenses, and any alcohol or drug-related 
charges. (Ex. 1.) 
 
 At his hearing, Applicant continued to deny any intent to falsify his QNSPs (“I knew 
that somewhere later on I had to explain a lot of that stuff.”). (Tr. 32.) When asked why he 
listed only two minor offenses on his latest QNSP rather than his felonies, Applicant 
responded, “There‟s no reason for that.” (Tr. 53.) On redirect examination, he testified that 
when he completed his second QNSP, he believed that all the information he had 
previously disclosed about his arrest record to the OPM investigator “was all included.” (Tr. 
54.) On re-cross examination, Applicant indicated he did not list his arrest record on his 
second QNSP “because there was a lot of information to put down.” (Tr. 57.) Despite his 
lengthy criminal record, Applicant believes the Government should grant him a security 
clearance because he has “reinvented” himself by learning technical skills, gaining 
experience, and becoming more responsible, as evidenced by his home purchase. (Tr. 34-
35.) 
   
Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion the Executive 
Branch has in regulating access to information pertaining to national security,  emphasizing 
that “no one has a „right‟ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 
U.S. 518, 528 (1988). When evaluating an applicant‟s suitability for a security clearance, 
the administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines. In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are required to be considered in 
evaluating an applicant‟s eligibility for access to classified information. These guidelines 
are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, 
these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative 
 
 9 
process. The administrative judge‟s overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and 
commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious 
scrutiny of a number of variables known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, 
favorable and unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to classified 
information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this decision, I have 
drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based on the evidence 
contained in the record. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence 
to establish controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant 
is responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision. 
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The Government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation as 
to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. Section 7 of 
Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national interest 
and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.” See 
also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites for access to classified or 
sensitive information). 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
The security concern about criminal conduct is set out in Guideline J, AG ¶ 30: 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person‟s judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. 
By its very nature, it calls into question a person‟s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations. 
 
 Applicant now disputes any arrests before January 1983, when he was caught with 
marijuana in his possession. He is not likely to have been involved in gaming activities at 
age 11. Several of the criminal charges were dismissed, which in the absence of evidence 
of culpability, must be resolved in Applicant‟s favor. Even so, his long criminal record spans 
most of his adult life and includes serious felony drug offenses and several assaults on 
former and current girlfriends, his daughter, and a neighbor. AG ¶ 31(a), “a single serious 
crime or multiple lesser offenses,” AG ¶ 31(c), “allegation or admission of criminal conduct, 
regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally prosecuted, or convicted,” 
 
 10 
and AG ¶ 31(e), “violation of parole or probation, or failure to complete a court-mandated 
rehabilitation program,” are amply established.
2
 
 
Mitigating condition AG ¶ 32(a), “so much time has elapsed since the criminal 
behavior happened, or it happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to 
recur and does not cast doubt on the individual‟s reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment,” cannot reasonably apply in light of his long criminal history, his bad conduct 
while in prison, his violation of his parole by committing new assaults, and his relatively 
recent August 2008 resisting arrest.  AG ¶ 32(c), “evidence that the person did not commit 
the offense,” has some applicability to those charges that were not prosecuted or 
dismissed and for which the evidence is insufficient to prove culpability. In addition to those 
charges alleged in SOR 1.a-1.c, Applicant denies that he sexually assaulted a female 
friend in October 1983 (SOR 1.e and 1.f, same offense), and although he was indicted in 
superior court for felony assault, the charges were not prosecuted or were continued 
without a finding. The November 1994 larceny and uttering charges were not prosecuted 
(SOR 1.x). The March 1988 threatening and assault and battery with a dangerous weapon 
charges were dismissed (SOR 1.j). The burglary and related charges filed against him in 
June 1988 (SOR 1.k, disposition in SOR 1.l) were not proven. However, the issuance of a 
default warrant in that case and in subsequent cases raises concerns about whether he 
can be counted on to comply with the law. Applicant denies any responsibility in the July 
1990 incident involving theft of jewelry and those charges were not prosecuted, so AG ¶ 
32(c) could apply to the crime alleged in SOR 1.u. The witness tampering charge in SOR 
1.jj was not substantiated. 
 
Applicant‟s consistent employment since April 2002 is some evidence of reform, but 
even so, his assault of his current girlfriend in 2006 and his resisting arrest in 2008 
undermine his case in rehabilitation. He also demonstrates an unacceptable tendency to 
minimize the seriousness of his criminal drug sales, as evidenced by his testimony that he 
was not an experienced drug pusher and sold heroin and cocaine for only a few months. 
Moreover, I cannot fully apply AG ¶ 32(d), “there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; 
including but not limited to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, 
remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement,” because of his lack of candor about his criminal 
record when he applied for a security clearance in December 2008 and October 2009. See 
Guideline E, infra. The Criminal Conduct concerns are not sufficiently mitigated. 
                                                 
2
Applicant‟s incarceration for more than a year would have brought his case under AG ¶ 31(f), “conviction in a 
Federal or State court, including a court-martial of a crime, sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding 
one year and incarcerated as a result of that sentence for not less than one year” of the adjudicative guidelines 
revised August 2006. With the addition of Section 2003 to 50 U.S.C. § 435(b) in January 2008, the 
disqualification absent meritorious waiver for persons who were sentenced to and served imprisonment for 
more than one year only applies to prevent clearances that would provide access to special access programs 
(SAP), Restricted Data (RD), or any other information commonly referred to as “special compartmented 
information” (SCI). Such access is not at issue in this case. 
 
   
 
 11 
Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern for personal conduct is set out in Guideline E, AG ¶ 15: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions about 
an individual‟s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid 
answers during the security clearance process or any other failure to 
cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant did not disclose any of his extensive criminal record when he applied for a 
security clearance in December 2008. His negative responses to inquiries into any felony 
charges, firearms charges, pending criminal charges, alcohol or drug charges, and charges 
within the last seven years were knowingly false. He was obligated to provide “true, 
complete, and correct” information, irrespective of whether the Government was likely to 
find out about his criminal record, whether he was personally “desperate” for the job, or in 
the case of his October 2009 QNSP, whether he had provided some details about his 
criminal past during his subject interviews. It is difficult to find that Applicant acted in good 
faith when the information reported on his more recent QNSP was so incomplete and 
largely inaccurate. As he had on his first QNSP, he denied that he had ever been charged 
with a felony, a firearms offense, or an offense related to alcohol or drugs. He listed only an 
April 2003 traffic violation and a 2008 disorderly conduct charge, and indicated that both 
had been dropped. Disqualifying condition AG ¶ 16(a),“deliberate omission, concealment, 
or falsification of relevant facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history 
statement, or similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or 
trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities,” is established. 
 
Applicant acknowledged during his first subject interview that he did not disclose any 
information about his criminal record on his December 2008 QNSP out of concern for his 
job (Ex. 3.), and he provided some details about some of his offenses. Yet AG ¶ 17(a), “the 
individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or 
falsification before being confronted with the facts,” cannot fully apply. The disclosures 
during interviews conducted in January 2009 and March 2009 were in response to 
questions from the investigator from the criminal record information discovered during the 
investigation. Furthermore, Applicant‟s misrepresentation of his criminal record on his 
October 2009 QNSP undermines his evidence in reform. When he answered the SOR, he 
claimed to not know why his written responses on his security clearance applications were 
the way they were and he suggested he may not have understood the questions at the 
time. Without a meaningful acknowledgement of responsibility and expression of 
appropriate remorse for his QNSP falsifications, I also cannot apply AG ¶ 17(c), “the 
offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual‟s reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment,” or AG ¶ 17(d), “the 
individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior 
 
 12 
or taken other positive steps to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that 
caused untrustworthy, unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is 
unlikely to recur.” I remain concerned about Applicant‟s candor and whether he can be 
counted on to fulfill the fiduciary obligations of a security clearance. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant‟s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of his conduct and 
all relevant circumstances in light of the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 
2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances 
surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the 
frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the individual‟s age and maturity at 
the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to which participation is voluntary; (6) 
the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral 
changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, 
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or 
recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of 
the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
In Applicant‟s favor, his lifestyle appears to be more stable in that he has a record of 
consistent employment, and he owns his home. The frequency of his criminal activity has 
diminished since 2002 when he was released from his last incarceration. That said, he has 
yet to demonstrate that he possesses the good judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness 
that must be expected from those persons granted security clearance eligibility. Despite 
evidence that he pleaded guilty to the August 2008 resisting arrest charge, he denies any 
merit to the charge. His October 2009 QNSP responses were glaring in their omission of 
his imprisonment for some five years in total for, in part, bad conduct in prison and violating 
his parole. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as 
required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline J:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:  For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.d:  Against Applicant 
 
 13 
 Subparagraph 1.e:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.f:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.g:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.h:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.i:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.j:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.k:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.l:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.m:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.n:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.o:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.p:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.q:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.r:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.s:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.t:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.u:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.v:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.w:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.x:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.y:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.z:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.aa:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.bb:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.cc:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.dd:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.ee:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.ff:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.gg:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.hh:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.ii:  For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.jj:   For Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.kk:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.ll:  Against Applicant 
 Subparagraph 1.mm: Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline G:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 2.a:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.b:  Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 2.c:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.d:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.e:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.f:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.g:  Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.h:  Against Applicant 
 
 14 
  Subparagraph 2.i:  Against Applicant 
 
 Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
________________________ 
Elizabeth M. Matchinski 
Administrative Judge 
