                                                              
 
1 
 
 
                                           
    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
            DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
          
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-02475 
  ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
  
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
__________ 
 
Decision 
__________ 
 
 
RIVERA, Juan J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant illegally used marijuana intermittently from the 1980s until November 
2008. He used marijuana after he was granted access to classified information at the 
secret level around 1992, and access to sensitive compartmented information (SCI) 
around 2004. Moreover, he falsified his 2008 security clearance application (SCA) and 
made a false statement to a government background investigator to cover his past use 
of marijuana. His behavior continues to cast doubt on his reliability, judgment, and 
ability and willingness to comply with the law and follow rules. Clearance is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted an SCA on November 4, 2008. After reviewing the results of 
the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the Defense Office of Hearings 
and Appeals (DOHA) were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding1 that it is 
 
1 Required by Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information Within Industry, dated 
February 20, 1960, as amended; and Department of Defense (DoD) Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial 
Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (Directive), dated January 2, 1992, as revised. 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant’s request for a security 
clearance.  
On September 27, 2010, DOHA issued Applicant a statement of reasons (SOR), 
which specified the basis for its decision – security concerns under Guidelines H (Drug 
Involvement) and E (Personal Conduct) of the adjudicative guidelines (AG).2  
 
Applicant responded to the SOR allegations on November 9, 2010, and elected 
to have his case decided without a hearing. A complete copy of the file of relevant 
material (FORM), dated December 29, 2010, was provided to him. Applicant responded 
to the FORM on February 2, 2011. He objected to some aspects of the FORM and 
submitted information in mitigation and extenuation. The case was assigned to me on 
April 4, 2011, to determine whether a clearance should be granted or denied.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted all the SOR factual allegations under guidelines H and E. His 
admissions are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence of record, including Applicant’s SCA, his answers to the SOR and 
interrogatories, his statements to government investigators, and his answer to the 
FORM, I make the following additional findings of fact. 
 
Applicant is a 58-year-old systems support engineer working for a government 
contractor. He served on active duty as an enlisted service member in the U.S. Air 
Force from January 1976 until January 1978. His service was characterized as 
honorable. His education includes a 1985 bachelor’s degree in engineering, an 
additional engineering certification in 2003, and a 2008 master’s in business 
administration. Applicant is currently divorced. He has been married twice, and has 
three children, ages 21, 18, and 16. 
 
Applicant has been employed as an engineer by numerous corporations since 
1983 to present. He has worked for his current employer, a government contractor, 
since March 2004. He received access to classified information at the secret level in 
September 1992, from another government agency. Applicant was granted access to 
SCI in July 2004, and he signed a statement from his company warning him that the 
unlawful use of any drugs, including marijuana, was a basis for ineligibility for a security 
clearance and SCI. 
 
In November 2008, Applicant submitted an SCA. Section 24 of the SCA asked 
whether in the last seven years he had used any illegal drugs (including marijuana), and 
whether he had ever used a controlled substance while possessing a security 
clearance. Applicant deliberately falsified his SCA when he answered “NO” to both 
questions.  
 
2 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the AGs, implemented by the DoD on September 1, 
2006. 
 
3 
 
 
 
During his background investigation, a review of Applicant’s mental counseling 
records revealed that in December 2008, Applicant sought counseling, among other 
things, to curtail his marijuana use. He told his counselor that he was using marijuana 
from time to time and that he wanted to stop his marijuana use. In January 2009, 
Applicant was questioned by a background investigator about his marijuana use. 
Applicant told the investigator that he used marijuana on a recreational basis during the 
weekends, and that he last used marijuana in 1988. Applicant made a false statement 
when he failed to reveal the full extent of his marijuana use. 
 
In March 2009, Applicant was questioned by another government investigator 
about his use of marijuana. During the March 2009 interview, Applicant admitted using 
marijuana from an unspecified date until 1988, but that he started to use marijuana 
again in January 2005. Applicant admitted that he used marijuana 12 times in 2005, 16 
times in 2006, 8 times in 2007, and 12 times from August to November 2008. Applicant 
admitted he knew marijuana use was illegal. He explained he used marijuana to self-
medicate for his depression. Applicant’s SCI access was revoked by the other 
government agency in May 2009, and his clearance was suspended. 
 
Applicant’s correspondence to the other government agency, to DOHA 
adjudicators, and in his response to the FORM, shows that he is deeply sorry, 
remorseful, and embarrassed about his past questionable behavior. He apologized for 
falsifying his SCA and for making the false statements. He understands that the use of 
illegal drugs is a “grave” offense. Moreover, he understands that his falsifications broke 
the trust and confidence placed in him by the Government. 
 
Applicant stated that he disclosed his marijuana use and his false statement to 
his supervisor and his facility security officer. In a June 2009 letter, he averred that he 
was participating in both an employee assistance program and in counseling with a 
psychologist. He believes that he is making excellent progress in his treatment. It is not 
clear whether the treatment and counseling are related to his depression and other 
personal problems or to his substance abuse.  
 
In his November 2010 letter to a DOHA adjudicator, Applicant claimed that since 
the suspension of his clearance he has learned a hard and invaluable lesson. He 
believes that his behavior and performance during the 18 months since his clearance 
was suspended have demonstrated that he is trustworthy. Applicant averred that he is 
now in control of himself. Through counseling and therapy, he has learned to manage 
his personal problems and stress levels in a healthy way. He is now involved in physical 
fitness, proper nutrition, and participates in church activities. Applicant volunteered to 
submit to any drug testing to show that he is abstinent. He also promised to sign a 
statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance for any violation. He did not 
submit such document. He also did not include a recent diagnosis and prognosis by a 
duly qualified medical professional concerning his substance abuse problem. 
 
 
4 
 
 
Policies 
 
 The President of the United States has the authority to control access to 
information bearing on national security and to determine whether an individual is 
sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Department of the Navy v. 
Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 527 (1988). The President has authorized the Secretary of 
Defense to grant eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended. The U.S. 
Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the Executive Branch in 
regulating access to information pertaining to national security, emphasizing that “no 
one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 
518, 528 (1988). 
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the adjudicative guidelines. These AGs are not inflexible rules of 
law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are 
applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole-person. An administrative judge’s 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. An administrative 
judge must consider all available, reliable information about the person, past and 
present, favorable and unfavorable to reach his decision.  
 
The Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk that the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and 
shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See 
Exec. Or. 10865 § 7. See also Executive Order 12968 (Aug. 2, 1995), Section 3. Thus, 
nothing in this Decision should be construed to suggest that I have based this decision, 
in whole or in part, on any express or implied determination as to Applicant’s allegiance, 
loyalty, or patriotism. It is merely an indication that the Applicant has not met the strict 
guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have established for issuing a 
clearance. 
 
Initially, the Government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in 
the personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant 
from being eligible for access to classified information. The Government has the burden 
of establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.” See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996). 
 
5 
 
 
                                           
 
Once the Government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue [his or her] security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). The burden of 
disproving a mitigating condition never shifts to the Government. See ISCR Case No. 
02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). “[S]ecurity clearance determinations should err, 
if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
AG ¶ 24 articulates the security concern about drug involvement: 
 
Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness, both because it may 
impair judgment and because it raises questions about a person’s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
Applicant has an extensive history of illegal marijuana use extending from around 
the 1980s until November 2008. He used marijuana after he was granted access to 
classified information at the secret level in 1992; after he was granted access to SCI in 
July 2004; and after he signed a statement acknowledging that the illegal marijuana use 
(any illegal drug) was a basis for ineligibility for SCI and a security clearance.  
 
AG ¶ 25 describes eight conditions related to drug involvement that could raise a 
security concern and may be disqualifying. Three drug involvement disqualifying 
conditions raise a security concern and are disqualifying in this particular case: AG ¶ 
25(a) “any drug abuse,”3 AG ¶ 25(c) “illegal drug possession . . . purchase, sale, or 
distribution,” and AG ¶ 25(g) “any illegal drug use after being granted a security 
clearance.” 
 
  AG ¶ 26 provides four potentially applicable drug involvement mitigating 
conditions:  
 
 
3  AG ¶ 24(b) defines “drug abuse” as “the illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner 
that deviates from approved medical direction.” 
 
AG ¶ 24(a) defines “drugs” as substances that alter mood and behavior, including: (1) Drugs, 
materials, and other chemical compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 
as amended (e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), and (2) 
inhalants and other similar substances. 
 
6 
 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt 
on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) a demonstrated intent not to abuse any drugs in the future, such as:  
 
(1) disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts; 
 
(2) changing or avoiding the environment where drugs were used;  
 
(3) an appropriate period of abstinence; and  
 
(4) a signed statement of intent with automatic revocation of clearance 
for any violation; 
 
(c) abuse of prescription drugs was after a severe or prolonged illness 
during which these drugs were prescribed, and abuse has since ended; 
and 
 
(d) satisfactory completion of a prescribed drug treatment program, 
including but not limited to rehabilitation and aftercare requirements, 
without recurrence of abuse, and a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional. 
 
I find that none of the Guideline H mitigating conditions fully apply. Applicant 
stopped using marijuana in November 2008. As such, his use could be considered not 
recent. However, the evidence does not support the conclusion that his questionable 
behavior is unlikely to recur. His illegal use of marijuana, although intermittent, spans a 
period of over 20 years. Applicant served in the military, he is well-educated, and has 
extensive experience working for government contractors and dealing with the security 
clearance process. He was 52 years old in 2004, when he received access to SCI and 
signed the drug use warning statement. He was 56 years old when he last used 
marijuana in November 2008. Applicant was well aware that using marijuana is a 
criminal offense and about the adverse job-related consequences of his actions. 
Notwithstanding, he elected to use marijuana.  
 
Applicant did not present evidence that he has satisfactorily completed a drug 
treatment program and received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical 
professional. He self-medicated with marijuana because of his depression problems. He 
did not present corroborating medical evidence to show that he has overcome his 
depression. His evidence is insufficient to show that the factors that triggered his 
depression and subsequent marijuana use are no longer present. He also failed to 
establish that he does not have a current substance abuse problem. Considering the 
totality of the circumstances, without credible corroborating evidence, Applicant’s 
assertions of abstinence and well-being are not sufficient to mitigate the present security 
concerns.  
 
7 
 
 
 
Applicant past questionable behavior still casts serious doubts on his reliability, 
judgment, and his ability and willingness to comply with the law. Applicant’s favorable 
evidence, at this time, is not sufficient to mitigate the Guideline H security concerns. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 15 explains why personal conduct is a security concern: 
 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
Applicant willfully falsified his November 2008 SCA when he failed to disclose his 
illegal marijuana use during the seven years preceding his SCA and his marijuana use 
after being granted a security clearance. Moreover, he compounded his falsification by 
making a false statement to a government background investigator. 
 
Applicant’s falsifications are material and trigger the applicability of disqualifying 
conditions AG ¶ 16(a): “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits of status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities;” AG ¶ 16(b): “deliberately providing false or misleading 
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative;” and AG ¶ 
16(e): “personal conduct, or concealment of information about one’s conduct, that 
creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, such as (1) engaging in 
activities which, if known, may affect the person’s personal, professional, or community 
standing.”  
 
Because of his education, maturity, and extensive experience working for 
government contractors and dealing with the security clearance system, Applicant knew 
that he was required to disclose his marijuana use in his SCA. Applicant deliberately 
falsified his SCA and made a false statement to a government investigator because he 
was aware of the probable adverse consequences his marijuana use would have on his 
eligibility for a security clearance, and ultimately his job. 
 
  AG ¶ 17 lists seven conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security 
concerns:  
 
(a) the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the omission, 
concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts; 
 
8 
 
 
                                           
 
(b) the refusal or failure to cooperate, omission, or concealment was 
caused or significantly contributed to by improper or inadequate advice of 
authorized personnel or legal counsel advising or instructing the individual 
specifically concerning the security clearance process. Upon being made 
aware of the requirement to cooperate or provide the information, the 
individual cooperated fully and truthfully; 
 
(c) the offense is so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is 
so infrequent, or it happened under such unique circumstances that it is 
unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's reliability, 
trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(d) the individual has acknowledged the behavior and obtained counseling 
to change the behavior or taken other positive steps to alleviate the 
stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, unreliable, 
or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur; 
 
(e) the individual has taken positive steps to reduce or eliminate 
vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress;  
 
(f) the information was unsubstantiated or from a source of questionable 
reliability; and 
 
(g) association with persons involved in criminal activity has ceased or 
occurs under circumstances that do not cast doubt upon the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, judgment, or willingness to comply with rules 
and regulations. 
 
  After considering the above mitigating conditions, I find that none apply to the 
facts of this case. Applicant falsified his 2008 SCA. His falsification is a serious, recent 
offense (felony level).4 Moreover, he also made a false statement to a government 
investigator. He made no effort to correct his false statements until he was confronted 
by a second government investigator. His behavior shows questionable judgment, 
untrustworthiness, unreliability, and lack of candor.  
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
4 See 18 U.S.C. 1001. 
 
9 
 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
The ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security clearance 
must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration of the 
guidelines and the whole-person concept. AG ¶ 2(c).   
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a well-educated and 
valuable employee. He is also a dedicated father. In 2008, he sought counseling to help 
him stop using marijuana, and he stopped using marijuana in November 2008. He 
expressed remorse and embarrassment for his questionable behavior, and promised to 
remain abstinent. He is undergoing counseling to overcome his depression and 
substance abuse issues. This recent conduct shows responsibility, good judgment, and 
some mitigation. 
 
Notwithstanding, the factors against granting his access to classified information 
are more compelling. Applicant illegally used marijuana for many years and while 
holding a security clearance. He then made false statements to cover his questionable 
behavior. He broke the trust placed in him. At this time, his evidence is insufficient to 
show that the factors that triggered his depression and subsequent marijuana use are 
no longer present. He also failed to establish that he does not have a current substance 
abuse problem. On balance, the record evidence fails to convince me of Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by Section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:          
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1a - 1c:    Against Applicant 
 
Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraphs 1a - 1d:    Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue eligibility for a security 
clearance for Applicant. Eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
 
 
____________________________ 
JUAN J. RIVERA 
Administrative Judge 
