 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-01756 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: John Griffith, Esq. 
 
 
April 7, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has not mitigated Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On August 19, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under Guideline 
F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order (EO) 10865, 
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; 
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on September 24, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on October 26, 2010. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 7, 2010, and the hearing was convened 
as scheduled on January 11, 2011. The Government offered Exhibit (GE) 1 through 6, 
 
2 
 
which were admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A through W, 
which were admitted without objection, called one witness, and testified on his own 
behalf. The record was left open for receipt of two additional documents, which were 
received on January 26, 2011. They were marked and admitted without objection as AE 
X and AE Y. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 21, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant is a 49-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is single and has 
one adult child. He has held a security clearance for approximately ten years through 
his employment with a government contractor. (GE 1; Tr. 32, 49-50.) 
 
 The SOR alleges two delinquent debts. The first debt is a delinquent mortgage, 
as listed on credit reports obtained in 2009 through 2011. As of a credit report dated 
January 11, 2011, Applicant was past due $26,780 on this mortgage (SOR 1.a.). 
Applicant admitted this debt in his Answer. (Answer; GE 6.)  
 
 Applicant’s mortgage debt pertains to his second home, purchased in April 2005. 
He financed the home through a single mortgage of approximately $382,410. The 
mortgage had a flexible interest rate that could change on the first day of each month 
and range from the lowest rate of 3.500% to 9.950%. The loan was a negative 
amortization loan, which Applicant claims was never revealed to him by the lender. (GE 
2; GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; AE X; AE Y; TR. 33-36, 54-60.) 
 
 Applicant purchased the house for his fiancée to live in. She rented the property 
from the Applicant for the exact amount of the mortgage payment each month, from the 
date of purchase in April 2005 through November 2007. However, when their 
relationship terminated in approximately November or December of 2007, his fiancée 
moved out of the property and stopped making payments to him. Applicant ceased 
making payments on the mortgage at that time. He claims that the interest rate had 
adjusted up and his payments went from $1,800 per month to $4,000 a month. He could 
not afford the payments. Applicant has not made a payment on his mortgage since 
November 2007. He testified that he applied for a loan modification, but it was denied 
because the loan was a negative amortization loan. He then decided to “walk away” 
from the home. He made no attempts to sell or rent the property. He felt that he could 
not sell the property because the mortgage “had penalties built in” and that the value of 
the house had declined below what he owed on his mortgage. (GE 2; Tr. 33-40, 53-66, 
70-73.) 
 
 He testified that in May 2008 the home was sold through a foreclosure sale. He 
believes that the property was resold; however, he does not know how much money the 
bank received in the sale. He does not believe he has any further financial obligations 
on this property and he has taken no actions to investigate or repay the debt as listed 
on his credit reports. He indicated that the $27,000 debt listed on his credit reports 
represented the amount he was past due on his mortgage when the home was 
foreclosed upon in May 2008. (GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; Tr. 40-42 73-77.) 
 
 
3 
 
 The second debt listed in the SOR (SOR 1.b.), was alleged to be owed to a 
collections agent for a debt placed by a telecommunications company in the 
approximate amount of $295.00. Applicant disputed this delinquent account and it has 
been removed from Applicant’s credit reports. The creditor determined that Applicant 
was “not responsible for this bill.” (Answer; GE 2; AE O.) 
 
 Applicant’s assets include a home he purchased in 2003 for approximately 
$205,000 (which has a second mortgage of $50,000). He currently lives in his first home 
and testified that he has never missed a mortgage payment on that property. He earns 
$1,836 bi-monthly, after taxes and testified that he makes enough money to cover his 
monthly expenditures. He has approximately $11,419 in his saving account and $7,436 
in his checking account. Additionally, he has a 401(k) plan valued at approximately 
$100,918. He estimates his total net worth to be $248,657. (GE 2; AE Q; AE R; AE S; 
AE T; AE U; AEV; AE W; Tr. 43-47.)  
 
 Applicant’s credit reports indicate that he is current on all of his other debts. He 
has taken a number of on-line financial classes offered by American Financial Solutions 
including: setting financial goals and creating a budget; banking relationships; 
understanding credit and credit reports; an introduction to borrowing; an introduction to 
investing; identity theft and predatory lending; and your financial life for young adults. 
(GE 3; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; AE G; AE H; AE I; AE J; AE K; AE L; AE M; Tr. 47-48.) 
 
 Applicant’s witness attested to his trustworthiness and noted that Applicant does 
not live beyond his means. Applicant also presented a number of letters of 
recommendation from co-workers, supervisors, and friends. These letters indicate 
Applicant is a man of “integrity” and performs well at his job. Additionally, he has 
received a certificate of appreciation from his employer for his efforts on a project. (AE 
A; AE B; AE C; AE D; AE F; AE N; Tr. 26-32.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
 
4 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. One is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
 (a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts. 
 
 
5 
 
 Applicant has delinquent mortgage debt and is unwilling to pay his obligations. 
He has the burden of presenting sufficient evidence to show that he no longer owes on 
his mortgage and he has failed to do so. He has not presented any documentation from 
the bank establishing that the home was foreclosed upon or that Applicant has been 
relieved of liability on the loan.1 He willingly took on the financial obligation of a second 
home for his fiancée. When the relationship terminated, Applicant did not take any steps 
to pay the mortgage or otherwise dispose of the property, other than requesting a loan 
modification, which was denied. He has assets totaling $248,657 and has the funds 
available to satisfy this debt. However, he has elected not to contact the bank or satisfy 
this debt. The evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying conditions. 
  
 Five Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are potentially 
applicable:  
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control;  
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
 Applicant took out the mortgage alleged in SOR subparagraph 1.a. to finance the 
purchase of his second home for the use of his fiancée. He agreed to the terms of the 
loan. When his fiancée moved out and he was not able to get a loan modification, he 
defaulted on the loan. While the end of his relationship may have been beyond 
Applicant’s control, it is his behavior after the relationship with respect to the mortgage 
that is troubling. Applicant made no attempts to make a single payment on the mortgage 
on his own. He has not contacted the creditor since walking away from the property. He 
has not presented sufficient documentation to establish that the debt is satisfied through 
                                                          
1 The Board has previously noted that it is reasonable for a Judge to expect applicants to present 
documentation about the satisfaction of individual debts. See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17520 at 2 (App. 
Bd. Sep. 20, 2007). 
 
6 
 
foreclosure. Applicant’s behavior is not responsible. He has not shown himself to be 
reliable, trustworthy, or exercising good judgment. He has presented nothing from the 
creditor to indicate that the problem is under control or that he has acted responsibly 
under the circumstances, with respect to his mortgage debt. AG ¶¶ 20(a), 20(b), and 
20(d) are not mitigating.  
 
 Applicant has received counseling on his finances through an on-line program in 
money management. However, his counseling bears little indication that he is acting 
responsibly with respect to his delinquent mortgage debt. In order to be fully applicable, 
Applicant must demonstrate that there are clear indications that the problem is being 
resolved or is under control. He failed to present sufficient evidence that his mortgage 
debt is resolved or under control. AG ¶ 20(c) is not fully applicable. 
 
 Applicant disputed the validity of his indebtedness to the creditor listed in 
allegation 1.b., and the creditor affirmed that the debt was not Applicant’s. AG ¶ 20(e) 
applies, but is limited in its applicability to allegation 1.b. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
Applicant is well respected by his colleagues, managers, and friends. Yet, he has 
made questionable financial choices that do not demonstrate the judgment, reliability, or 
trustworthiness needed to hold a security clearance. He did not document any attempt 
to resolve his delinquent mortgage debt. There are significant unresolved concerns 
about Applicant’s financial choices and judgment.  
 
7 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has not mitigated the Financial Considerations security concerns.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
