 
1 
 
 
                                                            DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-03107 
                                                                      ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Caroline H. Jeffreys, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, I conclude that 
Applicant mitigated the Government’s security concerns under Guideline B, Foreign 
Influence, and the “whole-person” analysis. His eligibility for a security clearance is 
granted. 
 
Applicant completed a security clearance application (SF 86) and a 
Counterintelligence and Security Screening Questionnaire (CI) on January 2, 2008. On 
November 5, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. DOHA acted under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant’s answer to the SOR was signed and notarized on November 30, 2010. 
He requested a decision on the record in lieu of a hearing. The Government compiled 
its File of Relevant Material (FORM) on January 6, 2011. The FORM contained 
documents identified as Items 1 through 7. Additionally, in the FORM, the Government 
 
2 
 
 
                                           
requested that I take administrative notice of certain facts about Afghanistan and the 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan (Pakistan) and provided, as reference materials, official 
U.S. documents.1 I marked the Government’s administrative notice documents as 
Exhibit (Ex.) A.  
 
On January 31, 2011, DOHA forwarded a copy of the FORM to Applicant, with 
instructions to submit any additional information and objections within 30 days of 
receipt. Applicant received the file on February 26, 2011. His response was due on 
March 28, 2011. Applicant timely submitted seven exhibits related to the Guideline B 
allegations in the SOR. Department Counsel did not object to the admission of these 
exhibits, which I then marked as Ex. A through Ex. G and admitted to the record. On 
March 22, 2011, the case was assigned to me for a decision.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains two allegations that raise security concerns under Guideline 
B, Foreign Influence (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. and 1.b.). In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant 
admitted the two Guideline B allegations. Applicant’s admissions are entered as findings 
of fact.  (Item 1; Item 4.) 
 
 Applicant, who is 54 years old, never married, and employed by a defense 
contractor, seeks a security clearance for the first time. He was born in Afghanistan and 
fled to Pakistan in 1986. In his CI interview, he told the investigator that his father was 
killed during the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan because “they did not like 
businessmen.” He immigrated to the United States in 1988, and he became a U.S. 
citizen in 2007. (Item 5; Item 6; Item 7 at 14.) 
 
 Applicant has been assigned as an Arab language linguist overseas since 
January 2008. Before becoming a linguist, Applicant owned a grocery store. He also 
worked as a salesperson, sales manager, and truck driver. (Item 7.) 
 
 During his CI interview in January 2008, Applicant appeared to have difficulty 
understanding and responding to the interviewer’s questions. The interviewer found it 
necessary to repeat questions and concluded that Applicant had a poor command of 
English. (Item 7.) 
 
 Applicant has a brother who is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. This 
relationship is alleged as a Guideline B security concern at SOR ¶ 1.a. Applicant’s step-
mother, brother, half-brother, and three half-sisters are citizens of Afghanistan who 
reside in Pakistan. Applicant reported that his contacts with these relatives were limited 
to one or two yearly attempts to contact them by telephone. These relationships are 
alleged as a Guideline B security concern at SOR ¶ 1.b.  (Item 1; Item 6.)  
 
1 The Government provided seven official U.S. documents and a six-page factual summary containing 
facts about Afghanistan and eight official U.S. documents and a six-page factual summary containing 
facts about Pakistan  
 
3 
 
 
 During a four-week home leave in December 2008, Applicant was interviewed by 
an authorized investigator from the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM). He 
told the investigator that during his deployments overseas, he has no contact with his 
foreign family members because such contacts were discouraged by U.S. authorities 
and could threaten his family members’ safety. (Item 6 at 5.)   
 
 In March 2011, in response to the FORM, Applicant provided additional 
information about his family contacts and work as a linguist. In a notarized statement, 
he asserted that for the previous eight months he had had no contact with his family 
members who are citizens of Afghanistan and who reside in Afghanistan and Pakistan. 
He also stated: “I have been working as a Federal Contractor . . . for the past 3 years 
[and] I am loyal to my company, the military, and to the United States of America.” (Ex. 
A.) 
 
 Applicant provided copies of awards and certificates of appreciation that he had 
received for his work as a linguist. He was recognized for outstanding service as a 
“mission essential personnel” from January 2008 until March 2010. In May 2009, he 
received a certificate of appreciation for his “professionalism and support” during in- 
processing and out-processing of hundreds of detainees. In April 2009, he received a 
commendation for his work as a translator on mental health issues. Additionally, a 
certificate of achievement that he was awarded on June 16, 2009 reads: 
 
For outstanding service in the face of the enemy, let all who witness this 
certificate know that [Applicant] who served as an interpreter from 1 Sep 
08 – 16 June 09 at [deleted] has performed his assigned duties selflessly 
and professionally. Without him and others of his caliber, the United 
States government and its allies would not be able to effectively prosecute 
the global war on terrorism. 
 
(Ex. B; Ex. C; Ex. D; Ex. E.) 
 
 Applicant also provided copies of his performance evaluations for 2009 and 
2010. In 2009, his supervisor evaluated the quality of his translations and interpretations 
as “excellent in all respects.” Additionally, the supervisor concluded that Applicant 
exhibited a “thorough understanding and utilization of fundamentals of linguist 
excellence.” Moreover, the supervisor noted that Applicant had an “excellent 
understanding of and willingness to execute assigned tasks and missions.” The 
supervisor also noted that Applicant was dependable, conscientious, and exercised 
good judgment under pressure. (Ex. G.) 
 
 Applicant’s 2010 performance evaluation reflected continued professional 
growth. His supervisor rated Applicant’s translations and interpretations as “superior” 
and “exceptional.”  Moreover, the supervisor awarded Applicant the highest possible 
ratings for dependability, cooperation, quality of work, timeliness of work, judgment, 
initiative and creativity, mission readiness, and overall performance. (Ex. F.)    
 
 
4 
 
 
                                           
   I take administrative notice of facts about Pakistan. The facts in the following 
summary were provided by Department Counsel to Applicant and to me. The facts were 
derived from official U.S. Government documents provided as attachments to the 
FORM and are identified in the record as Ex. A2: 
 
Pakistan is a parliamentary republic in South Asia with a population of 
over 170 million people. Pakistan is a low-income country, with a 
population that is 97% Muslim. Pakistan has extreme poverty and is 
underdeveloped. Its economy remains vulnerable to internal security 
concerns. Pakistan has a coalition government led by Prime Minister 
Yousef Gilani and president and head of state Asif Ali Zardari, widower of 
assassinated Pakistan People’s Party leader Benazir Bhutto. 
 
After September 11, 2001, Pakistan pledged its alliance with the U.S. in 
counterterrorism efforts and made a commitment to eliminate terrorist 
camps on its territory. Despite these efforts, members of the Taliban are 
known to be in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of 
Pakistan, the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (Kpk) (formerly known as the 
Northwest  Frontier Province (NWFP)), and in the Balochistan Province, 
which borders Iran and Afghanistan. The leader of the Taliban, Mullah 
Omar, is operating openly in Pakistan. The Pakistani Taliban (Tehrik-i-
Taliban “TTP”), al-Qa’ida extremists, foreign insurgents, and Pakistani 
militants have re-exerted their hold over areas in the FATA and NWFP, 
and the Pakistani Taliban also used the FATA to plan attacks against 
civilian and military targets across Pakistan. Al-Qa’ida leadership in 
Pakistan supported militants in conducting attacks in Afghanistan and 
provided funding, training, and personnel to facilitate terrorist and 
insurgent operations. 
 
In addition to the Taliban, the FATA in Pakistan continues to be a vital 
sanctuary to al-Qa’ida and a number of foreign and Pakistan-based 
extremist groups. Al-Qa’ida and other Afghan extremist groups exploit that 
operating environment to plan operations, direct propaganda, recruit and 
train operatives, and raise funds with relative impunity. 
 
2 The following official U.S. Government documents were used to provide the factual summary on 
Pakistan quoted in this decision: U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Pakistan, July 21, 2010 (16 
pages); U.S. Department of State, Country Specific Information: Pakistan, July 13, 2010 (10 pages); U.S. 
Department of State, 2009 Human Rights Report: Pakistan, March 11, 2010 (41 pages); Annual Threat 
Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community for the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Director 
of National Intelligence, February 2, 2010 (47 pages); Verbatim Interview: Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff Admiral Mike Mullen, National Public Radio, March 27, 2009, as found at 
http://www.jcs.mil/speech.aspx?id=1148; U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2009, 
Chapter 5 – Terrorist Safe Havens and Tactics and Tools for Disrupting or Eliminating Safe Havens, 
August 5, 2010 (15 pages); U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2009, Chapter 2 – 
Country Reports South and Central Asia Overview, August 5, 2010 (9 pages); and U.S. Department of 
State, Travel Warning Pakistan, July 22, 2010 (4 pages). Footnotes in the quoted text were omitted. 
 
5 
 
 
Overall, Pakistan has intensified counterinsurgency efforts, but its record 
with dealing with militants has been mixed. Pakistan has demonstrated 
determination and persistence in combating militants it perceives to be 
dangerous to Pakistan’s interests, particularly those involved in attacks in 
settled areas, but it maintains its historical support to the Taliban, has not 
consistently pursued militants focused on Afghanistan, and still considers 
militant groups to be important to its efforts to counter India’s military and 
economic advantages. 
 
The U.S. Department of State has defined terrorist safe havens as 
ungoverned, under-governed, or ill-governed areas of a country and non-
physical areas where terrorist groups that constitute a threat to U.S. 
national security interests are able to organize, plan, raise funds, 
communicate, recruit, train, and operate in relative security because of 
inadequate governance capacity, political will, or both. The U.S. 
Department of State has concluded that, despite increased efforts by 
Pakistani security forces, al-Qa’ida terrorists, Afghan militants, foreign 
insurgents, and Pakistani militants continue to find safe haven in portions 
of Pakistan’s FATA, NWFP, and Baluchistan, and have operated in those 
areas to organize, train, and plan attacks against the United States and its 
allies in Afghanistan, India, and Europe. 
 
The Department of State warns U.S. citizens of the risks of traveling to 
Pakistan in light of the threat of terrorist activity, specifically the presence 
of al-Qa’ida, Taliban elements, and indigenous militant sectarian groups 
that pose a danger to American citizens. In the last three months of 2009, 
Pakistan-based extremists and al-Qa’ida conducted at least 40 suicide 
terrorist attacks in major cities in Pakistan, killing about 600 Pakistani 
civilians and security force personnel. Terrorists and their sympathizers 
have demonstrated their willingness and capability to attack targets where 
Americans are known to congregate or visit. Suicide bombings and 
attacks occur throughout Pakistan on a regular basis. Also, since 2007, 
several American citizens throughout Pakistan have been kidnapped. 
 
The human rights situation in Pakistan remains poor. Major problems 
include extrajudicial killings, torture and disappearances. Additional 
problems include poor prison conditions, arbitrary arrest, widespread 
government corruption, rape, honor crimes, and widespread trafficking in 
persons. The military operations in the FATA and NWFP resulted in the 
deaths of approximately 1,150 civilians, and militant attacks in the FATA 
and NWFP killed 825 more civilians. The Pakistani government also 
maintains several domestic intelligence services that monitored politicians, 
political activists, suspected terrorists, the media, and suspected foreign 
intelligence agents. Credible reports indicated that authorities routinely 
used wiretaps and intercepted and opened mail without the requisite court 
approval, as well as monitoring mobile phones and electronic messages. 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
In addition to al-Qa’ida, the Taliban, and other insurgents and militants, 
foreign terrorist organization Lashkar e-Tayyiba (LT) also operates out of 
Pakistan. The LT is the prime suspect for the November 2008 Mumbai 
attacks and is one of the largest and most proficient of the traditionally 
Kashmiri-focused militant groups. 
 
I also take administrative notice of the following facts about Afghanistan. The facts in 
the following summary were provided by Department Counsel to Applicant and to me. 
The facts were derived from official U.S. Government documents provided as 
attachments to the FORM and are identified in the record as Ex. A3: 
 
Afghanistan has been an independent nation since August 19, 1919, after 
the British relinquished control. A monarchy ruled from 1919 until a military 
coup in 1973. Following a Soviet-supported coup in 1978, a Marxist 
government emerged. In December 1979, Soviet forces invaded and 
occupied Afghanistan. Afghan freedom fighters, known as mujaheddin, 
opposed the communist regime. The resistance movement eventually led 
to an agreement known as the Geneva Accords, signed by Pakistan, 
Afghanistan, the United States, and the Soviet Union, which ensured 
Soviet forces withdrew by February 1989. 
 
The mujaheddin were not a party to the negotiations for the Accords and 
refused to accept them. As a result, a civil war continued after the Soviet 
withdrawal. In the mid-1990s, the Taliban rose to power largely due to the 
anarchy and warlordism that arose after the Soviet withdrawal. The 
Taliban sought to impose an extreme interpretation of Islam on the entire 
country and committed massive human rights violations. The Taliban also 
provided sanctuary to Osama Bin-Laden, al-Qa’ida, and other terrorist 
organizations. 
 
After the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, demands to expel Bin-
Laden and his followers were rejected by the Taliban. U.S. forces and a 
coalition partnership commenced military operations in October 2001 that 
forced the Taliban out of power by November 2001. A new democratic 
government took power in 2004. Despite progress made since the Taliban 
was deposed, Afghanistan still faces many daunting challenges. Among 
 
3 The following official U.S. Government documents were used to provide the factual summary on 
Afghanistan quoted in this decision: U.S. Department of State, Background Note: Afghanistan, March 26, 
2010 (12 pages); U.S. Department of State, 2009 Human Rights Report: Afghanistan, March 11, 2010 (28 
pages); U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Country Specific Information: Afghanistan, 
September 27, 2010 (7 pages); Annual Threat Assessment of the U.S. Intelligence Community for the 
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, Director of National Intelligence, February 2, 2010 (47 pages); 
U.S. Department of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2009, Chapter 5 – Terrorist Safe Havens and 
Tactics and Tools for Disrupting or Eliminating Safe Havens, August 5, 2010 (15 pages); U.S. Department 
of State, Country Reports on Terrorism 2009, Chapter 2 – Country Reports South and Central Asia 
Overview, August 5, 2010 (9 pages); and U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Travel 
Warning: Afghanistan, August 13, 2010 (2 pages).  Footnotes in the quoted text were omitted. 
 
7 
 
 
these challenges are: defeating terrorists and insurgents; recovering from 
over three decades of civil strife; and rebuilding a shattered physical, 
economic and political infrastructure. 
 
Afghanistan’s human rights record has remained poor. Human rights 
problems included extrajudicial killings, torture, poor prison conditions, 
official impunity, prolonged pretrial detention, restrictions on freedom of 
the press, restrictions of freedom of religion, violence and societal 
discrimination against women, restrictions on religious conversion, abuses 
against minorities, sexual abuse of children, trafficking in persons, abuse 
of worker rights, the use of child soldiers in armed conflict, and child labor. 
There were numerous reports that the government – or its agents – 
committed arbitrary or unlawful killings. Additionally, over the last year, 
more that 5,814 people died as a result of the insurgency. 
 
The Afghan-Taliban dominated insurgency has become increasingly 
frequent, sophisticated, dangerous, and destabilizing, despite International 
Security Assistance Force and Operation Enduring Freedom military 
operations. Civilians continue to bear the brunt of the violence and 
increased attacks. Despite the loss of some key leaders, insurgents have 
adjusted their tactics to maintain momentum following the arrival of 
additional U.S. forces last year. Additionally, the Taliban was most likely 
responsible for suppressing voter turnout in the August 2009 elections in 
key parts of the country. In the past year, armed conflict spread to almost 
one-third of the country, including previously unaffected areas in the north 
and northeast. The Taliban’s expansion of influence into northern 
Afghanistan since late 2007 has made the insurgency a countrywide 
threat. This lack of security in many areas, coupled with a generally low 
government capacity and competency, has hampered efforts to improve 
governance and extend development. 
 
Afghan leaders also continue to face the eroding effects of official 
corruption and the drug trade. Criminal networks and narcotics cultivation 
constitute a source of funding for the insurgency in Afghanistan. Streams 
of Taliban from across the border in Pakistan, along with funds gained 
from narcotics trafficking and kidnapping, have allowed the insurgency to 
strengthen its military and technical capabilities. 
 
In addition to the Taliban, al-Qa’ida, other insurgent groups, and anti-
Coalition organizations continue to operate in Afghanistan resulting in 
numerous attacks and deaths.  Insurgents have targeted NGOs [Non-
Government Organizations], Afghan journalists, government workers, and 
UN workers. Instability along the Pakistan-Afghan frontier continued to 
provide al-Qa’ida with leadership mobility and the ability to conduct 
training and operational planning, targeting Western Europe and U.S. 
 
8 
 
 
interests in particular. Kabul is considered at high risk for militant attacks, 
including rocket attacks, vehicle-borne IEDs, and suicide bombings. 
 
Overall, the State Department has declared that the security threat to all 
American citizens in Afghanistan remains critical, and travel in all areas of 
Afghanistan remains unsafe, due to military combat operations, 
landmines, banditry, armed rivalry between political and tribal groups, and 
the possibility of terrorist attacks. 
  
                          Policies 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the substantial discretion of the 
Executive Branch in regulating access to information pertaining to national security, and 
it has emphasized that “no one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the 
Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the 
authority to control access to information bearing on national security and to determine 
whether an individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. 
at 527. The President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant 
an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to do so.”  Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.    
 
When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, an   
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are used in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
 
9 
 
 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion in seeking to obtain a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
                                                         Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 Under Guideline B, Foreign Influence, “[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a 
security concern if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may 
be manipulated or induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government 
in a way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by any 
foreign interest.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
 Additionally, adjudications under Guideline B “can and should consider the 
identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or financial interest is located, 
including, but not limited to, such considerations as whether the foreign country is 
known to target U.S. citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with 
the risk of terrorism.”  AG ¶ 6. 
 
Soon after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, Pakistan pledged its 
alliance with the U.S. in counterterrorism efforts and made a commitment to eliminate 
terrorist camps on its territory. However, despite these efforts, members of the Taliban 
are known to be in the FATA of Pakistan, the Kpk (formerly known as the NWFP), and 
in the Balochistan Province, which borders Iran and Afghanistan. Overall, Pakistan has 
intensified counterinsurgency efforts, but its record with dealing with terrorists and 
militants has been mixed. Pakistan has demonstrated determination and persistence in 
combating militants it perceives to be dangerous to Pakistan’s interests, but many 
terrorist groups, including al-Qa’ida and other transnational terrorists and insurgents 
appear to be operating freely in parts of Pakistan. Terrorist groups operating in Pakistan 
 
10 
 
 
have targeted U.S. citizens. The U.S. Department of State has warned U.S. citizens of 
the dangers of travel to Pakistan.  
 
 In Afghanistan, the Afghan-Taliban dominated insurgency has become 
increasingly  dangerous and destabilizing, despite International Security Assistance 
Force and Operation Enduring Freedom military operations. In addition to the Taliban, 
al-Qa’ida, other insurgent groups, and anti-Coalition organizations continue to operate 
in Afghanistan resulting in numerous attacks and deaths. The State Department has 
declared that the security threat to all American citizens in Afghanistan remains critical, 
and travel in all areas of Afghanistan remains unsafe, due to military combat operations, 
landmines, banditry, armed rivalry between political and tribal groups, and the possibility 
of terrorist attacks. 
  
Applicant’s brother is a citizen and resident of Afghanistan. His stepmother, 
brother, half-brother, and three half-sisters are citizens of Afghanistan and reside in 
Pakistan. These facts are sufficient to raise Guideline B security concerns. 
  
I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under the Foreign Influence 
guideline.  The facts in this case raise security concerns under disqualifying conditions 
AG ¶¶ 7(a) and 7(b). AG ¶ 7(a) reads: “contact with a foreign family member, business 
or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  AG ¶ 7(b) reads: “connections to a 
foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential conflict of interest 
between the individual’s obligation to protect sensitive information or technology and the 
individual’s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that 
information.”  
 
Applicant’s family members are citizens of Afghanistan who reside in Afghanistan 
and Pakistan, two countries destabilized by war and terrorist activity. In the past, 
Applicant has contacted these relatives once or twice a year by telephone. When 
deployed overseas on assignment, he has honored his employer’s policy of not 
contacting his family members. In his response to the FORM, Applicant stated that he 
had had no contact with his family members for eight months. If he were to have contact 
with these family members, his contacts with them could create a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.    
 
 Several mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 8 might be applicable to Applicant’s 
case.  If “the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these 
persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are 
such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose 
between the interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the 
interests of the U.S.,” then AG ¶ 8(a) might apply.  If “there is no conflict of interest, 
either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, 
group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and 
longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
 
11 
 
 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest,” then AG ¶ 8(b) might 
apply.  If “contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that 
there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation,” 
then AG ¶ 8(c) might apply. 
 
 Applicant is a single middle-aged man with no immediate family. In the past, his 
contacts and relationships with his family members in Afghanistan and Pakistan 
consisted of one of two telephone calls a year. When on deployment, he honored his 
employer’s wishes and had no contact with those family members. The record suggests 
that Applicant’s relationship with his family members in Afghanistan and Pakistan is 
based on minimal and infrequent contact. Applicant’s conduct suggests he put his 
loyalty to the United States above his relationships with his family members in 
Afghanistan and Pakistan.  
 
Applicant has distinguished himself as a contract linguist, and his supervisor and 
the clients he serves provided credible documentation establishing his honorable and 
dedicated service in carrying out the interests of the United States in the face of 
hardship and danger. Applicant himself stated that his loyalties are to his employer, the 
U.S. military, and to the United States. I conclude that Applicant’s demonstrated service 
and loyalty to the United States show he can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest. I conclude that AG ¶¶ 8(a), 8(b), and 8(c) apply in 
mitigation to Applicant’s case. 
    
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of an applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): 
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant, who is serving overseas 
as a contract Arab linguist, elected to have a decision without a hearing. Because he did 
 
12 
 
 
not appear in person, I was unable to question and observe him in order to assess his 
credibility. However, in his response to the FORM, Applicant provided assessments of 
his character and job performance that enabled me to see him as he is seen by those 
with whom he serves and works. Those individuals provided information establishing 
Applicant’s bravery, professionalism, good judgment, and demonstrated commitment to   
the goals and interests of the United States.   
  
A careful review of Applicant’s family relationships does not raise security 
concerns about his vulnerability to conflict of interest, foreign exploitation, inducement, 
and coercion. For his own interests and for the protection of his family members in 
Afghanistan and Pakistan, Applicant has taken reasonable steps to avoid contact with 
them. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions or doubts about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. I conclude that Applicant 
mitigated security concerns arising under the foreign influence adjudicative guideline.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 2: Guideline B:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b.:   For Applicant 
 
                    Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                
____________________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
