 
1 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 10-04236 
  )   
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se 
 
 
April 8, 2011 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
GOLDSTEIN, Jennifer I., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He is alleged to be 
indebted to two creditors in the approximate amount of $27,068. Applicant has mitigated 
the Financial Considerations security concerns. Eligibility for access to classified 
information is granted.  
 
Statement of the Case 
 
On November 17, 2010, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) to Applicant detailing security concerns under 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations. The action was taken under Executive Order 
(EO) 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) effective for cases after September 1, 2006.  
 
Applicant answered the SOR on December 7, 2010, and requested a hearing 
before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to another Judge on February 
 
2 
 
24, 2011. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on February 24, 2011, scheduling the 
hearing for March 15, 2011. The case was reassigned to me on March 14, 2011, for 
hearing due to the unavailability of the original Judge assigned. The hearing was 
convened as scheduled. The Government offered Exhibit (GE) 1 through 6, which were 
admitted without objection. The Applicant offered Exhibit (AE) A through H, which were 
all admitted without objection. Applicant called one witness and testified on his own 
behalf. The record was left open for receipt of an additional document. On March 16, 
2011, Applicant presented a five page post-hearing exhibit marked and admitted without 
objection as AE I. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on March 24, 2011.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant denies allegations 1.a. and 1.b. After a thorough and careful review of 
the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old employee of a defense contractor. He served in the Air 
Force from July 2000 to November 2003 and achieved the rank of Airman First Class 
(E-3). He has an associate’s degree in criminal justice and is taking classes toward 
earning a bachelor’s degree. He has been employed in his present position since 
November 2007. He is married and has five minor children. (GE 1; GE 3; Tr. 39-40, 43-
44, 57-61.) 
 
As stated in the SOR, Applicant is alleged to be indebted to two creditors in the 
approximate amount of $27,068. His alleged debts are as follows: 
 
Applicant was indebted on account #466602 in the approximate amount of $75, 
as identified in a September 2010 report of credit. However, this debt has been paid. 
Applicant presented a letter dated December 1, 2010, bearing the same account 
number that verified this account was paid in full. Applicant testified that he was 
unaware of this debt prior to receiving the SOR, but he has now satisfied it. (GE 5; AE 
A; Tr. 44.) 
 
Applicant’s second delinquent account is past due in the approximate amount of 
$26,993. This account was opened by Applicant’s mother. She testified that she had the 
credit card for a number of years, before she added her son to the account for the 
purposes of building his credit. When she added Applicant, he signed an agreement, 
becoming jointly liable for the debt. Applicant’s mother used the card to pay attorney’s 
fees related to one of her other children. She indicated the debt was “solely mine.” 
Applicant never used the card to make any purchases. Applicant’s mother was current 
on the account until approximately April 2009, when her husband was unable to work 
due to illness and she was furloughed. She was then unable to make the required 
minimum payment to this creditor, unbeknownst to the Applicant. Statements went 
directly to Applicant’s mother and Applicant did not see them. Despite his mother’s 
inability to make the minimum payment, she still sent a payment in every month. In 
approximately June 2009, she contracted a credit consolidation company to help her 
manage this debt. Each month since June 2009, she testified she has paid the credit 
consolidation company at least $300 toward the satisfaction of this debt. Applicant 
 
3 
 
presented a transaction history from the credit counselor showing payments of $300 or 
more each month since June 2009. She has accumulated approximately $2,718.65, 
held by the credit consolidation company, for the eventual satisfaction of this debt. 
Applicant was not aware of the debt until it was brought to his attention by the 
government. He is now following up on the debt with his mother and making sure she is 
able to maintain her monthly payments to the credit consolidation agency. Once 
Applicant’s mother has accumulated a significant balance, the credit consolidation 
company will settle the account on her behalf. He has also indicated he is willing to 
contribute towards the debt’s repayment. (GE 2; GE 4; GE 5; GE 6; AE B; AE C; AE D; 
AE I; Tr. 27-30, 34-38, 45-46, 51-52.) 
 
Applicant is well respected by his operations manager, coworker, and neighbor, 
who wrote letters of support on his behalf. His Operations Manager indicated Applicant 
“has demonstrated an uncommon level of professionalism, personal integrity and sense 
of service to community that most people only hope to achieve.” His neighbor indicates 
that Applicant is a “positive male role model” in their underprivileged community. 
Evidence establishes that Applicant has volunteered numerous hours with the 
Tuskegee Airmen and has been instrumental in setting world aviation records. 
Additionally, he works as a tutor to disadvantaged children and volunteers his time 
visiting disabled veterans in the local veteran’s hospital paraplegic ward. (AE E; AE F; 
AE G; AE H; Tr. 31-33, 47-50, 53-57.) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition to brief 
introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list potentially 
disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are to be used in evaluating an 
applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, administrative judges apply the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
overarching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial, and commonsense decision. According 
to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables 
known as the “whole-person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all 
available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical, and based 
on the evidence contained in the record.  
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
 
4 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel.” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.  
 
 A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of EO 10865 provides that adverse decisions shall be “in terms of the 
national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern for Financial Considerations is set out in AG ¶ 18, as 
follows:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concern under 
AG ¶ 19. The following is potentially applicable in this case:   
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts. 
 
 Applicant had two delinquent accounts listed on his credit reports. The debts 
entered collections and were not satisfied at the time the SOR was issued. The 
evidence is sufficient to raise the above disqualifying condition. 
 
 Three Financial Considerations Mitigating Conditions under AG ¶ 20 are 
potentially applicable:  
 
 
5 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment;  
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
and 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 Applicant paid off one of the two debts alleged. Thus, he has initiated a good-
faith effort to repay the debt listed in allegation 1.a. AG ¶ 20(d) applies, in part. 
 
 With respect to the outstanding delinquency alleged in 1.b., Applicant’s financial 
obligation is directly attributable to his mother. She used her credit card, on which 
Applicant was also a co-signer, to pay legal fees for one of her other children. Shortly 
thereafter, her husband was unable to work due to illness and she was furloughed, 
causing her inability to pay the monthly minimum due on the account. These problems 
are both beyond Applicant’s control and are unique circumstances that are unlikely to 
recur. Further, Applicant was not aware that his mother had become delinquent on the 
debt until it was brought to his attention by the Government. Since that time, he has 
monitored his mother’s payments to the credit counseling agency. She has been 
making payments to the credit counseling agency since June 2009 toward the 
satisfaction of this debt. Under the circumstances, the debt casts no doubt on the 
Applicant’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment. Further, Applicant is 
acting responsibly by monitoring his mother’s repayment efforts since learning of the 
delinquency. AG ¶¶ 20(a) and 20(b) are mitigating. 
 
Whole-Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole-person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all relevant circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the 
nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
6 
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole-person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. I have incorporated my comments 
under Guideline F in my whole-person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 2(a) were 
addressed under those guidelines, but some warrant additional comment.  
 
The majority of Applicant’s debt was caused by unforeseen circumstances 
beyond his control. He was young when his mother added him to her credit card in 
order to help him establish credit. Her efforts backfired and actually ended up tarnishing 
Applicant’s credit. Now that he is older, he is aware of the importance of maintaining a 
close watch on his credit accounts and can be trusted to monitor his mother’s 
repayment of their outstanding joint debt. Applicant is well respected by his operations 
manager, coworker, and neighbor. He served the U.S. honorably for three years in the 
Air Force. Those who know him best report that he has good judgment and integrity. His 
standards are reflected in the time and devotion that he has invested in his community 
through his volunteer work. His integrity, as attested to in his letters of support, shows 
that his promises to continue to monitor his mother’s repayment of the debt are credible. 
Further, he is willing to help his mother repay the debt. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions and doubts as to 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant has mitigated the Financial Considerations security concern.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a.:   For Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
________________________ 
Jennifer I. Goldstein 
Administrative Judge 
