 
1 
 
 
                                                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
          DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 06-03112 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
 
For Government: Jeff Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Robert Bohn, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is denied. 
 
On August 12, 2004, Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 
86). On September 19, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline J (Criminal Conduct) and Guideline G (Alcohol Consumption). The action was 
taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
 
2 
 
 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on October 20, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. On November 28, 2008, DOHA assigned the 
case to me and issued a Notice of Hearing on December 16, 2008. The case was heard 
on January 14, 2009, as scheduled. The parties stipulated to the introduction of the 
Government’s exhibits (GE) 1 through 6, and Applicant’s exhibits (AE) A through Q into 
evidence. Applicant testified in his case-in-chief. DOHA received the hearing transcript 
(Tr.) on January 26, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations contained in 
paragraphs 1.a, 1.c and 1.e. He admitted the allegations contained in paragraph 1.b, 
but denied that he was ordered to attend 10 hours of alcohol counseling. He admitted 
the allegations contained in paragraph 1.d, but denied that he was found guilty of DUI. 
He denied the allegations contained in paragraph 2, except those contained in 
paragraph 2.b which he admitted. His admissions are incorporated into the following 
findings: 
 
 Applicant is 52 years old and divorced. He was married for 14 years and has a 
19-year old daughter. He and his wife share custody of their daughter. After graduating 
from college with a bachelor’s degree in accounting, he was an account manager and 
comptroller for a medium size subcontracting company with revenues between $25 and 
$50 million for several years. (Tr. 16) He then owned his own business and later worked 
as a consultant for other companies. For the last 15 years, he has worked in the 
computer technology field. Last summer, he obtained a Master of Science degree in 
Information Technology.  
 
 Applicant began his current position with a defense contractor in October 2002. 
As an IT project manager, he is responsible for budgeting and scheduling various jobs 
and about 30 people. He was granted an Interim Secret security clearance in 2004 that 
was revoked pending this proceeding. Since working in this position, he has received 
performance evaluations that rate him as meeting or exceeding expectations for the 
years 2003 to 2007, resulting in increases in his compensation. (AE J) 
  
 Applicant began consuming alcohol in his late teens while in high school. (Tr. 
35). He continued to consume alcohol during and after leaving college, but was never 
convicted of any alcohol-related incidents until middle age.  
  
 Applicant has five alcohol-related criminal incidents in his background. In July 
1998, he was driving home after having a couple beers at a local bar when the police 
stopped him for going the wrong way down a one-way street. He refused a breathalyzer 
test and failed a field sobriety test. He was arrested and charged with (1) Driving Under 
the Influence of Alcohol (DUI); (2) Expired registration; and (3) Driving the Wrong-Way 
 
3 
 
 
on a One-way Street. In June 1999, he pleaded guilty to Alcohol Related Improper 
Control by Driver and Driving the Wrong-Way on a One-way Street. (Tr. 40-47) This first 
incident occurred in State 1. He was 42 years old at the time. He denied that he was 
intoxicated at the time of this arrest. (Tr. 78; GE  3) 
 
 In May 2001, Applicant had dinner with a couple co-workers. After leaving the 
restaurant, the police stopped him for speeding and requested that he take a 
breathalyzer test. Applicant refused the test and was arrested. He was charged with (1) 
DUI; and (2) Speeding. In October 2001, he pleaded guilty to a charge of Alcohol 
Related Reckless, and the Speeding charge was dismissed. He was sentenced to 60 
days in jail (suspended), and fined $1,800 ($900 suspended). (GE 3) He was placed on 
12 months supervised probation and ordered to obtain an alcohol assessment, which he 
did. (Tr. 52) The next time he appeared in court, the judge did not have the evidence of 
the assessment results, and consequently he did not order Applicant to attend alcohol 
counseling. (T. 53) This incident also occurred in State 1. During the hearing, he 
admitted that he had been drinking several hours before being stopped by the police, 
but denied that he was intoxicated at the time. (Tr. 81) 
 
 In September 2004, Applicant attended a family reunion in State 2. On his way 
back to his hotel, he made an illegal U-turn and ran a red light. After being stopped by 
the police, he took a breathalyzer test that he failed. He was arrested and charged with 
(1) Operating While Under the Influence (OWUI); and (2) Improper Turn on Red. He 
pleaded guilty to the OWUI and the other charge was dismissed. He was fined $1,250 
and his State 3 driver’s license was suspended for six months. (GE 4; Tr. 58) The court 
ordered him to complete an alcohol assessment/driver’s safety course. He admitted that 
he was under the influence of alcohol at the time he was arrested. (Tr. 54) About four 
years later, in August 2008, he started attending the court-ordered classes, consisting of 
eight hours of instruction. He completed the course in October 2008. (AE O; P) He did 
not take the classes sooner because he could not locate an appropriate course in his 
then-resident state (State 3) before that. (Tr. 57) He found the classes to be educational 
and informative. (Tr. 70)  
 
 In October 2006, Applicant consumed a couple alcoholic beverages after work 
with friends. He then went to study at a local coffee shop. While he was driving home 
around 10:30 p.m., he swerved his car to avoid hitting a cat and ran into a tree. (Tr. 111) 
The police took him to the hospital where he was treated for a concussion. He walked 
out of the hospital a couple hours later without being discharged. The following morning, 
he telephoned the police and learned that he was ticketed for a DUI and his car was 
impounded. He does not remember walking home from the hospital in the early morning 
or any other details from the accident. (GE 5; Tr. 111) Because he never received any 
legal documents after the incident, he did not think charges were filed. However, 
charges were filed and he missed a hearing on the DUI, resulting in an automatic 
suspension of his State 3 driver’s license.1 (Tr. 92) During the hearing, he admitted that 
                                                          
1 Applicant has had driver’s licenses issued from State 1 and State 3. Both licenses have been 
suspended at some point. The record is not clear as to the exact time frame of those suspensions or 
when the licenses were obtained. 
 
4 
 
 
he had consumed alcohol prior to the accident, but denied that he was intoxicated. (Tr. 
62-63; 86) He reported this incident to his employer in January 2007. (AE Q) The 
criminal DUI charges were later dismissed. (AE A)   
 
 In January 2007, Applicant was stopped by the police after he failed to make a 
complete stop at a stop sign in State 3. He was arrested by the police and charged with 
Drive While License Suspended for Driving Under the Influence. After the arrest, he 
hired a lawyer and learned of the specific DUI charges of October 2006 and that his 
license was suspended. (Tr. 64) He also found out from the police report that he had 
been hospitalized after the accident. (Tr. 114) He subsequently biked or took the train to 
work until the suspension expired in December 2007. (Tr. 97; 115)2 
 
 In the fall of 2008, Applicant made an appointment with a certified substance 
abuse counselor for an alcohol evaluation in preparation for this hearing. (Tr. 106) After 
an hour and a half interview, the counselor determined that Applicant “does not meet 
the criteria for Alcohol Dependency.” (AE K; Tr. 104) The counselor noted in his brief 
November 2008 report that Applicant was attending a counseling center for DUI classes 
for his 2004 conviction. (Id.) 
  
 Over the course of his life, Applicant has abstained from consuming alcohol 
during stressful periods. (Tr. 78) The last time Applicant consumed alcohol was on July 
15, 2008, at his daughter’s birthday party. (Tr. 38) Prior to that day, he had a glass of 
wine on Memorial Day. (39) He has not had an alcoholic drink during the past six 
months because consuming alcohol has “caused a lot of problems. It turned out to be 
very expensive. And it doesn’t seem to be worth the trouble.” (Tr. 39) He does not 
believe he is an alcoholic nor that he has a problem with alcohol. (Id.; Tr. 108; 124) He 
does not intend to use alcohol in the foreseeable future. (Tr. 74) Up to March 2008, he 
admitted that he was still consuming alcohol. 
 Four of Applicant’s accomplished colleagues submitted letters in support of 
Applicant, attesting to his reliability, integrity and trustworthiness, especially as it relates 
to handling classified information. They have known him since he began working for 
their current employer in 2004. All of them are aware of the alcohol security concerns 
underlying this proceeding. (AE C, D, E, and F) Two of Applicant’s former college 
roommates submitted strong letters of recommendation. They are aware of Applicant’s 
alcohol-related charges, but do not believe that he has an alcohol problem. (AE H; I) 
Applicant’s former wife also submitted a letter on his behalf. She has observed him over 
the years and does not think he abuses alcohol. (AE G) 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
                                                          
2It is not clear from the record as to the disposition of this January 2007 charge. 
 
5 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(a), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive ¶ E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by the applicant or proven by Department Counsel, and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable clearance decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions adverse to an applicant shall be “in 
terms of the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty 
of the applicant concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the Government’s security concern pertaining to criminal 
conduct: 
 
 
6 
 
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person's ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules and regulations. 
 
AG ¶ 31 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and 
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person 
was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted.  
 
 Applicant was arrested and/or charged with alcohol-related offenses in 1998, 
2001, 2004 and 2006. There is sufficient evidence to raise significant security concerns 
under the above-cited disqualifying conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence of those disqualifying 
conditions, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove mitigation.  
AG ¶ 32 provides five conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under this 
guideline, two of which may be potentially applicable:  
 
(a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness or 
good judgment;  
 
(b) the person was pressured or coerced into committing the act and those 
pressures are no longer present in the person’s life; 
 
(c) evidence that the person did not commit the offense; and 
 
(d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without the recurrence of criminal activity, remorse 
or restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement.  
 
Applicant’s last criminal arrest was in October 2006, about two years ago. This 
incident involved alcohol consumption, as did four preceding arrests. Hence, the 
October incident did not occur under such unusual circumstances that would make it 
unlikely to recur, as required for the application of AG ¶ 32 (a).  
 
Applicant provided some evidence of rehabilitation. He has not been involved in 
any alcohol-related charge for two years, has a good employment record with his 
employer over the past four years, and appears remorseful about the criminal charges. 
He also presented evidence of completing an alcohol counseling course in October 
2008, which was court-ordered in September 2004. Based on his four-year delay in 
 
7 
 
 
complying with the court’s mandate, AG ¶ 32 (d) has less mitigating weight than would 
otherwise be the case.   
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption:  
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness. 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns under 
AG ¶ 22, one of which is potentially applicable in this case:  
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent. 
Applicant has four alcohol-related criminal charges in his history: a DUI in 1998, 
a DUI in 2001, a DUI in 2004, and a DUI in 2006. The Government established security 
concerns under AG ¶ 22(a).  
Conditions that could mitigate security concerns raised under this guideline are 
provided under AG ¶ 23: 
(a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
(b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); 
(c) the individual is a current employee who is participating in a counseling 
or treatment program, has no history of previous treatment and relapse, 
and is making satisfactory progress; and, 
(d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
 
8 
 
 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
AG ¶ 23(a) does not provide mitigation for the reasons set forth under AG ¶ 32 
(a) above.  
Applicant denied that he has an alcohol problem, but acknowledged that it has 
caused him expensive difficulties over the past ten years. As a consequence, he 
asserted that he has not consumed alcohol for the past six months. Applicant provided 
an alcohol evaluation that he obtained in preparation for this hearing and as evidence of 
actions he has taken to address his concerns. The evaluation was performed by a 
certified alcohol counselor who was not a duly qualified medical professional, such as a 
physician, clinical psychologist, psychiatrist, or a licensed clinical social worker who is a 
staff member of a recognized treatment program, as required under the guidelines. The 
evaluation consisted of a brief interview of Applicant, resulting in a final opinion that 
does not address elements routinely contained in standard psychological or psychiatric 
evaluations of this nature. Hence, the evaluation is given little weight and does not 
corroborate Applicant’s assertions that he has taken steps to address any of his alcohol-
related concerns. AG ¶ 23(b) has no application to the concerns raised. 
The record evidence does not support the application of AG ¶ 23(c). Applicant 
did not participate in a formalized substance abuse treatment program, as contemplated 
under this guideline; hence, AG ¶ 23(d) is not applicable either. 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case, including Applicant’s candid 
 
9 
 
 
testimony. Applicant is an intelligent and very successful 52-year-old man, who has 
worked for his employer for the last four years and received the support of many 
accomplished colleagues. The outpouring of support is impressive. 
 
Applicant began having problems with alcohol in 1998 and they continued up to 
October 2006. He has four separate arrests for DUI and three convictions. His driver’s 
licenses have been suspended for significant periods of time as a result. He 
acknowledged that he had consumed alcohol before each incident, but denied that he 
was intoxicated, except on one occasion. He believes that he should never consume 
alcohol and drive again, but does not think he has an alcohol problem, despite the DUIs. 
He decided to stop drinking in July 2008, about six months ago, and one month later 
managed to comply with a court order entered four years earlier. This alcohol 
assessment/driver’s safety course was also two years after the serious October 2006 
incident. While he now appears to appreciate the significance of his criminal history and 
the adverse effect it may have on his employment, he has been dilatory, and possibly 
stubborn, in not addressing his acknowledged concerns sooner, especially in light of his 
pursuit of a security clearance since August 2004. It is particularly troublesome that two 
months after submitting an SF 86, he was convicted of a DUI, but waited four years to 
take the eight hours of alcohol-related counseling, as ordered. That delay exemplifies 
an underlying lack of good judgment or willingness to comply with rules. Without 
substantive independent evidence to corroborate his assertions that he does not have 
an alcohol problem, the record does not contain sufficient evidence of rehabilitation or 
mitigation.  
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with substantial questions and doubts as 
to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising under criminal 
conduct and alcohol consumption guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.c:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:    Against Applicant 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   Against Applicant 
 
10 
 
 
  Subparagraph 2.c:    Against Applicant 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly not consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility 
for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
                                                  
    
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
