1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
)       ISCR Case No. 06-10873
SSN: )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
February 24, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
CEFOLA, Richard A., Administrative Judge:
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SCA), on September 30,
2004.  On October 23, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
B and C for Applicant.  The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
Applicant acknowledged receipt of the SOR on October 23, 2008.  He answered
the SOR in writing on November 11, 2008, and requested a hearing before an
Administrative Judge.  DOHA received the request on December 22, 2008, and I
received the case assignment on January 5, 2009.  DOHA issued a notice of hearing
that same day, and I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 22, 2009.  The
Government offered Exhibits (GXs) 1 through 3, which were received without objection.
2
Applicant testified on his own behalf.  DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (TR)
on February 3, 2009.  I granted Applicant’s request to keep the record open until
February 5, 2009, to submit additional matters.  On February 2, 2009, he submitted
Exhibit A, which the Government forwarded, without objection, on February 23, 2009.
The record closed on February 23, 2009.  Based upon a review of the case file,
pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility for access to classified information is
denied.
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings
Request for Administrative Notice
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice
of certain facts relating to Taiwan.  The request was granted.  The request, and the
attached documents, were not admitted into evidence, but were included in the record.
The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below. 
Findings of Fact
In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in all the
Subparagraphs of the SOR, with explanations, except for Subparagraph 2.c., which he
denied.
Guideline B - Foreign Influence
The Applicant was born in Taiwan in 1975, initially immigrated to the U.S. in
1995, but continued his schooling, college, in Taiwan until 2000 (TR at page 17 line 23
to page 21 line 3, and GX 1 at page 1).  After college, he returned to the U.S. to pursue
his Masters Degree in 2000 (Id).  His net worth in the U.S. is at least $750,000, and his
salary is about $80,000 (TR at page 24 line 3 to page 25 line 10, and at page 28 lines
5~10, see also AppX A at pages 22~34).
1.a.  The Applicant’s parents are citizens of Taiwan (GX 1 at page 3).  The
Applicant’s father is involved in financial planning, and lives six months out of the year in
Taiwan and the other six months in the U.S. (TR at page 29 line 24 to page 32 line 12).
His father has no connection with the Taiwanese government (Id).
The Applicant’s mother is a retired accountant, who lives with the Applicant’s
sister in the U.S. (TR at page 32 line 21 to page 33 line 19).  His mother also has no
connection with the Taiwanese government (Id).
1.b.  The Applicant’s sister, a dual national with Taiwan, works for a city’s
government in the U.S. (TR at page 35 lines 4~19).
1.c. and 1.d.  Through the Applicant’s mother, who uses his name, the Applicant
owns about $87,000 of stock in Taiwanese companies, and has about $10,000 in a
3
Taiwanese bank account (TR at page 36 line 3 to page 38 line 6, and at page 38 line 7
to page 39 line 19).  Although these accounts are in the Applicant’s name, he avers that
he has little access to them, and his mother represents that she will “cooperate with . . .
[her] son to transfer . . . [her] money out of his accounts in Taiwan and transfer the
money to the U.S.” (AppX A the last page).
1.e.  The Applicant avers that he has transferred Taiwanese real estate, worth
about $128,500, to his father (TR at page 39 line 20 to page 41 line 6).  However,
despite his representation at his hearing, he has provided no documentation in support
of this averment.
Guideline C - Foreign Preference
2.a. and 2.b.  After becoming a naturalized U.S. citizen in 2001, the Applicant
traveled to Taiwan on five separate occasions, from 2004~2007, using his Taiwanese
passport (TR at page 43 line 4 to page 48 line 8, and GX 2).  He renewed that passport
in December of 2005 (TR at page 48 line 9 to page 49 line 23, and GX 3).
2.c.  The Applicant has returned his passport to the Taiwanese “Bureau of
Counselor Affairs” (TR at page 49 line 24 to page 51 line 15).
2.d.  Having lived “two-thirds” of his life in Taiwan, the Applicant is unwilling to
renounce his Taiwanese citizenship (TR at page 52 lines 13~17, at page 54 line 25 to
page 57 line 1, and at page 57 line 13 to page 59 line 5).  He reiterated this stance
several times during his testimony, and in his response to the SOR (Id).
I take administrative notice of the following facts: Taiwan has an elected
democratic government.  It has the 17  largest economy in the world and is a leadingth
producer of high-technology goods.  It engages in industrial and economic espionage.
Proprietary information technology is high on the Taiwanese list of targeted information
to be acquired by their agents from foreign governments and business.  Although the
U.S. now recognizes Taiwan as part of “one-China,” it continues to maintain strong
unofficial relations with Taiwan.
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG).  In
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines
list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law.  Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process.  The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision.  According to AG ¶
4
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.”  The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration.  AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.”  In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record.  Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR.  Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .”  The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence.  This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours.  The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information.  Decisions include, by necessity, consideration
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information.  Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.”  See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).
Analysis
Guideline B - Foreign Influence
Paragraph 6 of the new adjudicative guidelines sets out the security concern
relating to Foreign Influence: “Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern
if the individual has divided loyalties or foreign interests, may be manipulated or induced
to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a way that is not in U.S.
interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by a foreign interest.”
Here, Subparagraph 7(a) is applicable: “contacts with a foreign family member . .
. who is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened
5
risk of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.”  The
Applicant’s parent’s are Taiwanese Nationals, and his father resides half the year in
Taiwan.  This is countered, however, by the first mitigating condition, as “the nature of
the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located . .
. are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose
between the interests of a foreign individual . . . and the interests of the U.S.”  The
Applicant’s parents have no connection with the Taiwanese government, his mother
resides in the U.S., as does his father for half of the year.
However, the disqualifying condition noted in Subparagraph 7(e) is also
applicable: “a substantial . . . financial or property interest in a foreign country, . . .which
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.”
Despite his mother’s representation to “cooperate with . . . [her] son,” he still owns
$87,000 in Taiwanese stock, has $10,000 in a Taiwanese bank account, and has failed
to demonstrate he has transferred his $128,500 in real estate to his father.  I can find no
countervailing mitigating condition.
Guideline C - Foreign Preference
Paragraph 9 of the new adjudicative guidelines sets out the security concern
relating to Foreign Preference: “When an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a
preference for a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to
provide information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United
States.”
Here, Subparagraph 10(a)(1) and (5) are applicable. “exercise of any right,
privilege or obligation of a foreign citizenship after becoming a U.S. citizen or through
the foreign citizenship of a family member.  This includes but is not limited to: (1)
possession of a current foreign passport; . . . (5) using foreign citizenship to protect
financial or business interests in another country.”  Although mitigating condition
Paragraph 11(e) is applicable, as the Applicant’s “passport has been . . . surrendered to
the cognizant security authority,” I can not find that crucial provisions of Paragraph 11(b)
are also applicable.  In answer to the SOR, and at his hearing, the Applicant repeatedly
failed to express “a willingness to renounce dual citizenship.”  He wishes to retain his
Taiwanese citizenship to maintain a connection with the country where he spent two-
thirds of his life, and to protect what financial interests he may have in Taiwan.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a public trust position by considering the totality of the
Applicant’s conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should
consider the nine adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature,
extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct,
to include knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct;
(4) the individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which
6
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other
permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for
pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or
recurrence.” Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility
for a public trust position must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon
careful consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.
He has the support of his Product Manager, who has known the Applicant for two
years (AppX A at page 21).
I considered all of the evidence, including the potentially disqualifying and
mitigating conditions surrounding this case.  Overall, the record evidence leaves me
with questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security
clearance.  For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant not mitigated the trustworthiness
concerns arising from his Foreign Influence and Foreign Preference. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e: Against Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: For Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: Against Applicant
7
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
Richard A. Cefola
Administrative Judge
