                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
) 
------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 06-20282 
SSN: ----------------- ) 
) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Jennifer I. Goldstein, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HOWE, Philip S., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant submitted his Security Clearance Application (SF 86), on September 
28, 2005. On August 11, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guideline F. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
Applicant=s receipt for the SOR is dated August 14, 2008. He answered the SOR 
in writing on August 22, 2008, and requested his case be decided on the written record 
in lieu of a hearing.  
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
On November 7, 2008, Department Counsel submitted the Department=s written 
case.  A complete copy of the file of relevant material (FORM) was provided to the 
Applicant. He was given the opportunity to file objections and submit material in 
refutation, extenuation, or mitigation.  Applicant received the file on November 13, 2008.  
Applicant did not file a response to the FORM within the 30 day time allowed that would 
have expired on December 14, 2008. I received the case assignment on January 22, 
2009. Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility 
for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
In his Answer to the SOR, dated August 22, 2008, Applicant admitted the factual 
allegations in && 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c of the SOR, with explanations. 
 
Applicant is 37 years old, divorced, and works for a defense contractor as a 
computer technician.  He is a veteran and received an honorable discharge.  His SF 86 
does not show any periods of unemployment between 1998 and the present time which 
significantly would have decreased his income in that time period. (Item 5) 
 
Applicant admits three delinquent debts totaling $24,517.  First, Applicant owes 
$162 to a bank on a credit card debt.  He closed this account in 2001.  This debt has not 
been paid, except he submitted proof of payment of $57 in April 2008 on the credit card 
debt, but no further proof of any payments.  (Items 5-10) 
 
Applicant also admits he owes $23,380 to a bank on a car loan debt.  He 
borrowed $27,000 to purchase the car in September 2004, and the monthly payments 
were $685. He allowed this vehicle to be repossessed in 2005 after he could no longer 
make the payments.  This debt has not been paid. (Items 5-10) 
 
Finally, Applicant also admits he owes $975 on a judgment for unpaid rent.  His 
former roommate is also liable on this debt.  Applicant has not paid this delinquent debt. 
(Items 5-10) 
 
Policies 
 
When evaluating an applicant=s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant=s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies the guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge=s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
 
 
3 
 
 
According to AG & 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the Awhole person concept.@ The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG & 2(b) 
requires that A[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.@ In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Directive & E3.1.14 requires the Government to present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive & E3.1.15, “The applicant is 
responsible for presenting Awitnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel and has the 
ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be Ain terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.@ See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG & 18:       
 
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual=s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
 
 
4 
 
 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
The guideline notes several conditions that could raise security concerns. Under 
AG & 19(a), an Ainability or unwillingness to satisfy debts@ is potentially disqualifying.  
Similarly under AG & 19(c), Aa history of not meeting financial obligations@ may raise 
security concerns. Since 2002 Applicant accumulated substantial delinquent debt 
($24,517) in only three debts that he has not paid or resolved. The evidence is sufficient 
to raise these potentially disqualifying conditions.. 
  
AG ¶ 20 of the guideline also includes examples of conditions that could mitigate 
security concerns arising from financial difficulties.  Those mitigating conditions are: 
 
 (a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred under 
such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the 
person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business downturn, unexpected 
medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual acted 
responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem and/or 
there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the past-due 
debt which is the cause of the problem and provides documented proof to 
substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides evidence of actions to resolve 
the issue; and, 
 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
 
 The burden of proof is on him to show that the mitigating conditions should apply 
to him. He failed in this burden. Examining each of the mitigating conditions, Applicant’s 
debts are current obligations, was not infrequent, and Applicant did not explain any 
circumstances which were unlikely to recur, so ¶ 20 (a) does not apply.  Applicant did 
not explain that the conditions which caused his financial problems were beyond his 
control, so ¶ 20 (b) does not apply.  There is no evidence of any counseling undertaken 
by Applicant, so ¶ 20 (c) does not apply.  There are no good-faith efforts shown to repay 
these debts, so ¶ 20 (d) does not apply.  Applicant has not stated any reasonable basis 
for disputing these debts.  In fact, Applicant admitted the three debts, so ¶ 20 (e) does 
 
 
5 
 
 
not apply.  Finally, there is no affluence shown by Applicant, and ¶ 20 (f) cannot apply.  
None of the mitigating conditions are factors for consideration in this case.   
 
Applicant does not explain his inability or inaction over the past few years to 
repay these three debts. He has not paid them, and offers no reasonable, good-faith 
explanation as to why he has not resolved the debts listed in the SOR.  
  
Whole Person Concept 
 
Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant=s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant=s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG & 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recentcy of the conduct; (4) the 
individual=s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG & 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 37-years old and works 
for a Federal contractor. He accumulated three debts over the past several years, but 
does not propose any action to repay these debts.  He had three years to repay the car 
loan.  The two smaller debts could have been repaid easily within the past two years, 
but no such repayment has been taken. (See AG & 2(a)(4).) Applicant does not explain 
what plans he has to avoid such problems in the future. (See AG & 2(a)(2).)  Applicant 
provided no information concerning efforts to repay the debts or behavioral changes to 
remedy the situation (See AG & 2(a)(6).)  The potential for coercion, exploitation or 
duress exists because of the size of the debt, which will affect his credit ratings, thereby 
causing him to take advantage of any method to extricate his finances from this 
predicament, including coercive methods by other persons. (See AG & 2(a)(8).) 
Applicant voluntarily entered into these debts, and it is likely he will continue in his 
refusal to repay them based on the evidence in this record. (See AG & 2(a)(5) and (9).) 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and substantial doubts as 
to Applicant=s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
 
 
6 
 
 
conclude Applicant did not mitigate the security concerns arising from his financial 
considerations.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
Subparagraph 1.a:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
Subparagraph 1.c:   Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
                                                   
_________________ 
PHILIP S. HOWE 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
