KEYWORD: Guideline B; Guideline E
DIGEST: Applicant contends on appeal that the Judge erred in concluding that the evidence sets
forth Guideline E security concerns, in that the evidence does not demonstrate that her omissions
were deliberate.  In evaluating an applicant’s state of mind, the Judge must examine the
omissions or false statements in light of the entirety of the record evidence.  The Judge took into
account the fact that the questions at issue “are neither difficult, confusing or misleading.”  She
also considered Applicant’s various explanations for the omissions, concluding that “none of her
explanations for failing to answer the questions accurately are reasonable or even
comprehensible.” .  The Board concludes that the Judge’s finding that Applicant’s omissions
were deliberate is supported by substantial record evidence.  An applicant’s disagreement with
the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the
evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions
in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  Adverse decision affirmed.
CASENO: 07-00196.a1
DATE: 02/20/2009
DATE: February 20, 2009
In Re:
----
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-00196
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
The Judge’s favorable finding under Guideline B is not at issue in this appeal.  1
2
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Alan Dickson, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On April 4, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision–security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence) and Guideline
E (Personal Conduct) of Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended)
(Directive).  Applicant requested a hearing.  On November 25, 2008, after the hearing,
Administrative Judge Darlene D. Lokey Anderson denied Applicant’s request for a security
clearance.  Applicant filed a timely appeal pursuant to Directive ¶¶  E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raised the following issues on appeal: whether the record establishes security
concerns under Guideline E; whether the Judge’s application of the Guideline E mitigating
conditions is erroneous; and whether the Judge’s whole-person analysis is erroneous.   Finding no1
error, we affirm.  
The Judge made the following pertinent findings of fact: Applicant was born in Lebanon to
a U.S. mother and a Lebanese father, who later became a U.S. citizen.  Her family moved from
Lebanon to the United Kingdom when Applicant was a child.  Due to her education and upbringing,
Applicant learned to speak Arabic, French, and English while a child.  Upon reaching the age of 20
Applicant moved to the U.S. to attend college. 
In the early 2000s Applicant and her brother started a company in the U.S. for the purpose
of engaging in international trade with countries in the Middle East.  Applicant’s father began
working as a consultant for Applicant’s company after securing a contract with the U.S. DoD.  He
was a dual citizen of Lebanon and the U.S. and, at the time of the contract, was living in Lebanon.
He served as a consultant for the company from May 2004 to February 2006 and from September
2006 until May 2007.  Her father was also involved in Lebanese politics.  
On November 4, 2005, Applicant, in furtherance of her company’s business, completed a
Certificate Pertaining to Foreign Interests (SF 328).  Question 5 on this form asked “Does your
organization have any contracts, agreements, understandings, or arrangements with a foreign
person(s)?”  On February 4, 2006, Applicant completed a security clearance application (SCA).
Question 12 asked “Do you have any foreign property, business connections, or financial interests?”
Applicant answered “no” to each of these questions.  The Judge found that these answers were false
3
in light of her father’s dual citizenship, his foreign connections, and the foreign subcontractors
working with Applicant’s business.
Applicant contends on appeal that the Judge erred in concluding that the evidence sets forth
Guideline E security concerns, in that the evidence does not demonstrate that her omissions were
deliberate.  “[P]roof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove an applicant’s intent
or state of mind when the omission occurred[.]” ISCR Case No. 03-10390 at 8 (App. Bd. Apr. 12,
2005).  In evaluating an applicant’s state of mind, the Judge must examine the omissions or false
statements in light of the entirety of the record evidence.  See ISCR Case No. 04-09429 at 3 (App.
Bd. Jul. 2, 2007) (“[W]e have considered the wording of the question at issue, Applicant’s level of
education, his explanations for the omissions, and the record as a whole”).   In this case, the Judge
took into account the fact that the questions at issue “are neither difficult, confusing or misleading.”
Decision at 9.  She also considered Applicant’s various explanations for the omissions, concluding
that “none of her explanations for failing to answer the questions accurately are reasonable or even
comprehensible.”  Id. at 8.  The Board concludes that the Judge’s finding that Applicant’s omissions
were deliberate is supported by substantial record evidence.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.32.1.  (Substantial
evidence is “such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a
conclusion in light of all the contrary evidence in the same record.”)  
Applicant takes issue with the Judge’s weighing of certain pieces of evidence, e.g., that
Applicant had received no help in filling out the forms in question and that she had no prior
experience in applying for a security clearance.  However, a Judge is presumed to have considered
all the evidence in the record unless she specifically states otherwise.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 07-
00553 at 2 (App. Bd. May 23, 2008).  “An applicant’s disagreement with the Judge’s weighing of
the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the evidence, is not sufficient to
demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in a manner that is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law.”  See  ISCR Case No. 07-10454 at 2 (App. Bd. Aug. 12, 2008).  The
record demonstrates that the Judge considered appropriate mitigating conditions, holding in favor
of Applicant as to Guideline B.  However, she concluded that Applicant had failed to meet her
burden of persuasion under Guideline E.  See Directive ¶ E3.1.15.  Viewed in light of the record as
a whole, the Judge’s adverse conclusion concerning mitigation is sustainable.  The Judge’s whole-
person analysis is also sustainable.  See ISCR Case No. 03-22861 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jun. 2, 2006).
See also Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S.
29, 43 (1983)(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962))  “The
general standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests
of the national security.’”  Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). 
Order
The Judge’s adverse security clearance decision is AFFIRMED.
4
Signed: Michael D. Hipple           
Michael D. Hipple
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: James E. Moody               
James E. Moody
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
