 Authorized by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), Section E3.1.2.2.1
 Required by Executive Order 10865, as amended, and by DoD Directive 5220.6 (Directive), as amended.2
1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
--------------------------- )
SSN: ------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-07987
)
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: D. Michael Lyles, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Angela Manson, Esquire
______________
Decision
______________
MALONE, Matthew E., Administrative Judge:
Based upon a review of the pleadings, exhibits and testimony, Applicant’s
request for continued eligibility for a security clearance is denied.
On January 12, 2007, Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for
Investigations Processing (e-QIP) to renew a security clearance required for his
defense-related research work through his professorship at a private university. After
reviewing the results of the ensuing background investigation, adjudicators for the
Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to Applicant three sets of
interrogatories to obtain clarification of and/or additional information about adverse
information in his background.  After reviewing his responses to the interrogatories,1
DOHA adjudicators were unable to make a preliminary affirmative finding  that it is2
 Adjudication of this case is controlled by the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, approved by the President on3
December 29, 2005,which were implemented by the Department of Defense on September 1, 2006. Pending
official revision of the Directive, the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines supercede the guidelines listed in
Enclosure 2 to the Directive.
 Department Counsel also asked that I take notice of additional documents included collectively in the record4
as Judicial Exhibit (Jx.) 1. This exhibit contains 17 attached documents (Attachments I - XVII) I sustained
Applicant’s objection to consideration of Attachments XII, XIV - XVII and I have not considered that information
for reasons discussed in the transcript at pages 19 - 24. However, those documents are included in the record
for possible appellate review.
2
clearly consistent with the national interest to allow Applicant access to classified
information. On August 15, 2008, DOHA issued to Applicant a Statement of Reasons
(SOR) alleging facts which raised security concerns addressed in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG)  under Guideline B (foreign influence), Guideline C3
(foreign preference) and Guideline E (personal conduct).
Applicant timely responded to the SOR and requested a hearing. The case was
assigned to me on December 2, 2008, and I convened a hearing on December 17,
2008. The parties appeared as scheduled. The government presented five exhibits (Gx.
1 - 5).  Applicant testified, but did not submit any documents. DOHA received the4
transcript of hearing (Tr.) on December 29, 2008.
Findings of Fact
The government has alleged as one basis for its decision to deny his clearance
renewal request that Applicant’s conduct and circumstances indicate he may give
preference to the interests of a foreign government over those of the United States.
(Guideline C - Foreign Preference) Specifically, it is alleged that Applicant exercises
dual citizenship with the United States and Iran through his possession of an Iranian
passport, obtained in August 2007 and valid through August 2011 (SOR ¶ 1.a); that he
exercised dual citizenship through his use of an Iranian passport in lieu of a U.S.
passport he received in June 2001 to travel to Iran between 2001 and 2003 (SOR ¶
1.b); that Applicant exercised dual citizenship by obtaining an Iranian passport in August
2001 after he had become a U.S. citizen in 1991 (SOR ¶ 1.c); that he inherited a house
in Iran worth about $100,000 (SOR ¶ 1.d); and that he served in the Iranian army
between 1972 and 1974 (SOR ¶ 1.e).
The government also has alleged that Applicant has interests and contacts in a
foreign country that may impair or conflict with his obligation to protect the interests of
the United States. (Guideline B - Foreign Influence) Specifically, it is alleged that
Applicant’s mother is a citizen of and resides in Iran (SOR ¶ 2.a); that his brother is a
citizen of and resides in Iran (SOR ¶ 2.b); that, as alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d, above, he
inherited a house in Iran worth about $100,000 (SOR ¶ 2.c); and that he traveled to Iran
in December 2005, February 2003 and August 2001 (SOR ¶ 2.d).
Finally, the government alleged it could not grant Applicant’s request because of
concerns he had not been candid or truthful about information material to the
government’s assessment of his suitability for access to classified information.
3
(Guideline E - Personal Conduct) Specifically, it is alleged that, by answering “no” to e-
QIP question 17.a (Your Foreign Activities - Do you have any foreign property, business
connections, or financial interests?”) he deliberately and knowingly failed to disclose his
interest in foreign property; that is, the house in Iran he allegedly inherited. (SOR ¶ 3.a)
In response to the SOR, Applicant admitted with explanation the allegations in
SOR ¶¶ 1.a - 1.c, 1.e and 3.a. He admitted without explanation the remaining
allegations. In addition to the facts entered through his admissions, I make the following
findings of relevant fact.
Applicant is a 59-year-old full professor of electrical and computer engineering at
a private U.S. university, where he has worked since September 1993. Among his
responsibilities is the supervision of post-graduate degree candidates doing research
funded, inter alia, by civilian and military Department of Defense agencies. He has also
done classified research and development work for other government agencies and
private corporations. Applicant is highly regarded in his field of expertise and has been
published at least 20 times in the past 16 years. His efforts also have led to significant
improvements in his university’s physical assets as well as its academic reputation. (Tr.
25 - 36)
Applicant was born and raised in Iran before coming to the United States in 1976
to pursue multiple post-graduate degrees. He received all of his undergraduate
education in Iran, and he served in the Iranian army from 1972 until 1974, fulfilling the
mandatory military service required of all Iranian males at the time. He also worked as
an engineer for at least four different state-run agencies in Iran before emigrating to the
U.S. (Gx. 1; Gx. 4; Answer to SOR) He became a naturalized U.S. citizen in 1991 and
received a U.S. passport in June 2001. (Gx. 1) His mother, brother, and one of his four
sisters are citizens of and live in Iran. His mother also has her green card after spending
long periods of time in the U.S. visiting Applicant. (Tr. 54) She last visited in 2004, but
due to her age (82 years old) she can no longer travel overseas. (Tr. 67) 
Applicant’s father, who died in 1973, was a teacher. Applicant’s mother lives on
the remainder of his retirement pension. Applicant’s brother used to be a teacher, but
since about 1981 has been barred by the government from doing so in Iran’s state-
supported schools. He lives with their mother and supports himself through private
tutoring and by on-line stock trading. Applicant occasionally sends his mother money
totaling about $500 each year. (Tr. 49 - 51) He speaks with his mother and brother by
phone about once each month. (Tr. 57) Applicant also has four sisters. All have Iranian
citizenship, but only one still lives in Iran. Two sisters live in Germany and one lives in
Canada. (Tr. 58) None of Applicant’s relatives are employed by or have any official
connection to the Iranian government. 
In 2001, Applicant was invited to attend an international conference of electrical
engineers to be held in Tehran, Iran. He had not been back to Iran since before the
1979 Islamic Revolution there. To travel back to Iran, he obtained an Iranian passport
as required by Iranian law. Iran considers U.S. citizens who were born in Iran as Iranian
citizens and requires the use of an Iranian passport for entering and leaving the country.
(Tr. 38 - 41; Jx. 1, Attachment II) Since obtaining an Iranian passport, Applicant has
4
returned to Iran to visit his family in 2003, 2005, and 2007. (Tr. 64) He renewed his
Iranian passport in August 2007 and does not want to relinquish it, because without it he
cannot see his mother or his other familymembers. Aside from his mother, Applicant
has other family and cultural ties to Iran that constitute other reasons for him to return to
Iran even were his mother not there. (Tr. 41 - 42)
When his father died in 1973, Applicant inherited an interest in his father’s house,
where his brother and mother still live. Applicant estimates the house (more properly
characterized as a condominium) is worth about $100,000. Applicant’s understanding is
that, under Islamic law, the house passed to Applicant and his siblings in shares
weighted in favor of the male children. Of course, Applicant and his siblings never
contemplated that his mother would leave the house. To the best of his understanding,
if his mother pre-deceases Applicant, the house will be disposed of through a process
similar to the United States’ probate system. It is also his understanding that he is not
on any deed for the property and that he is not registered as having any partial interest
in the property. (Tr. 42 - 44, 60 - 62) Applicant does not receive any income from the
property and there is no indication his interest in the property is contingent on his
exercise of Iranian citizenship.
Applicant first applied for a security clearance in 1991. In the security clearance
application (SF 86) he submitted at the time, he disclosed he had previously held an
Iranian passport before he was naturalized. He also answered “yes” to question 17.a
(Do you have any foreign property, business connections, or financial interests?). (Gx.
5) When he submitted his e-QIP in January 2007 to renew his clearance, he answered
“no” to the same question, but disclosed again that he held a foreign passport. (Gx 1)
Applicant explained that when he considered the question on his 2007 e-QIP, he
decided to answer “no” because he was not listed on a deed or otherwise registered as
having an interest in his father’s house. (Tr. 45 - 46)
Applicant owns property in the United States worth about $220,000. He also has
retirement savings through his current employer and at another university where he
worked from 1985 through 1993. He insists that if he was approached by Iran or any
other foreign country that wished to pressure him into compromising U.S. national
interests, he would seek out the proper authorities and report the matter. (Tr. 49)
Applicant had not given any consideration to whether he would be willing to renounce
his Iranian citizenship because he does not consider himself to be a dual citizen.
However, he is not willing to relinquish his Iranian passport because without it he cannot
visit his relatives there. Further, he has used his Iranian passport only when entering or
leaving Iran. At all other times, he has used his U.S. passport. (Tr. 41 - 42)
In 1979, the Shah of Iran was overthrown in favor of a theocratic government
based on Islamic law. Despite occasional gains by more moderate Muslim clerics in the
government, the Islamic Republic of Iran remains under the control of fundamentalists
dedicated to a repressive form of government in furtherance of strict adherence to the
Koran. Iran’s regime has amassed a dismal human rights record. Government entities
have been involved in an increased number of abductions, summary executions,
disappearance, torture, and other unacceptable practices designed to preserve the
government’s hold over its citizens. The U.S. State Department has also advised U.S.
 Directive. 6.3.5
 See Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518 (1988).6
5
citizens not to travel to Iran, and has noted instances whereby dual U.S.-Iranian citizens
have been singled out for special monitoring and detention. (Jx. 1, Attachments I - IV)
Iran’s global interests are directly antithetical to those of the U.S.. To further their
regional and global goals, Iran has become an active collector of economic information
and has an active espionage service which targets U.S. interests and information. Iran
is also an active sponsor of terrorism, which targets the interests of the U.S. and its
allies. Finally, the development and proliferation of nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction by Iran is seen by the U.S. as a major threat to regional and
possibly global stability. (Jx. 1, Attachments V - XI, XIII)
Policies
Each security clearance decision must be a fair, impartial, and commonsense
determination based on examination of all available relevant and material information,5
and consideration of the pertinent criteria and adjudication policy in the Revised
Adjudicative Guidelines (AG). Decisions must also reflect consideration of the factors
listed in ¶ 2(a) of the new guidelines. Commonly referred to as the “whole person”
concept, those factors are:
(1) The nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual's age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
The presence or absence of a disqualifying or mitigating condition is not
determinative of a conclusion for or against an applicant. However, specific applicable
guidelines should be followed whenever a case can be measured against them as they
represent policy guidance governing the grant or denial of access to classified
information. In this case, the pleadings and the information presented by the parties
require consideration of the security concerns and adjudicative factors addressed under
AG ¶ 6 (Guideline B - Foreign Influence), AG ¶ 9 (Guideline C - Foreign Preference)
and AG ¶ 15 (Guideline E - Personal Conduct).
A security clearance decision is intended to resolve whether it is clearly
consistent with the national interest  for an applicant to either receive or continue to6
have access to classified information. The government bears the initial burden of
producing admissible information on which it based the preliminary decision to deny or
revoke a security clearance for an applicant. Additionally, the government must be able
 See Egan, 484 U.S. at 528, 531.7
 See Egan; Revised Adjudicative Guidelines, ¶ 2(b).8
6
to prove controverted facts alleged in the SOR. If the government meets its burden, it
then falls to the applicant to refute, extenuate or mitigate the government’s case.
Because no one has a “right” to a security clearance, an applicant bears a heavy
burden of persuasion.  7
A person who has access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the government based on trust and confidence. Thus, the government
has a compelling interest in ensuring each applicant possesses the requisite judgment,
reliability and trustworthiness of one who will protect the national interests as his or her
own. The “clearly consistent with the national interest” standard compels resolution of
any reasonable doubt about an applicant’s suitability for access in favor of the
government.8
Analysis
Personal Conduct.
The security concern about Applicant’s personal conduct, as addressed in AG¶
15, is that 
[c]onduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
Applicant does not contest that he did not disclose his interest in a foreign
property when he completed his most recent security clearance application. However,
to be disqualifying, his omission must have been made with intent to falsify or mislead.
(See AG ¶ 16(a): deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts
from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar form
used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award benefits or
status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary
responsibilities). Unintentional error or a misunderstanding of the question is not
disqualifying. The totality of information bearing on this allegation shows that Applicant
did not try to mislead the government here. He had previously disclosed ownership of
foreign property and was forthcoming about his potential inheritance when he
responded to DOHA interrogatories. His thought at the time he submitted his 2007 e-
QIP was that he did not, in fact, own any foreign property. Further, it is less than clear
what, if any future interest he has in the house where his mother lives and there is no
apparent reason for him to have deliberately withheld that information. Because
Applicant denied intentionally falsifying his e-QIP answer, the burden was on the
 Directive, E3.1.14.9
7
government to show he acted with the requisite intent.  While the government9
presented sufficient information to show he omitted the information about his father’s
house, available information is not sufficient to show he deliberately lied about it as
alleged in SOR ¶ 3.a. I resolve this security concern in favor of the Applicant.
Foreign Preference. 
The government denied Applicant’s request for clearance, in part because, after
becoming a U.S. citizen in 1991 and obtaining a U.S. passport in 2001, he exercised
his Iranian citizenship by obtaining, using, and continuing to possess a valid Iranian
passport. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a, 1.b, and 1.c). Also, the government alleged as a basis for
disqualification his alleged inheritance of a house in Iran worth about $100,000 (SOR ¶
1.d) and his two years of service in the Iranian army (SOR ¶ 1.e). As to SOR ¶ 1.e, I
conclude that his service in Iran’s military is not disqualifying because it occurred 17
years before he became a U.S. citizen. As to the inheritance of his father’s house, it is
unclear what his interest in that property might be. Further, the inheritance appears to
be a future interest that would pass to Applicant and/or his siblings only as long as
he/they survive his mother. Thus, the SOR ¶ 1.d allegation is not disqualifying. 
However, available information is sufficient to support the allegations in SOR ¶¶
1.a, 1.b, and 1.c. Those established facts, in turn, raise a security concern addressed
by Guideline C of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines. Specifically, the government is
concerned that, “[w]hen an individual acts in such a way as to indicate a preference for
a foreign country over the United States, then he or she may be prone to provide
information or make decisions that are harmful to the interests of the United
States.”(AG ¶ 9) More specifically, the record requires consideration of Guideline C
disqualifying condition at AG ¶ 10(a)(1) (possession of a current foreign passport).
After living in the United States for more than 30 years, and more than 10 years after
becoming a U.S. citizen, Applicant obtained and still holds a valid Iranian passport. It
allows him to travel as an Iranian citizen despite his U.S. citizenship, and his reluctance
to surrender it reflects Applicant’s divided preference between the U.S. and Iran. 
The resulting security concerns in this case might be mitigated if the use of his
passport were sanctioned by the U.S. government or if he had relinquished or
destroyed the passport. (See AG ¶ 11(d): use of a foreign passport is approved by the
cognizant security authority; and AG ¶ 11(e): the passport has been destroyed,
surrendered to the cognizant security authority, or otherwise invalidated) However,
neither is the case here. In fact, Applicant wishes to retain his Iranian passport so he
can continue to travel to Iran and visit relatives. Further, absent any post-naturalization
exercise of his rights as an Iranian citizen, Applicant’s foreign citizenship, based solely
on his parents’ citizenship (see AG ¶ 11(a)) would not be disqualifying. But an act in
furtherance of a right or privilege of foreign citizenship after naturalization, such as
Applicant’s possession and use of his Iranian passport since 2001, makes such
mitigation unavailable. Mitigation might also be available if Applicant expressed a
willingness to renounce his Iranian citizenship. (see AG ¶ 11(b)) However, Applicant
has not made such an expression and affirmatively stated his desire to continue
8
possession of his passport for ease of travel to Iran. Accordingly, none of the Guideline
C mitigating conditions apply, and I resolve this guideline against Applicant.
Foreign Influence. The government also stated as reasons for denying
Applicant’s request for a clearance the fact his mother (SOR ¶ 2.a) and his brother
(SOR ¶ 2.b) are citizens of and reside in Iran. Available information is sufficient to
support these allegations. The established facts, in turn, raise a security concern
addressed by Guideline B (AG ¶ 6) of the Revised Adjudicative Guidelines.
Specifically, the government’s position is that
[f]oreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a
risk of terrorism.
Applicant has held a security clearance since about 1991. For ten years
thereafter, the circumstances of his foreign citizenship and foreign ties, which were
known to the government at the time his clearance was granted, did not change.
However, beginning in 2001, as alleged in SOR ¶ 2.d, he began to travel to Iran to see
his mother and siblings, in addition to regular telephonic contact. He has stated that he
has ties to Iran independent of his mother’s presence there, and all of the information
here suggests he is likely to travel there in the future. Contact with his mother and
brother, and to a lesser extent, his extended family who are citizens of and reside in
Iran, may be disqualifying “if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” (see ¶ AG 7(a)) In
assessing whether these facts present a heightened risk, I have considered the fact that
Applicant has regular contact with his mother and brother. I have also considered the
repressive nature of the Iranian government towards its own people, particularly where
dual U.S.-Iranian citizens are concerned. I have also considered Iran’s sponsorship of
international terrorism, aggressive economic espionage and foreign intelligence
activities, all of which are conducted in furtherance of its strategic, political, and
economic interests hostile and opposed to those of the U.S. and its allies. 
As to the allegation in SOR ¶ 2.c regarding the possible inheritance of property in
Iran, for the same reasons stated above regarding SOR ¶ 1.d, I find for the Applicant.
Also, as to the SOR ¶ 2.d allegation that Applicant traveled to Iran in 2001, 2003 and
2005, that information is uncontroverted but not, by itself, disqualifying. Rather, it is
evidence of Applicant’s ties to his family in Iran. Accordingly, I find for the Applicant as
to SOR ¶¶ 2.c and 2.d. Nonetheless, available information does not support any of the
mitigating conditions listed at AG ¶ 8. Applicant has not shown that his relationship with
his family is anything but close or that their presence in Iran, which is governed by a
repressive regime with interests hostile to the U.S., may not potentially be used to
 See footnote 5, supra.10
 See footnote 6, supra. 11
9
pressure or coerce Applicant to act in a manner contrary to U.S. interests. On balance, I
conclude Applicant has failed to overcome the adverse information presented by the
government.
Whole Person Concept. 
I have evaluated the facts presented and have applied the appropriate
adjudicative factors under Guidelines B, C and E. I have also reviewed the record
before me in the context of the whole person factors listed in AG ¶ 2(a). Applicant is a
mature, responsible, and accomplished professor whose work at a U.S. university
requires he be allowed access to classified information. Until he obtained and used a
foreign passport, he had held a security clearance without incident for nearly 20 years.
His work at the university and with various military and civilian organizations has been
highly-regarded. Applicant has family and financial contacts over the past 30 years in
the United States that suggest he is fully engaged as a U.S. citizen and will remain here
after retirement. However, his recent acquisition of a foreign passport and increased
contacts with family members in Iran now indicates he has divided preferences between
Iran and the United States. His conduct has been recent, undertaken voluntarily and is
likely to continue. As such, it casts doubt on his willingness or ability to protect the
government’s interests free of foreign interests or influence. A fair and commonsense
assessment  of all available information shows Applicant has not overcome the doubts,10
raised by the government’s information, about his continued suitability for access to
classified information. Because protection of the national interest is paramount in these
determinations, such doubts must be resolved in favor of the government.11
Formal Findings
Formal findings on the allegations set forth in the SOR, as required by section
E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline C: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a - 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d - 1.e: For Applicant
Paragraph 2, Guideline B: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a - 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c - 2.d: For Applicant
10
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: FOR APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: For Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the foregoing, it is not clearly consistent with the national interest
for Applicant to have access to classified information. His request for a security
clearance is denied.
                            
                                                    
MATTHEW E. MALONE
Administrative Judge
