 
 
 
 
1
                                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE   
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  ) ISCR Case No. 07-08047 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
 
 
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
DAM, Shari, Administrative Judge: 
 
 Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, and exhibits, eligibility for access 
to classified information is granted. 
 
On April 27, 2006, Applicant submitted a security clearance application (e-QIP). 
On February 8, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
(Financial Considerations) and Guideline E (Personal Conduct). The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
 
 Applicant answered the SOR on or about March 10, 2008, and waived his right to 
a hearing. The Department subsequently exercised its right to request a hearing. DOHA 
 
 
 
 
2
assigned the case to me on December 4, 2008, and issued a Notice of Hearing on 
December 16, 2008. The case was heard on January 14, 2009, as scheduled. 
Department Counsel offered exhibits (GE) 1 through 6 into evidence without objection. 
Applicant testified, called one character witness, and offered exhibits (AE) A through M 
into evidence without objection. At the conclusion of the hearing, I left the record open 
until January 28, 2009, to give Applicant an opportunity to submit additional information. 
On January 27, 2009, Applicant submitted exhibits AE N through Z, which were 
admitted into the record without objection by the Government. DOHA received the 
hearing transcript (Tr.) on January 26, 2009.                                                           
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his written Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted all allegations contained in 
Paragraph 1, except those in Paragraphs 1.a, 1.c, and 1.e. He admitted the allegations 
contained in Paragraph 2, but denied intentionally falsifying his security application. His 
admissions are incorporated into the following findings of fact: 
 
 Applicant is 37 years old and married. He and his wife have three children, ages 
16, 11 and 9. After completing high school, he started working in the aerospace 
industry. In April 1996, he left to take over his uncle’s automotive business. He owned 
and managed the business until April 2001, when he sold it because of a diminished 
income and financial difficulties. He was earning about $30,000 per year. He then 
obtained another position in the aerospace industry, which required him to travel 
extensively. In October 2004, he started working for his current employer, a federal 
contractor. He is a measurement technician and works on aircraft.  
 
  In April 2006, Applicant completed an e-QIP and was later granted an interim 
Secret clearance. In response to “Section 27: Your Financial Delinquencies (c) In the 
last 7 years, have you had a lien placed against your property for failing to pay taxes or 
other debts,” he failed to list the tax lien alleged in the SOR. In response to Section 27: 
Your Financial Delinquencies (d) In the last 7 years, have you had any judgment against 
you that have not been paid, he answered “no,” and failed to list the judgment alleged in 
the SOR. 
 
 In response to “Section 28: Your Financial Delinquencies (a). In the last 7 years, 
have you been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” he answered “no,” and failed 
to list any of the delinquent debts alleged in the SOR. He did not disclose any debts in 
response to subparagraph b of this section, inquiring if, “In the last 7 years, have you 
been over 90 days delinquent on any debt(s)?” 
   
 When Applicant completed his first security clearance application in 2006, he 
was unaware of his delinquent debts and had never reviewed his credit bureau report 
(CBR). His company did not provide him any assistance when he completed the form. 
(Tr. 79) He did not intentionally fail to disclose his financial delinquencies to the 
government. (Answer)  
 
 
 
 
 
3
 Sometime in late 2007, Applicant reviewed his CBR for the first time. He was 
very surprised at the scope of his delinquent debts that began accumulating in 2000.  
(GE 2) He attributes the delinquent debts to a failed business and extensive traveling for 
his previous job. During the time that he was away from home, his wife handled the 
finances along with all of the other household duties, resulting in unpaid bills and marital 
difficulties. (Tr. 38-39) After learning of the financial situation, he immediately began 
addressing the delinquencies. (Tr. 42-43)  
 
 Applicant’s wife testified and confirmed the underlying reasons leading to the 
delinquent debts. She was responsible for taking care of their three children, handling 
the household budget, and paying the bills while Applicant was gone. At times, she fell 
behind in managing the finances and failed to tell Applicant about it. (Tr. 39; 72) Since 
working for his current employer, Applicant no longer travels and has assumed 
responsibility for paying the bills and managing the finances. Their marriage has also 
improved. (Tr. 85-95)  
 
Based on CBRs, dated October 2006, December 2007, March 2008, and 
January 2009, the SOR alleged eleven debts, totaling about $15, 280. The status of the 
debts is as follows:  
 
1. The $181 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.a was owed to a cell phone company. It is 
paid. (GE 6) 
 
2. The $2,603 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.b is owed to a credit card company. 
Applicant paid $100 on January 23, 2009, leaving a balance of $2,499. He 
spoke to the company, which offered him a settlement for 50% of the balance. 
He intends to pay the debt with his 2008 tax refund. (AE O; Tr. 44)     
 
3. The $60 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.c was owed to a telephone company. It is 
paid. (GE 6) 
 
4. Applicant has formally disputed the $160 alleged in SOR ¶ 1.d. (AE T) 
 
5. The $3,124 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.e was a tax lien. It has been paid and the 
lien is released. (AE I)  
 
6. Applicant formally disputed the $170 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.f because he 
does not recognize it. (AE R; Tr. 50)   
 
7. The $160 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.g is paid. He called the company to obtain 
a zero balance verification, but has not yet received it. (Tr. 51; AE P) 
 
8. Applicant was unfamiliar with the $33 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.h and disputed 
it. (GE 3)    
 
 
 
 
 
4
9. Applicant disputed the $7,393 debt listed in SOR ¶ 1.i. He filed a complaint 
with the appropriate attorney general’s office, alleging that his payment of 
$350 previous resolved the car lease matter.1 (AE K; Tr. 52) It does not 
appear on the January 2009 CBR. (GE 6) 
 
10.  The April 2001 $600 default judgment alleged in SOR ¶ 1.j is owed to a 
previous automotive customer and is unpaid. Applicant attempted to locate 
her to resolve the matter, but has been unable to find her. (Tr. 55) He 
disputed it and it no longer appears on his January 2009 CBR. 
 
11. The $733 debt alleged in SOR ¶ 1.k is paid. (AE N)  
 
 In summary, Applicant has paid or taken steps to resolve the eleven debts. He is 
willing and financially able to pay any of the debts he has disputed, should it be 
determined that he owes the debts. (Tr. 70-72) 
 
 Applicant has assumed responsibility for paying the household bills. According to 
his budget, he has a net monthly income of approximately $4,400 and expenses of 
$3,400, leaving approximately $1,000 for additional expense. (AE Y) Since assuming 
managing the finances, he routinely pays the bills on-line when they arrive. He has not 
incurred additional delinquent debt for a long time and uses only one credit card. (Tr. 
74) He believes his financial problems were limited to that period of time when he 
owned a business and later when he was traveling. He does not envision similar 
problems occurring in the future. (Tr. 73)  
  
 Applicant submitted a copy of his Performance Management Process for 2008. 
Overall, he has received good ratings and in some areas is “exceeding expectations.” 
(AE E) A colleague, for over seven years, considers him to be a loyal, dependable, and 
an asset to the unit. (AE D). A co-worker for five years commented on Applicant’s 
“upstanding work ethic and an extraordinary detail for quality.” (AE W) Applicant’s direct 
manager for five years finds Applicant “to be loyal, honorable, hardworking, dependable 
and highly skilled in his areas of expertise.” (AE C) The plant manager is highly 
impressed with Applicant’s work relationships, skill and dedication. He wrote, “I feel 
confident in saying that he is capable of handling any situation with thoughtfulness, 
maturity and level-headiness. He has consistently responded in many situations with 
ethical and “common sense” solutions that were based on “Doing the Right Thing” for 
Customer and Company.” (AE B) 
  
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
                                            
1The June 2006 and December 2007 CBRs provided by the Government list two separate lease 
debts, one owed to LFG and one to Cit/Lease.  The Cit/Lease is paid or closed on each CBR. AE K 
addresses the LFG account listed in the SOR. Both are now resolved.  
 
 
 
 
5
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and commonsense decision. According to AG ¶ 2(c), 
the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as the 
“whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, reliable 
information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in making a 
decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the “applicant is 
responsible for presenting witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. The applicant 
has the ultimate burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable security decision.” Section 7 
of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of the national 
interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant 
concerned.”  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
The security concern relating to the guideline for Financial Considerations is set 
out in AG ¶ 18:       
 
 
 
 
 
6
Failure or inability to live within one=s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.  
 
AG ¶ 19 describes two conditions that could raise a security concern and maybe 
be disqualifying in this case:  
 
(a) an inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and   
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant began accumulating a significant amount of delinquent debt between 
2000 and 2001 after his business failed and he then worked at a position, requiring him 
to travel and be away from home. Some of the debts were not addressed or resolved 
until 2008. The evidence is sufficient to raise these two potentially disqualifying 
conditions. 
 
After the Government produced substantial evidence supporting the two 
disqualifications, the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence and prove 
mitigation of the security concerns. AG ¶ 20 includes six conditions that could mitigate 
security concerns arising from financial difficulties: 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; 
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
 
 
 
 
7
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue; and 
(f) the affluence resulted from a legal source of income. 
Applicant=s financial indebtedness arose around 2000 when his business failed 
and later when he relied on his wife to manage the finances while traveling for work. 
After learning of the problems in late 2007, he began to address them. Both of those 
circumstances are unlikely to occur in the future and do not cast doubt on his current 
reliability or trustworthiness. AG ¶ 20(a) is applicable. Some of Applicant’s financial 
problems are attributable to a failed business, which was a situation beyond his control. 
However, there is no evidence that while accumulating the debts he took steps to 
manage his obligations. Hence, AG ¶ 20(b) has limited application. Although he has not 
obtained credit counseling, he has addressed the eleven debts listed in the SOR, and 
his current budget is sufficient to cover any of the outstanding disputed debts. Thus, 
there are “clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is under control,” 
warranting the application of AG ¶ 20(c). Applicant paid six of the eleven debts and is 
attempting to resolve the others. His actions demonstrate a good-faith effort to resolve 
the debts, triggering the application of AG ¶ 20(d). 
Applicant disputed five debts and provided supporting documentation thereby 
establishing the application of AG ¶ 20(e). The record evidence does not support the 
application of AG ¶ 20(f). 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
The security concern pertaining to the guideline for Personal Conduct is set out 
in AG ¶ 15: 
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process. 
 
The Government alleged in SOR ¶¶ 2.a through 2.d that Applicant falsified 
answers to four questions on his e-QIP, in that he failed to disclose debts over 90 and 
180 days old, a tax lien and a judgment. The Government contended that those 
omissions may raise a security concern and be disqualifying under AG ¶ 16(a):  
 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
 
 
 
 
8
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
 
Applicant admitted that he failed to include the information in the e-QIP, but denied 
that he intentionally omitted the information.  
When a falsification allegation is controverted or denied, the government has the 
burden of proving it. Proof of an omission, standing alone, does not establish or prove 
an applicant’s state of mind when the omission occurred. An administrative judge must 
consider the record evidence as a whole to determine whether there is direct or 
circumstantial evidence concerning an applicant’s state of mind at the time the omission 
occurred. See ISCR Case No. 03-09483 at 4 (App. Bd. Nov. 17, 2004) (explaining 
holding in ISCR Case No. 02-23133 at 5 (App. Bd. Jun. 9, 2004)). 
 
Applicant was unaware of the delinquencies until he reviewed his credit report for 
the first time in December 2007, which was after he completed his e-QIP. Up to that 
time, his wife had been managing the finances, and unbeknownst to him many of the 
bills had not been paid. Given his wife’s candid testimony, confirming that she had not 
told him about the debts, his explanation for not disclosing the financial information is 
credible. The omission of the information was not intentional. Hence, the evidence does 
not establish deliberate falsification. This Guideline is found in favor of Applicant. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a). They include the following:  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must include an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is a 37-year-old man, who 
began experiencing financial difficulties between 2000 and 2001. Upon learning of the 
delinquent debts, he promptly began addressing them, demonstrating his commitment 
to responsible financial management. According to both his supervisor and plant 
 
 
 
 
9
manager, he exhibits similar characteristics at work. His supervisor is aware of the 
Government’s security concerns, diminishing a potential for coercion or manipulation. 
The Appeal Board in ISCR Case No. 04-09684 at 2-3 (App. Bd. Jul. 6, 2006), noted that 
“an applicant is not required to show that she has completely paid off her indebtedness, 
only that she has established a reasonable plan to resolve her debts and has ‘taken 
significant actions to implement that plan.’” Applicant’s current income and budget are 
solid, indicating that he appears to be living within his means and resolving his 
obligations. 
 
Overall, the record evidence leaves me without questions as to Applicant’s 
eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude 
Applicant mitigated the security concerns arising under financial considerations and 
personal conduct guidelines.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a through 1.k:  For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline E:    FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 2.a through 2.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the interests of national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a 
security clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
SHARI DAM 
Administrative Judge 
