 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-10940 
 SSN:  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Emilio Jaksetic, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Kristen Ittig, Esq.  
Avi M. Baldinger, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline B, 
Foreign Influence. Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance is granted. 
 
On July 14, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under 
Guidelines B. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of 
Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on August 18, 2008, and requested a 
hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 2, 
2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 8, 2008, and after coordinating 
the date with both sides I convened the hearing as scheduled on January 13, 2009. The 
 
2 
 
 
government offered Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9. Applicant did not object and they were 
admitted. The government also requested administrative notice be taken on exhibits 
marked as Hearing Exhibit (HE) I through III, which was granted. Applicant testified and 
offered Exhibits (AE) A through F. Department Counsel did not object and they were 
admitted. Applicant also offered a post-hearing request for administrative notice of HE 
IV through HE VI. Department Counsel’s response is HE VII. The request is partially 
granted. I have considered for administrative notice purposes the source documents 
provided as hearing exhibits by both parties. I have considered the persuasive briefs 
and the other documents that were not from official U.S. Government sources as 
evidentiary documents. DOHA received the transcript of the hearing (Tr.) on January 
26, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant’s admissions to the allegations in the SOR are incorporated herein. In 
addition, after a thorough and careful review of the pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, I 
make the following findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is a 28-year-old college graduate. She was born in the U.S., is a U.S. 
citizen, and is married to a U.S. citizen. After college, Applicant worked as a mental 
health counselor for approximately nine months before returning to school to become a 
paralegal in 1998. She continued to work and then attended law school at night from 
1999 to 2003, when she graduated and passed the bar. She worked for a small law firm 
for approximately two years before joining a consulting company that has contracts with 
the Department of Defense.1  
 
 Applicant’s father was born and raised in Lebanon. He moved to the U.S. in 1970 
to attend school. After completing his college education he worked in the U.S. for a 
period of time. He married his wife, a native born U.S. citizen in 1973. He became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen in 1977. He does not hold a Lebanese passport, but under 
Lebanese laws he is considered a Lebanese citizen and it also considers his children 
citizens of that country, without any action on their part. It is immaterial if they do not 
hold passports or renounce their citizenship, they are still considered Lebanese citizens. 
At one time, as a minor, Applicant held a Lebanese passport, so she could travel easily 
to Lebanon. The passport has expired and been destroyed. Her father’s passport also 
has been destroyed. Neither Applicant nor her father considers themselves dual citizens 
of the U.S. and Lebanon. Applicant’s brother was born in the U.S. and has the same 
citizenship status as Applicant. He is married to a U.S. citizen and they reside in a 
neighboring state with their ten-month old son. All of Applicant’s immediate family are 
citizens and residents of the U.S. Applicant has formally renounced her ancestral 
citizenship. Applicant has no interest in being recognized as a Lebanese citizen and 
professed her loyalty only to the U.S. Applicant’s father also professed his loyalty only to 
the U.S and no other country.2  
                                                          
1 Tr. 31-43. 
 
2 Tr. 43-46, 53, 59-63, 94-99, 126-133, 140-143. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s father is employed by a Lebanese owned foundation (Foundation) 
and he serves as the president of its U.S. division. The Foundation is a non-profit 
educational foundation properly registered under the tax laws of the U.S. It is a separate 
Foundation not affiliated with any Lebanese companies. Applicant’s father was asked by 
a Lebanese businessman and his family to form the Foundation in 1978. The 
Foundation is nonpartisan, nonsectarian, and philanthropic. It identifies qualified and 
worthy Lebanese students wishing to study abroad and coordinates their interests and 
needs with approximately 340 colleges and universities. The Foundation’s Board of 
Directors are American officials and members of the American business community, 
some of whom are former senators and political appointees of the U.S. government. He 
has been affiliated with the family and the Foundation since its founding. The U.S. 
Foundation has no contact with the Lebanese government.3  
 
The parent company of the Foundation is also owned by the same Lebanese 
family. The father of that family became the prime minister of Lebanon. He was 
assassinated in 2006. Applicant’s father still has some contact with other members of 
the family due to his responsibilities with the Foundation. One of the family members is 
a member of parliament. He has some dealings with this person only as it relates to the 
educational commitments of the Foundation. The Foundation and Applicant’s father do 
not have dealings with the Lebanese government and he is not involved in any of the 
politics of Lebanon.4  
 
Applicant met the woman who is a member of parliament one time at a reception 
when she was in high school. She also met a brother of that family during trips to 
Lebanon. The meetings were at large luncheon receptions of a least 20-30 people. She 
did not have private conversations, but rather was one of many people attending. Due 
to her father’s position as the president of the Foundation, he gets invited to many 
receptions in his official capacity. These are obligatory events and he does not have 
personal relationships with the attendees. Applicant likewise has met some dignitaries, 
but does not have personal relationships with them.5  
 
The parent company of the Foundation is international in nature and has offices 
in other countries throughout the world. The parent company’s headquarters are located 
in Saudi Arabia. Applicant’s father sits on the Board of Directors and Executive Board of 
the parent company and consults on policy issues regarding the financial aspects of the 
company. The parent company is a privately held company, owned by the same 
Lebanese family that owns the Foundation and does not have any government affiliation 
or ties with any country. The company has clients worldwide. Applicant travels to Saudi 
Arabia when there is a Board of Director’s meeting.6  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
3 Tr. 46-59, 100-112, 133-135, 144-149. 
 
4 Tr. 100-112, 144-153. 
 
5 Tr. 54-59, 100-112, 133-139, 149-153, 158-162. 
 
6 Tr. 101, 133-139, 144-153. 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant’s father’s contact with the parliamentary family member is not political, 
but rather because of her interest in the continuing success of the Foundation. 
Applicant’s father may see her at social events, but she is not a personal friend. He 
travels to Lebanon several times a year due to Foundation’s business and board 
meetings. While there he will visit family that still lives in Lebanon.7  
 
Applicant’s father at one time owned land in Lebanon that was titled in both of his 
children’s names. Until recently, Applicant was unaware that there was land in her 
name. Her father sold the land and no longer owns any land in Lebanon. Applicant does 
not have any financial interests in Lebanon, nor does any of the rest of her immediate 
family. All of Applicant’s parent’s assets are in the U.S.8  
 
Applicant has a large extended family, both in the U.S. and abroad. Her father 
has seven siblings who have various citizenships, including U.S., Lebanese, and 
French, who live in various countries around the world, to include the U.S., Lebanon, 
France and Saudi Arabia. These seven siblings collectively have 25 children with the 
same citizenships and residences, plus some others residences in Qatar, Canada, and 
the United Arab Emirates. Applicant’s mother has four brothers and collectively 13 
children, all of whom are U.S. born citizens.  
 
Applicant has had sporadic contact with different relatives in her extended family. 
When she lived with her parents she had more frequent contact and received updates 
on her relatives. She is not close to her overseas relatives. She exchanged emails with 
some family members a few times a year. Since her marriage she only has occasional 
physical contact with relatives living in the U.S. and none with those overseas. Her 
email contact is also less frequent. 
 
Applicant traveled to Lebanon during several summer vacations when she was in 
high school and college. Her last trip was in 2003 for a weekend to attend a cousin’s 
wedding and later the same summer for another cousin’s wedding.  
 
All of Applicant’s family members on her mother’s side are U.S. citizens residing 
in the U.S.  
 
Applicant has two cousins from her father’s side who are U.S. citizens residing in 
the U.S. One other cousin lives in the U.S. and is in the process of obtaining a green 
card. Three cousins are citizens and residents of France. One uncle is a U.S. citizen 
who splits his residence between the U.S. and Lebanon. One cousin is a citizen and 
resident of Canada.9  
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
7 Tr. 56-59, 100-109, 133-139, 149-153. 
 
8 Tr. 63-64, 99-100, 113, 124-126, 140, 157. 
 
9 Tr. 65-89, 115-121. 
 
 
5 
 
 
Applicant’s other uncles and aunts are citizens and residents of Lebanon. She 
also has cousins who are citizens and residents of Lebanon.10  
 
 Applicant has a cousin who is a citizen of Lebanon and resides in the U.A.E.11 
 
 Applicant has five cousins who are citizens of Lebanon and reside in Saudi 
Arabia.12 
 
 Applicant has a cousin who is a citizen of Lebanon and resides in Qatar.13 
 
 Applicant has a cousin who is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Lebanon. Her 
cousin’s wife is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Tunisia. They reside in the U.S.14  
 
 Applicant has a cousin who is a Palestinian national, has a U.S. green card and 
resides in the U.S.15 
 
 Applicant has another cousin whose wife is a dual citizen of the U.S. and 
Lebanon. She also has three cousins who are citizens of Lebanon and currently reside 
in the U.S.16  
 
 Applicant knows who her relatives are and except for a few cousins around her 
age, she has minimal contact with many of them and no contact with others. She may 
hear about their well-being from her father, but only in a customary family situation. She 
traveled to Lebanon twice in 2003 to attend two cousins’ weddings. The two cousins 
she considers herself closer to than other cousins. Some of her other cousins she has 
had no contact with at all.17  
 
 None of Applicant’s family members work for the governments of their countries 
or other countries. She has two cousins that she is closer to than the others because 
they are close in age and were in the U.S. for awhile when Applicant was growing up so 
she got to know them. The last time she saw one was in 2007 when he came to the U.S 
for a visit and she saw him for a day. The other cousin she has not seen since 2003. All 
                                                          
10 Id. 
 
11 Id. 
 
12 Id. 
 
13 Id. 
 
14 Id. 
 
15 Id. 
 
16 Id. 
 
17 Tr. 65-89, 90-91, 97, 115-121. 
 
6 
 
 
of her other cousins she has no physical contact with. She does not telephone them and 
has only very occasional email contact, usually to send a photo.18 
 
 Applicant credibly testified that although she has relatives that live in Lebanon 
and it is half of her ancestral heritage, she has no loyalty to the country and would not 
do anything to compromise her loyalty to the U.S., even if requested by a relative. She 
also credibly testified she would not do anything regarding her father’s business that 
would conflict with the U.S. interests.19  
 
 Applicant provided character witnesses who testified on her behalf. She also 
provided character letters from people who know her and who hold top secret 
clearances and access to sensitive compartmented information. They attest to her 
loyalty, professionalism, trustworthiness, reliability, honesty, dedication, diligence, 
maturity, responsibility and ethics. I have considered all of the letters.20 
 
Lebanon21 
 
Lebanon is a parliamentary democracy in which people have the constitutional 
right to change their government. Due to civil war the exercise of political rights were 
precluded until 1992. Lebanon has a free-market economy and a strong laissez-faire 
commercial tradition. The economy is service-oriented. The U.S. enjoys a strong 
exporter position with Lebanon and is its fifth largest source of imported goods. More 
than 160 offices representing U.S. businesses operate in Lebanon. Since the lifting of 
passport restrictions in 1997, a number of large U.S. companies have opened branch or 
regional offices in Lebanon.  
 
The foreign policy of Lebanon reflects its geographic location, the composition of 
its population and its reliance on commerce and trade. Its foreign policy is heavily 
influenced by neighboring Syria, which has also long influenced Lebanon’s internal 
policies as well. Lebanon, like most Arab states, does not recognize Israel, with which it 
has been technically at war since Israel’s establishment.  
 
Lebanon has had some human rights problems including the arbitrary arrest and 
detainment of individuals and instances of arbitrary and unlawful deprivation of life, 
torture and other abuses. 
 
The terrorist group Hezbollah is a Lebanese-based radical Shi’a group and is 
designated by the U.S. as a “Foreign Terrorist Organization.” The Lebanese 
government recognizes Hezbollah as a “legitimate resistance group” and political party 
                                                          
18 Tr.141-142. 
 
19 Tr. 92-94. 
 
20 AE A, B, C, D, and E Tr. 121-124, 167-180. 
 
21 HE I and IV. 
 
7 
 
 
and until recently was represented by elected officials in the Lebanese parliament. 
Hezbollah also provides support to several Palestinian terrorist organizations and is 
known to be involved in numerous anti-US. and anti-Israeli terrorist attacks. Americans 
have been the targets of numerous terrorist attacks in Lebanon.  
 
 The United States seeks to maintain its traditionally close ties with Lebanon and 
to help preserve its independence, sovereignty, national unity and territorial integrity. 
The U.S. provides more than $400 million in aid to Lebanon and pledged $1 billion in 
additional aid. The aid reflects the importance the U.S. attaches to Lebanon’s 
development as a unified, independent and sovereign country. 
 
 U.S. citizens who also possess Lebanese nationality may be subject to laws that 
impose special obligations on them as Lebanese citizens. Presently there is a travel 
warning for U.S. citizens traveling to Lebanon due to the threat against westerners. 
 
Saudi Arabia22 
  
Saudi Arabia is a monarchy ruled by the Al Saud Family. The government is the 
monarchy and there are no political parties or national elections. There are significant 
human rights problems, including no right to peacefully change the government, 
infliction of severe pain by judicially sanctioned punishment, beatings and other abuses. 
Some prisoners are subjected to torture, abuse, violence, and forced confessions.  
 
The U.S. and Saudi Arabia share a common concern about security, oil exports 
and imports and sustainable developments. In addition to economic ties there is a 
longstanding security relationship that continues to be important to the U.S.-Saudi 
relationship. The U.S. military provides training and support in the use of weapons and 
other security–related services to the Saudi armed forces. There are serious concerns 
regarding terrorist activity by Saudis against westerns. Individuals and organizations 
based in Saudi Arabia have been designated by the U.S. government as providing 
financial and material support to Al-Qaeda and other terrorist groups. The Saudi 
government has confronted terrorism and extremist ideologies and has frozen assets 
and enforced travel bans on certain of their citizens.  
 
United Arab Emirate23 
 
 The United Arab Emirates is located in the Persian Gulf region, and it is a 
federation of emirates, each with its own ruler. The federal government is a 
constitutional republic headed by a president and council of ministers. There are no 
democratically elected legislative institutions or political parties, and no general election. 
Only 15-20% of the U.A.E.’s population are U.A.E. citizens. 
 
                                                          
22 HE II and V. 
 
23 AE III and IV. 
 
8 
 
 
 The U.A.E. contributes to the continued security and stability of the Gulf and the 
Straits of Hormuz. It is a leading partner in the campaign against global terrorism, 
providing assistance in military, diplomatic, and financial arenas since September 11, 
2001. U.A.E is a member of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC). Following Iraq’s 
invasion and attempted annexation of Kuwait, the U.A.E. has sought to rely on the 
GCC, the United States and other Western allies for its security. The U.A.E. believes 
that the Arab League needs to be restructured to become a viable institution and would 
like to increase strength and interoperability of the GCC defense forces.  
 
 The U.S. and U.A.E. have enjoyed friendly relations since 1971. Private 
commercial ties, especially oil, have developed into friendly government-to-government 
ties which include security assistance. The U.S. and U.A.E. relations increased 
dramatically when the U.S. led the campaign to end Iraqi occupation of Kuwait. The 
U.S. and U.A.E. launched a strategic partnership and it has been a key partner in the 
War on Terror. U.A.E. ports host more U.S. Navy ships than any port outside the U.S. 
The U.S. was the third country to establish formal diplomatic relations with the U.A.E. 
and has had an ambassador resident in the U.A.E. since 1974.  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
 
9 
 
 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
AG ¶ 6 expresses the security concern regarding foreign influence:  
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
AG ¶ 7 describes conditions that could raise a security concern and may be 
disqualifying. I have considered all of them and especially considered the following:  
(a) contact with a foreign family member, business or professional 
associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident in a 
foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign 
exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion;  
(b) connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that 
create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
 
10 
 
 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to 
help a foreign person, group, or country by providing that information; and  
(e) a substantial business, financial, or property interest in a foreign 
country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign operated business, which 
could subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or 
exploitation.  
Applicant has many extended family members who are citizens of Lebanon and 
reside in Lebanon and other countries, including Saudi Arabia and the U.A.E. She has 
some contact with some of these family members. She has attended weddings of two 
cousins. There is no evidence to suggest that her limited contact with her extended 
family that are not U.S. citizens and reside in other countries creates a heightened risk 
of foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure or coercion. All of her 
immediate family are U.S. citizens residing in the U.S. Her father works for the U.S. 
Division of a Foundation that provides educational opportunities to Lebanese students. 
There is no question he has business contacts in other countries, but there is no 
evidence that his business in any way creates a heightened risk. He sits on the Board of 
Directors of a parent company that has its headquarters in Saudi Arabia. However, 
there is no evidence that these business entities create a heightened risk or have ties to 
a foreign government. Applicant’s father has been a U.S. citizen for more than 30 years. 
Applicant and none of her immediate family have financial interests in any foreign 
country. Her connections to her foreign relatives do not create a potential conflict of 
interest between Applicant and her relatives or her ancestral country. Applicant has 
many family members who are U.S. citizens, by birth and by choice. None of them work 
for foreign governments. I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions and 
conclude none apply.  
In an abundance of caution, I have also analyzed all of the facts and considered 
all of the mitigating conditions for this security concern under AG ¶ 8 and especially 
considered the following: 
(a) the nature of the relationship with foreign persons, the country in which 
these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those persons in 
that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a 
position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, 
group, organization and interests of the U.S.;  
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of 
loyalty or obligation to the foreign person, group, government, or country is 
so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships 
and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any 
conflict of interests in favor of the U.S. interests; and  
 
11 
 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation.  
Applicant was born in the U.S. and has lived her entire life in the U.S. Like most 
Americans she has ancestral ties to other countries. Her father has been a naturalized 
citizen for more than 30 years and works for a Foundation that although it has ties to a 
family in Lebanon, it is a U.S. entity. There was no evidence to suggest that he is 
influenced by the politics of Lebanon. Merely knowing people from other countries does 
not create a heightened risk. Applicant has a large extended family, on both her father’s 
and mother’s side of the family. She does not know those that live in other countries 
very well and hears updates of their well-being only occasionally from her father. Others 
she is closer to depending on whether they spent time in the U.S. or if they are closer in 
her age. None are employed by the country where they are either citizens of or reside 
in. The countries noted have some issues with human rights. Her relatives do not have 
jobs or contacts with the government where they are citizens or reside. It is unlikely that 
Applicant would be placed in a position of having to choose between the interest of a 
distant relative or her father’s business and the U.S. It is very clear that even in the 
unlikely event such a situation would arise she would choose the interests of the U.S. 
Therefore, I find (a) applies.  
I have considered all of the facts and it is abundantly clear there is no conflict of 
interest because of Applicant’s complete and undivided loyalty to the U.S. She has no 
loyalty to any other country and never has. The diversity and the number of different 
countries that Applicant has some family ties also decreases the likelihood that she 
would harbor a sense of obligation to a distant relative living in a country she has never 
had ties to. Or in the case of Lebanon, her ties are to her cultural heritage and not to the 
policies of its government, much like most Americans. Even if there was remote 
possibility of a conflict of interest, it is clear Applicant would unequivocally resolve all 
potential conflicts of interests in favor of the U.S. Hence I find (b) applies. 
Applicant’s contact with her relatives in other countries is infrequent and although 
somewhat sentimental, it is casual. She has not divorced herself from acknowledging 
that she has a large family who lives all over the world. She can not control her family 
ties, but it does not diminish her loyalty to her country. Applicant does not deny her ties 
to her father’s side of her family, but many of those ties have some type of foot hold in 
the U.S. either by living in the U.S. or they are citizens, or they have green cards, etc. 
Also noted are the ties she has on her maternal side of the family. The sheer number 
and complexity of the different relationships with both sides of her family reduces any 
issues that would create a heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation. 
Therefore, I find (c) also applies. 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
 
12 
 
 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
 (1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant was born, educated and 
lived in the U.S. her entire life. She has many relatives; many are citizens of the U.S.; 
many are citizens of Lebanon; and some are citizens of other countries. The one 
constant of her international family is Applicant’s loyalty to her country, the U.S. Her 
father adopted the U.S. as his country. His job allows him to have contacts with foreign 
citizens of different countries. Those contacts are part of every international business 
venture. Applicant’s internationally diverse family, their citizenry and residency is broad. 
Her entire mother’s side of the family are citizens and residents of the U.S. Many of her 
father’s side of the family have connections to the U.S., either as citizens, residents, or 
green card holders. Saudi Arabia has strong ties with the U.S., but there have been 
issues of their commitment to fight terrorism. Lebanon equally has a strong relationship 
with the U.S., but also has terrorist factions. The U.A.E. is a committed U.S. ally. I 
considered Applicant’s maturity, demeanor and credibility. I found her testimony to be 
sincere and thoughtful. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with no questions about 
Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all these reasons, I 
conclude Appellant has mitigated the security concerns arising from the foreign 
influence security concerns raised under guideline B. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:    For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.r:   For Applicant 
      
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
