 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 )           
                                                                             )  ISCR Case No. 07-18220 
                                                                      )                 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Erik Borgstrom, Esquire,  Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
ANTHONY, Joan Caton, Administrative Judge: 
 
 After a thorough review of the case file, pleadings, testimony, and exhibits, I 
conclude that Applicant mitigated security concerns under Guideline G, Alcohol 
Consumption, but failed to mitigate the Government’s security concerns under Guideline 
H, Drug Involvement.   His eligibility for a security clearance is denied. 
 
Applicant submitted an Electronic Questionnaire for Investigations Processing 
(EQIP) on May 31, 2007. On September 24, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and 
Appeals (DOHA) issued Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security 
concerns under Guideline H, Drug Involvement and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. 
The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense 
Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program 
(January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) 
promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 
2 
 
 
 On October 13, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR in writing and elected to have 
a hearing before an administrative judge. The case was assigned to me on December 
15, 2008. I convened a hearing on January 21, 2009, to consider whether it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to grant or continue a security clearance for 
Applicant.  The Government called no witnesses and introduced eight exhibits, which 
were marked Ex. 1 through 8 and admitted to the record without objection.  Applicant 
testified on his own behalf, called one witness, and introduced 17 exhibits, which were 
marked Exs. A through Q. Applicant’s exhibits were admitted to the record without 
objection.  
 
DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) of the hearing on January 28, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 The SOR contains five allegations of disqualifying conduct under AG H, Drug 
Involvement (SOR ¶¶ 1.a. through 1.e.) and three allegations of disqualifying conduct 
under AG G, Alcohol Consumption (SOR ¶¶ 2.a through 2.c). In his Answer to the SOR, 
Applicant admitted the five Guideline H allegations and two of the three Guideline G 
allegations. He also provided additional information. Applicant’s admissions are 
admitted as findings of fact.   
 
 Applicant is 23 years old and single. In May 2008, he earned a bachelor’s degree 
in mechanical engineering. From approximately August 2003 until July 2007, Applicant 
worked intermittently as an intern for a defense contractor during summers and 
academic breaks. In his employment as an intern, he did not hold a security clearance 
but worked in program areas of military significance. Additionally, in August 2003, when 
he began work as an intern for his employer, Applicant agreed to be bound by the 
employer’s code of business conduct and ethics, including its drug-free workplace 
policy, which applied to all full-time and part-time employees. (Ex. 1; Ex. 8; Tr. 78-84.) 
 
 During his senior year in college, from August 2007 until May 2008, Applicant 
worked on a research team at his university to redesign a landing gear for an unmanned 
aircraft. The sponsor of the research project was the defense contracting firm which 
employed him as an intern and which currently employs him. When he graduated from 
college, the defense contracting firm hired him as a program specialist. At the time of 
his hearing, Applicant had worked full-time for the defense contractor since June 2008.  
He seeks a security clearance.  (Ex. G; Tr. 112, 131.) 
 
 Applicant began using and experimenting with illegal drugs when he was 15 
years old. Between November 2001 and January 2007, he used marijuana 150 times. 
Between the ages of 16 and 18, he used marijuana two times a week. In December 
2002, when he was about 17 years old, he used “mushrooms.” In March 2003, 
Applicant’s parents suspected he was using illegal drugs. They took him to a drug 
rehabilitation center to be tested. He tested positive for marijuana use. Thereafter, he 
entered a drug and alcohol counseling class for adolescents that met two or three times 
a week for two weeks. When he completed the drug and alcohol counseling program, 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant said to himself: “I need to stop, or at least severely limit my use.” He remained 
drug-free for one year. (Ex. 1; Tr. 64, 68, 88-89.) 
 
 In 2004, he used marijuana four times. He also used cocaine once in June 2004 
after graduating from high school. After he used cocaine, he felt guilty and remorseful. 
He avoided the people with whom he used cocaine.  However, he used marijuana again 
in 2005, and, in December 2005, when he was about 20 years old, he used the 
prescription drug Adderall illegally. After his illegal use of Adderall, he resolved never to 
use illegal drugs again. (Tr. 64-68, 86-87.) 
 
 In January 2007, when he was 21 years old, he traveled with a friend to a 
European country and, while there, used marijuana twice. He thought his marijuana use 
was legal in the European country. After his use of marijuana in January 2007, 
Applicant returned to his duties as an intern with his current employer. (Tr. 64-68, 83, 
85, 89.) 
 
 Applicant’s parents knew of his illegal use of marijuana in 2003.  After receiving 
the SOR in the fall of 2008, he told them of his use of mushrooms in 2002 and his illegal 
drug use since 2003. Applicant no longer has contact with the individuals with whom he 
used illegal drugs.  (Tr. 66, 90-92.)  
 
 Applicant began consuming alcohol at the age of fifteen. Although his use of 
alcohol has impaired his judgment in the past, he is confident he knows how to use 
alcohol prudently and safely. In October 2007, he responded to questions from an 
authorized investigator about his drinking habits. At that time, he stated that he drank 
alcohol about once a week and drank to intoxication about once a month. At his 
hearing, he stated he did not drink to intoxication as much as he did when he was in 
college.  He drank to intoxication at his college graduation in May 2008, at Thanksgiving 
in November 2008, and on New Year’s Eve, 2008. He has not been diagnosed as an 
alcohol abuser or as alcohol dependent.  (Ex. 2 at 5; Tr. 96-100.) 
 
 In May 2006, when he was 20 years old, Applicant was in a bar. He was asked 
by a police officer to show his personal identification to establish that he was old enough 
to drink legally. Applicant presented the officer with an identification card that was not 
his but which belonged to a person who was legally eligible to drink.  The officer cited 
him for False Documentation. Applicant was fined and sentenced to 16 hours of 
community service. (Ex. 6: Tr. 102-104.) 
 
 In September 2006, Applicant was arrested for underage drinking and charged 
with Purchase/Possess Alcohol, a misdemeanor offense. He paid a fine and took a two-
month alcohol safety awareness program from October 2007 to December 2007. He 
was not permitted to drink alcohol during the alcohol safety awareness program. (Ex. 4; 
Tr. 100-102,104-105.)      
 
 Applicant called a senior program manager from his employer to testify as a 
witness on his behalf. The witness stated that he and Applicant were friends. He said he 
 
4 
 
 
had known Applicant personally and professionally for six months. He further stated that 
Applicant was honest, possessed an outstanding character, and was an excellent 
example to all other new employees at the firm. He stated that Applicant told him of his 
drug use three or four months before the January 21, 2009 security clearance hearing. 
(Tr. 130-136.) 
 
 Applicant’s witness also provided a letter of character reference. In addition, 
Applicant submitted eight other letters of character reference on his behalf.  All of the 
letters of character reference praised Applicant as an outstanding young man of 
superior character who was honest, reliable, and trustworthy. Applicant stated that his 
witness was the only one of the nine persons who wrote letters of character reference 
who was fully aware of the specific disqualifying conduct alleged on the SOR.  (Ex. A 
through I; Tr. 92-94.)    
 
 Applicant also spoke highly of his own character, and he noted that the nine 
letters of character reference “reveal my true integrity, loyalty, and enthusiasm, as an 
overall good person, and dedication to a healthy lifestyle.”  (Tr. 14.) 
 
 Applicant emphasized his increased maturity, and he reported his involvement in 
numerous community activities and charitable service projects.  His plans for the future 
include paying off his student loans, marriage, and a graduate degree in business 
administration.  (Ex. Q; Tr. 14-18.) 
 
 Applicant tested negative in two random drug tests administered by his employer 
in May 2008 and August 2008. Additionally, he provided the following signed 
statements:  
 
Statement of intent:  January 2007 was the last time I used a drug.  I have 
since pledged to remain disassociated from any type of drug using 
associates or contacts, that I have change[d] and will avoid the 
environment where drugs were and are used, and that I will remain 
abstinent in the future. Again, I am trustworthy enough to protect classified 
information.  (Signed and notarized October 13, 2008) 
 
For clarification purposes: 
 
I understand that a violation of my above agreement would result in an 
automatic revocation of clearance.  (Signed and dated January 20, 2009. 
 
(Ex. M; Ex. N; Ex. O) 
 
                                                           Policies 
 
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
 
5 
 
 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, the administrative judge applies these guidelines in 
conjunction with the factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s 
over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. 
According to AG ¶ 2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of 
variables known as the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider 
all available, reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and 
unfavorable, in making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
                                           
Analysis 
 
Guideline H, Drug Involvement 
 
 Use of an illegal drug or misuse of a prescription drug can raise questions about 
an individual’s reliability and trustworthiness because it may impair judgment and 
because it raises questions about a person’s ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules, and regulations.  AG ¶ 24(a) defines drugs as “mood and behavior altering 
substances.”  The definition of drugs includes “(1) drugs, materials, and other chemical 
compounds identified and listed in the Controlled Substances Act of 1970, as amended 
(e.g., marijuana or cannabis, depressants, narcotics, stimulants, and hallucinogens), 
and (2) inhalants and other similar substances.”1 AG ¶ 24(b) defines drug abuse as “the 
illegal use of a drug or use of a legal drug in a manner that deviates from approved 
medical direction.” 
 
The relevant Guideline H security concern in this case is referenced at AG ¶ 
25(a) of the Drug Involvement guideline.  The record shows that Applicant’s admitted 
illegal use of marijuana began in November 2001, when he was 15 years old and 
continued until 2007, when he was 21 years old. During that time he also used cocaine 
once, Adderall once, and mushrooms once. He used illegal drugs while employed by a 
federal contractor. In 2003, his parents, who suspected he was using drugs, took him to 
a drug treatment center for a drug test. When he tested positive, he was placed in a 
drug counseling program for about two weeks. After completing the drug counseling 
program, he returned to drug use after one year. This conduct casts doubt on his 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment.  It also raises security concerns about 
his ability or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. I conclude that 
Applicant’s illegal drug use raises security concerns under AG ¶ 24 and AG ¶ 25(a). 
 
Two Guideline H mitigating conditions might apply to the facts of Applicant’s 
case.  If Applicant’s drug use happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or happened 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on his 
current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment, then AG ¶ 26(a) might be 
applicable in mitigation.  If Applicant demonstrated an intent not to abuse any drugs in 
the future by disassociation from drug-using associates and contacts, changing or 
avoiding the environment where drugs were used, abstaining from drug use for an 
appropriate period, and signing a statement of intent with the automatic revocation of 
his security clearance for any violation, then AG ¶ 26(b) might be applicable.  
 
The record shows that Applicant’s use of mushrooms, cocaine, and Adderall  
was infrequent and happened between 2002 and 2005. These brief episodes of drug 
 
1 Schedules l, ll, lll, lV, and V, as referred to in the Controlled Substances Act, are contained in 21 U.S.C. 
§ 812(c). Marijuana is a Schedule l controlled substance. See also Gonzales v. Raish, 545 U.S. 1 (2005) 
(discussing placement of marijuana on Schedule 1.)  Mushrooms is the street name for psilocybin or 
psilocin, which is a Schedule l controlled substance. See United States v. Hussein, 351 F.3d 9, 16 (1st Cir. 
2003 (mushrooms are a plant which may contain the Schedule l(c)15) and 1(c)(16) controlled substance 
psilocybin or psilocin.  Cocaine is a Schedule ll controlled substance.  
 
7 
 
 
                                           
use occurred under circumstances that are not likely to recur. I conclude that AG ¶ 
26(a) applies to SOR ¶¶ 1.c., 1.d., and 1.e. 
 
Applicant’s marijuana use, on the other hand, was more intense and covered a 
time span of over six years, from 2001 to 2007. It was the drug Applicant returned to 
after resolving at least twice to stop using drugs. Applicant’s use of marijuana was of 
sufficient duration to demonstrate a consistent lifestyle choice, despite cautionary drug 
counseling. Applicant stated he had disassociated from drug-using associates and 
avoided environments where drugs were used. He provided a signed statement of 
intent to abstain from all drug use, with automatic revocation of his security clearance 
for any violation. However, while Applicant stated he had not used marijuana since 
January 2007, he failed to provide evidence corroborating his statement about his 
abstinence from friends and others who knew him socially during the time of his drug 
use. Applicant stated he had changed his behavior and activities after his last use of 
marijuana in January 2007 and his subsequent decision to abstain from illegal drugs. 
These decisions are still somewhat recent and the lifestyle change is of insufficient 
duration to demonstrate a positive and permanent change in behavior. I conclude that 
AG ¶¶ 26(a) and 26(b) do not fully apply in mitigation to the security concerns raised by 
Applicant’s use of marijuana. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption, applies in this case to a determination of 
eligibility for access to classified information. Under Guideline G, “[e]xcessive alcohol 
consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable judgment or the failure to 
control impulses, and can raise questions about an individual’s reliability.” 
 
 I have considered all of the Alcohol Consumption Disqualifying Conditions.  I 
have especially considered AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c).2 
 
Applicant admitted alcohol consumption from age 15, and he admitted that his 
past consumption had impaired his judgment. In May 2006, when he was 20 years old, 
Applicant was cited for presenting false documentation to a police officer. Four months 
later, in September 2006, he was arrested and charged with under age possession of 
alcohol. He paid a fine and, in 2007, enrolled in an alcohol safety awareness program. 
These facts raise security concerns under AG ¶¶ 22(a) and 22(c). 
 
The Guideline G disqualifying conduct could be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(a) if 
“so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or does not cast doubt on the 
individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The disqualifying 
 
2 AG ¶  22(a) reads: “alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under the influence, 
fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or other incidents of concern, regardless of whether 
the individual is diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”  AG ¶ 22(c) reads: “habitual or 
binge consumption of alcohol to the point of impaired judgment, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.”   
 
8 
 
 
conduct could also be mitigated under AG ¶ 23(b) if “the individual acknowledges his or 
her alcoholism or issues of alcohol abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to 
overcome this problem, and has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol 
dependent) or responsible use (if an alcohol abuser).”  If “the individual is a current 
employee who is participating in a counseling or treatment program, has no history of 
previous treatment and relapse, and is making satisfactory progress,” then AG ¶ 23(c) 
might apply.  Finally, mitigation might be possible under AG ¶ 23 (d) if “the individual 
has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient counseling or rehabilitation along 
with any required aftercare, has demonstrated a clear and established pattern of 
modified consumption or abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, 
such as participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization and 
has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified medical professional or a 
licensed clinical social worker who is a staff member of a recognized alcohol treatment 
program.”   
 
 Applicant’s alcohol-related conduct occurred in adolescence and as a college 
student, when he was not old enough to drink alcohol legally. Now that he is of legal 
age to consume alcohol, he drinks alcohol about once a week. He drank to intoxication 
at his college graduation, Thanksgiving, and on New Year’s Eve. As an adult, he has 
not been cited for alcohol offenses, and he claims uses alcohol responsibly. He has not 
been diagnosed as alcohol dependent or as an abuser of alcohol.  I conclude that AG ¶ 
23(a) applies in mitigation to the facts of Applicant’s case and that AG ¶¶ 23(b), 23(c), 
and 23(d) do not apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
  Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
 I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. To his credit, Applicant himself 
 
9 
 
 
provided information about his drug and alcohol use that was alleged on the SOR. I 
conclude that Applicant’s underage alcohol consumption has been mitigated by the 
passage of time. Additionally, I conclude that his one-time uses of mushrooms in 2002, 
cocaine in 2004, and Adderall in 2005 were isolated uses of illegal drugs. However, he 
used marijuana 150 times between 2001 and January 2007.  After receiving drug 
counseling in 2003, he continued his use of marijuana. After his cocaine use in 2004, 
and after his use of Adderall in 2005, he resolved to stop using drugs, but returned, after 
time, to using marijuana. His last use of marijuana, in 2007, occurred two years after he 
resolved not to use illegal drugs again. 
 
 Additionally, Applicant used marijuana while employed by a government 
contractor and after he committed to his employer’s code of business conduct and 
ethics, including its drug-free workplace policy. His intermittent but repetitive marijuana 
use suggested a lifestyle choice. I conclude that insufficient time has passed to 
determine if Applicant will abstain from illegal use of marijuana in the future. 
  
 As a part of this whole person analysis, I have also considered the fact that 
Applicant requested letters of recommendation from nine individuals and apprised only 
one of those individuals of the totality of the SOR allegations of drug involvement and 
alcohol consumption. It is not clear what the other eight individuals might have written 
about Applicant if he had informed them of the facts alleged in the SOR. Because those 
assessments of his character were not based upon knowledge of the conduct that gave 
rise to the SOR allegations, they have less credibility, and I gave them less weight. 
 
Applicant’s resolve to abstain from illegal drug use will likely be demonstrated 
with the passage of time. He can reapply for a security clearance one year after the 
date that this decision becomes final.  If he wishes, he can produce new evidence that 
addresses the Government’s current security concerns.    
 
 Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions and doubts at the present 
time as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant mitigated security concerns related to alcohol 
consumption but failed to mitigate the security concerns arising from his drug 
involvement.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline H:   AGAINST  APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.b:   Against Applicant 
 
 
10 
 
 
  Subparagraph 1.c:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.d:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.e:   For Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.b:   For Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.c:   For Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
Joan Caton Anthony 
Administrative Judge 
