                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-17826 
  )  
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: John B. Glendon, Esquire, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro Se 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
RICCIARDELLO, Carol G., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to mitigate the government’s security concerns under Guideline 
J, Criminal Conduct, and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. Applicant’s eligibility for a 
security clearance is denied. 
 
On August 26, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued 
to Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline 
J, Criminal Conduct, and Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption. The action was taken 
under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry 
(February 20, 1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense 
Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as 
amended (Directive); and the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the 
President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of Defense for 
SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 22, 2008, and elected to 
have his case decided on the written record. Department Counsel submitted the 
government’s file of relevant material (FORM) on October 24, 2008. The FORM was 
 
1 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
                                                          
mailed to Applicant on October 29, 2008, and it was received on November 3, 2008. 
Applicant was afforded an opportunity to file objections and submit material in refutation, 
extenuation, or mitigation. Applicant did not object to the FORM and did not submit 
additional material. The case was assigned to me on January 21, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 Applicant admitted all of the allegations in the SOR. After a thorough and careful 
review of the pleadings, exhibits, and statements submitted, I make the following 
findings of fact. 
 
 Applicant is 31 years old and has worked for a federal contractor since 2004. He 
graduated from college in 2001. He is not married. He has a three-year-old daughter.  
 
 Applicant was arrested on or about June 8, 1998, and charged with one count of 
Reckless Handling of a Firearm and one count of Possession of Marijuana. The 
firearms charge was dismissed and he was found guilty of the marijuana charge. 
Applicant received a suspended sentence and a fine.  
 
 Applicant was arrested on or about July 1, 1999, and charged with Possession of 
a Controlled Substance with Intention to Distribute (cocaine). He was found guilty and 
sentenced to five years in jail, with the sentence suspended for all but four months of 
“shock incarceration.” He stated in his answer to interrogatories the following:  
 
 I never was a user, manufacturer, or a user of cocaine. The incident which 
I was arrested for charges me with distribution. Just for the record, I was 
never a cocaine supplier or distributor. Just someone trying to make some 
extra money, but went about it the wrong way.1 
 
  Applicant was arrested on or about September 4, 2001, and charged with Driving 
Under the Influence (DUI). He was fined and received a suspended sentence. His 
driver’s license was suspended for a year and he was ordered to attend an alcohol 
safety program.  
 
 Applicant was arrested on or about April 1, 2007, and charged with one count of 
Felony Eluding Police and Endangering Police or Police Car; one count of Driving While 
Intoxicated (DWI); one count of Reckless Driving, and one count of Improperly Stopping 
Vehicle. The Felony charge was reduced to a misdemeanor and he was fined $500. He 
pleaded guilty to DWI and was fined, sentenced to 12 months in jail with all but 20 days 
suspended. He received three years probation and his driver’s license was suspended 
for three years. He was ordered to attend an alcohol safety program. The remaining 
charges were dismissed.  
 
1 Item 6. 
 
3 
 
 
                                                          
 Applicant consumed alcohol, at times in excess and to intoxication, between at 
least September 4, 2001 and at least April 1, 2007. 
 
 In his answer to interrogatories Applicant stated he turned his life around and no 
longer participates in any illegal activities.2 He also wrote that he stopped using illegal 
substances in 2002 because he decided to grow up and he needed to do better.3 He 
checked the box on the interrogatory question that said he did not intend to consume 
alcohol beverages in the future.4 There was no amplifying information as to what recent 
steps Applicant has taken regarding his alcohol consumption. He is not participating in 
Alcoholics Anonymous.5 No other amplifying information was provided to show what 
Applicant has done substantively to change his life or mitigate the security concerns 
raised. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
2 AE 6. 
 
3 AE 7. 
 
4 AE 9. 
 
5 Id. 
 
4 
 
 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of 
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 sets out the security concern relating to criminal conduct:  
 
Criminal activity creates doubt about a person=s judgment, reliability, and 
trustworthiness. By its very nature, it calls into question a person=s ability 
or willingness to comply with laws, rules, and regulations. 
 
I have considered the disqualifying conditions under Criminal Conduct AG ¶ 31 
and especially considered: 
 
(a) a single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses; and  
 
(c) allegation or admission of criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person 
was formally charged, formally prosecuted or convicted; and 
 
(d) individual is currently on parole or probation. 
 
 Applicant was arrested five times in a nine year period from June 1998 to April 
2007. Three arrests were drug related and two involved alcohol. His last arrest was a 
felony charge of Eluding Police and Endangering Police or Police Car, as well as DWI, 
Reckless Driving and Improperly Stopping Vehicle. Applicant pled guilty as part of a 
plea agreement. The felony was reduced to a misdemeanor. He also pled guilty to the 
DWI, received 12 months in jail (all but 20 days suspended), and was placed on 
 
5 
 
 
probation for three years. Applicant is currently on probation. His probation continues 
until 2010. I find all of the above disqualifying conditions apply. 
 
I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions for criminal conduct under AG ¶ 
23 and especially considered the following: 
 
 (a) so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur 
and does not cast doubt on the individual’s reliability, trustworthiness, or 
good judgment;  
 
 (d) there is evidence of successful rehabilitation; including but not limited 
to the passage of time without recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or 
restitution, job training or higher education, good employment record, or 
constructive community involvement. 
 
 Applicant has a nine-year criminal history for drug and alcohol offenses, the most 
recent having occurred in 2007. He remains on probation for the most recent offenses 
until 2010. I find (a) does not apply because Applicant is still on probation and no 
evidence was offered to show his conduct is unlikely to recur. His repeated conduct 
over a significant period of years casts doubt on his reliability, trustworthiness and good 
judgment. 
 
 Applicant failed to provide any substantive evidence that he has changed his 
ways and is successfully rehabilitated. Not enough time has passed to come to this 
conclusion, nor is there any evidence in the record to reflect the contrary. I find (d) does 
not apply. 
 
Guideline G, Alcohol Consumption 
AG ¶ 21 expresses the security concern pertaining to alcohol consumption:  
Excessive alcohol consumption often leads to the exercise of questionable 
judgment or the failure to control impulses, and can raise questions about 
an individual's reliability and trustworthiness. 
 I have considered all of the disqualifying conditions under AG ¶ 22 including:  
 
(a) alcohol-related incidents away from work, such as driving while under 
the influence, fighting, child or spouse abuse, disturbing the peace, or 
other incidents of concern, regardless of whether the individual is 
diagnosed as an alcohol abuser or alcohol dependent.  
 
Applicant has two alcohol-related incidents in 2001 and 2007, for DUI and DWI. 
The above disqualifying condition applies.  
 
 
6 
 
 
 I have also considered all of the mitigating conditions under AG ¶ 23 and 
especially considered: 
 
 (a) so much time has passed, or the behavior was so infrequent, or it 
happened under such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur or 
does not cast doubt on the individual’s current reliability, trustworthiness, 
or good judgment; 
 
 (b) the individual acknowledges his or her alcoholism or issues of alcohol 
abuse, provides evidence of actions taken to overcome this problem, and 
has established a pattern of abstinence (if alcohol dependent) or 
responsible use (if an alcohol abuser); and 
 
 (d) the individual has successfully completed inpatient or outpatient 
counseling or rehabilitation along with any required aftercare, has 
demonstrated a clear and established pattern of modified consumption or 
abstinence in accordance with treatment recommendations, such as 
participation in meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar 
organization and has received a favorable prognosis by a duly qualified 
medical professional or a licensed clinical social worker who is a staff 
member of a recognized alcohol treatment program. 
 
I have considered Applicant’s statements that he has not consumed alcohol since his 
last alcohol-related arrest in 2007. Applicant did not provide any other credible evidence 
to show what he has done to overcome his issues with alcohol. He apparently was 
required to attend an alcohol safety program after his first alcohol-related, but did not 
heed its warnings. No evidence was presented to confirm any treatment program, 
attendance at Alcoholics Anonymous or a similar organization or any prognosis from a 
medical professional. Without supporting evidence Applicant’s latest alcohol-related 
incident is too recent to conclude another is unlikely to recur or that he has overcome 
his problem or is successfully rehabilitated. I find none of the above mitigating 
conditions apply. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which 
participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and 
other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; 
 
7 
 
 
(8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the 
likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security 
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration 
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.        
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Applicant is 31 years old and has a 
nine-year history of drug and alcohol abuse and criminal offenses. He remains on 
probation until 2010 for his latest criminal activity. Insufficient time has passed since his 
last offense and he has not provided any substantive evidence to convince me he is 
successfully rehabilitated. Overall the record evidence leaves me with serious questions 
and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For all 
these reasons, I conclude Applicant failed to mitigate the security concerns arising 
under the Guidelines for Criminal Conduct and Alcohol Consumption.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline J:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a-1.e:    Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Guideline G:    Against Applicant 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a-2.b.    Against Applicant 
   
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
 
                                                     
_____________________________ 
Carol G. Ricciardello 
Administrative Judge 
