 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 -------------------- ) ISCR Case No. 07-16388 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Greg D. McCormack, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guidelines E (Personal 
Conduct) arising from Applicant’s concealment of contacts with a citizen and resident of 
the Republic of China. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on July 5, 2006. On July 8, 
2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline E. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on July 16, 2008; answered it on August 12, 2008; 
and requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on 
 
2 
 
 
August 18, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on November 6, 2008, and 
the case was assigned to me on November 10, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on November 17, 2008, scheduling the hearing for December 8, 2008. Applicant 
retained counsel on November 28, 2008, and requested a continuance. On January 5, 
2009, DOHA issued a second notice of hearing, scheduling the hearing for February 2, 
2009. I convened the hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 through 3 
were admitted in evidence without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and 
submitted Applicant’s Exhibits (AX) A through C, which were admitted without objection. 
AX C consists of seven separate documents, which are labeled as AX C-1 through AX 
C-7. The record closed upon adjournment of the hearing on February 2, 2009. DOHA 
received the transcript (Tr.) on February 13, 2009. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant generally admitted the allegations in SOR, 
with some qualifications and explanation. His admissions in his answer and at the 
hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 65-year-old principal systems engineer for a federal contractor. He 
has worked for his current employer since September 2008 (Tr. 30). He has worked 
continuously for various federal contractors supporting the intelligence community since 
November 1981. He was a federal government employee from June 1974 to July 1979 
(AX A). He has held a clearance since June 1982 and eligibility for access to Sensitive 
Compartmented Information (SCI) for more than 20 years (Tr. 29). His current position 
requires only a secret clearance (AX B). 
 
 Applicant was married in December 1968 and divorced in August 1975. He 
remarried in September 1977 and was divorced in December 2001. He has two 
children, a 39-year-old daughter and a 22-year-old son. 
 
 In September 2004, Applicant used a Euro-Asian on-line dating service to start 
an email relationship with a 45-year-old citizen of the Republic of China, residing in 
mainland China. She claimed she worked as an optometrist in a local hospital (Tr. 32). 
They maintained weekly email contact until April 2005 (GX 2 at 6-7). The woman spoke 
limited English and used translation software to communicate with Applicant, and he 
learned some Chinese phrases to communicate with her (GX 2 at 8). At the time, 
Applicant held a top secret clearance with access to SCI (Tr. 32). 
 
 In April 2005, Applicant requested approval to travel to Hong Kong to meet the 
woman. His request was disapproved because of his intended meeting with a Chinese 
national, and he was advised to terminate all contact with her. He cancelled his hotel 
and airline reservations. He could not obtain a refund of the airfare, about $1,500, but 
he received a credit for the airfare on another trip. Applicant emailed the woman and 
told her he could not continue to see her because of his employment. He changed his 
email address and deleted all the emails and photographs she had sent him (GX 2 at 7; 
Tr. 38-39). 
 
3 
 
 
 
 In May 2005, Applicant decided he needed a vacation because of stress at work 
and disappointment about his breakup with the Chinese woman. He requested vacation 
time from late June to early July 2005, but did not disclose that he intended to visit Hong 
Kong (GX 2 at 7). Although he testified he did not schedule the trip in order to meet with 
his Chinese friend, he emailed her about two weeks before traveling and told her his 
travel dates and where he would be staying (Tr. 40). At the hearing, he admitted his 
email was an implied invitation (Tr. 66). He testified he was “full of fear” on the flight to 
Hong Kong because he knew he had done something wrong (Tr. 44). Nevertheless, his 
friend met him at his hotel and they spent about a week together (Tr. 43). He admitted 
he did not request approval of his trip because he knew it would be denied (Tr. 58). 
 
 Applicant submitted a trip report after returning from Hong Kong, but he did not 
report his contact with his Chinese friend (Tr. 43, 64). He testified he did not disclose 
the foreign contact because he was “unbelievably full of fear” that he would lose his 
clearance, his job and his career (Tr. 52). His son was starting college, he was caring 
for his aged mother, and he had financial obligations arising from his previous 
marriages (Tr. 44). 
 
 After returning from Hong Kong in early July 2005, Applicant proposed marriage 
to the Chinese woman and she accepted. He contacted the chief of security for the 
agency he was supporting and asked if he could obtain a waiver of the restrictions on 
foreign contact if the person contacted was his fiancée (Tr. 45). He was informed that 
he could not continue his foreign contact without giving up his current classified 
assignment. He emailed the woman and informed her that he could not continue their 
relationship (Tr. 46). She sent one or two more emails to him but he did not respond 
(GX 2 at 9).  
 
 In late July 2005, Applicant’s supervisor informed him that he presented too 
much of a security risk to continue working on his assigned project (GX 1 at 28; GX 2 at 
10). He left that employer in September 2005 and found employment with another 
federal contractor (GX 1 at 16; AX A). 
 
 In July 2006, Applicant submitted an application to continue his clearance. In 
response to question 22, pertaining to his employment record, he disclosed he had left 
his previous job because of the risk presented by his foreign contacts. He explained: 
 
Security chief denied my request for foreign travel to Hong Kong due to 
foreign contact. I had completed the Request for Travel and Foreign 
Contract Report per policy. Upon trip denial I terminated communication 
with foreign contact 4/20. By late May-Early June/2005 I realized that I 
needed a vacation. I replanned the Hong Kong trip without former foreign 
contact. Due to the small window of time before more tasks would be 
assigned, I scheduled a trip for 6/25-7/4. I should have but did not submit 
a Request for Foreign Travel prior to the trip. I submitted the Request in 
the 1st week upon returning. During the trip I missed foreign contact 
 
4 
 
 
person. Post trip I emailed her to ask if she wanted to resume our 
relationship & submit for Fiance Visa. 
 
GX 1 at 28. He intentionally did not mention that he and the “foreign contact” spent the 
week together in Hong Kong. At the hearing, he admitted his explanation on the security 
clearance application was intentionally incomplete (Tr. 49). 
 
 In early September 2006, Applicant received a voicemail message from a female 
Chinese medical student in the U.S., conveying a message that his Chinese friend “was 
still waiting for him.” Applicant returned the call and told the medical student he could 
not continue the relationship without losing his job (GX 2 at 9).  
 
 During an interview with a security investigator on September 20, 2006, Applicant 
stated he had visited Hong Kong in 2005 “by himself,” that he felt lonely during the trip, 
that he was worried about not submitting a foreign travel request. He denied contacting 
or meeting his friend while overseas (GX 2 at 8). At the hearing, he testified he was “full 
of fear” during the interview because he knew his clearance was at risk, and he was not 
candid about his foreign contact in Hong Kong (Tr. 50).  
 
 At some time in 2007, Applicant’s Chinese friend contacted him by instant 
messaging. Applicant thought the message was a hoax or a trick and asked her to show 
herself on the video camera, which she did. Applicant told her his situation had not 
changed, and he had no further contact with her (Tr. 48). Applicant reported the contact 
to his security officer (Tr. 68). 
 
 In February 2008, Applicant hired a private polygraph examiner. He made a 
lengthy statement during the examination that was consistent with his testimony at the 
hearing. His motive in arranging for the polygraph examination was to express remorse 
for his lack of candor about his foreign contacts and to demonstrate that he did not 
disclose any classified or sensitive material (GX 2 at 25). He provided a copy of his 
statement in response to DOHA interrogatories asking him to authenticate his statement 
to the security investigator in September 2006, and he pointed out that he had omitted 
mentioning his one-week contact with his friend from China during that interview (GX 2 
at 16).  
 
 Applicant had no further contact with the Chinese woman after the instant 
message contact in 2007. He testified he uninstalled the instant messaging software 
from his computer and no longer has any communication with anyone in a foreign 
country (Tr. 51-52).  
 
In August 2008, Applicant married his current wife, a naturalized U.S. citizen. In 
September 2008, he began working for his current employer. According to his current 
supervisor, he was very candid about the issues surrounding his security clearance and 
he described the circumstances surrounding his trip to Hong Kong in 2005 in detail (AX 
B). 
 
 
5 
 
 
 A retired Navy officer with 25 years of service, who met Applicant in June 2008 
when he and his then-fiancée joined their church, now works with Applicant to establish 
and maintain a men’s ministry. Based on observation of Applicant’s interaction with his 
mother and new wife, the witness believes Applicant is an honest person, willing to be 
bound by conscience and to do what is right (AX C-1). 
 
 Applicant’s pastor since the spring of 2008 describes Applicant as sincere, 
honest, and dedicated to God, his family, and his country. He is aware of Applicant’s 
“mistakes” and believes they have motivated him to be wiser (AX C-5). Applicant’s 
previous pastor for four years describes him as responsible, reliable, trustworthy, and 
committed to his family (AX C-6). A member of Applicant’s previous church, who is a 
retired Army officer and has known him since 2002, was aware of his foreign contacts 
and believes he is remorseful about his poor judgment and has grown in his religious 
faith and maturity as a result of his mistake (AX C-7). 
 
 A former colleague who has known Applicant for three years and holds a top 
secret/SCI clearance describes him as exceptionally talented and a person of high 
integrity, honesty, and a strong work ethic (AX C-4). A long-time friend since 1965 
describes Applicant as a person who is honest, mature, responsible, loyal, of high moral 
character, and a deeply religious man who tries to live his faith by example. He believes 
Applicant has been a caring father to his children, and a caring son to his aging mother. 
He considers Applicant a conservative person, a God-fearing and proud American, and 
a fierce patriot (AX C-2). 
 
 Applicant’s son describes Applicant as his “best friend in life.” His father has 
taught him “humility, responsibility, leadership, determination, respect, love, and 
honesty.” He describes his father as a family man and a deeply religious person who 
will stand by his word and fight for what is right (AX C-3). 
 
 The Office of the National Counterintelligence Executive reported to Congress in 
September 2008 that a large number of countries target U.S. information and 
technology, but that the bulk of intelligence collection is from a “core group” of fewer 
than 10 countries, one of whom is China (GX 3 at 1). Foreign collectors target U.S. 
travelers with a variety of methods, including eliciting information from seemingly 
innocuous conversations (GX 3 at 4). The 2007 Report to Congress of the U.S.-China 
Economic and Security Review Commission states that China operates an aggressive 
clandestine industrial espionage network that is so extensive that China’s espionage 
and industrial theft activities are the “single greatest risk” to the security of U.S. 
technology (GX 4 at 9, 11). 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
 
6 
 
 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
 
7 
 
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant was given a choice in April 2005 of losing his 
clearance or terminating his relationship with a foreign contact, that he briefly broke off 
the relationship, and that he failed to report that he had resumed the relationship in May 
or June of 2005 (SOR ¶ 1.a). It alleges that, in June and July 2005, he traveled to Hong 
Kong without obtaining the approval for foreign travel required by his employer (SOR ¶ 
1.b). It also alleges two instances of falsification. The first allegedly occurred when he 
submitted an application to continue his clearance in July 2006, and disclosed that he 
had left a job under unfavorable circumstances, but did not disclose that he attempted 
to conceal a foreign contact in Hong Kong (SOR ¶ 1.c). The second instance allegedly 
occurred during an interview with a security investigator in September 2006 when he 
stated he was laid off for “lack of work” by his previous employer and he did not disclose 
that he had initiated foreign contact during his trip to Hong Kong (SOR ¶ 1.d).  
 
 Applicant’s use of an on-line dating service to initiate foreign contacts and his 
weekly email contacts with a Chinese national before his trip to Hong Kong in June and 
July 2005 are not specifically alleged in the SOR. Thus, this conduct may not be used 
as an independent basis for revoking his clearance. However, conduct not alleged in the 
SOR may be considered to assess an applicant=s credibility; to evaluate evidence of 
extenuation, mitigation, or changed circumstances; to consider whether an applicant 
has demonstrated successful rehabilitation; or as part of the whole person analysis. 
ISCR Case No. 03-20327 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). I have considered the conduct 
not specifically alleged in the SOR for these limited purposes. 
 
 Although Applicant has been eligible to SCI access for many years and listed 
himself on his resume as “TS/SCI eligible,” the SOR makes no reference to Director of 
Central Intelligence Directive 6/4, Personnel Security Standards and Procedures 
Governing Eligibility for Access to Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI), which 
was the controlling directive at the time of the conduct alleged and the date of the SOR. 
Thus, this decision is limited to considering whether Applicant’s underlying collateral 
security clearance should be continued. 
 The concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 15 as follows:  
Conduct involving questionable judgment, lack of candor, dishonesty, or 
unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise questions 
about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect 
classified information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful 
and candid answers during the security clearance process or any other 
failure to cooperate with the security clearance process.   
Several potentially disqualifying conditions are relevant. The disqualifying 
condition set out in AG ¶ 16(a) applies to: 
 
8 
 
 
deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant facts from 
any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or 
similar form used to conduct investigations, determine employment 
qualifications, award benefits or status, determine security clearance 
eligibility or trustworthiness, or award fiduciary responsibilities. 
AG ¶ 16(b) applies to “deliberately providing false or misleading information concerning 
relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, competent medical authority, 
or other official government representative.” 
AG ¶ 16(c) applies to: 
credible adverse information in several adjudicative issue areas that is not 
sufficient for an adverse determination under any other single guideline, 
but which, when considered as a whole, supports a whole-person 
assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, unreliability, 
lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations, or other 
characteristics indicating that the person may not properly safeguard 
protected information. 
AG ¶ 16(d) applies to: 
credible adverse information that is not explicitly covered under any other 
guideline and may not be sufficient by itself for an adverse determination, 
but which, when combined with all available information supports a whole-
person assessment of questionable judgment, untrustworthiness, 
unreliability, lack of candor, unwillingness to comply with rules and 
regulations, or other characteristics indicating that the person may not 
properly safeguard protected information. This includes but is not limited 
to consideration of . . . a pattern of dishonesty or rule violations. 
AG ¶ 16(e) applies to “personal conduct, or concealment of information about 
one's conduct, that creates a vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress, 
such as . . . engaging in activities which, if known, may affect the person's 
personal, professional, or community standing.” Finally, AG ¶ 16(f) applies to 
“violation of a written or recorded commitment made by the individual to the 
employer as a condition of employment.”  
Applicant’s deliberate concealment of his week-long contact with a citizen and 
resident of mainland China on his security clearance application raises AG ¶ 16(a). His 
false statement to a security investigator that he had no contact with the Chinese 
woman during his Hong Kong visit raises AG ¶ 16(b). His intentional and repeated 
contacts with a Chinese national, while holding a top secret/SCI clearance and working 
on a sensitive project, and his intentional concealment of his contacts raise AG ¶¶ 16(c), 
(d), and (e). Finally, his violation of his employer’s rules regarding foreign travel and 
reporting of foreign contacts raises AG ¶ 16(f).  
 
9 
 
 
 Since the government produced substantial evidence to raise the disqualifying 
conditions in AG ¶¶ 16(a)-(f), the burden shifted to Applicant to produce evidence to 
rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005).   
 
 Security concerns raised by false or misleading answers on a security clearance 
application may be mitigated by showing that “the individual made prompt, good-faith 
efforts to correct the omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with 
the facts.” AG ¶ 17(a). Applicant falsified his security application in July 2006, repeated 
the falsification during an interview with a security investigator in September 2006, and 
did not correct his omission until he responded to DOHA interrogatories in February 
2008, about 19 months after he submitted his application. I conclude AG ¶ 17(a) is not 
established. 
 
 Security concerns based on personal conduct may be mitigated if “the offense is 
so minor, or so much time has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened 
under such unique circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on 
the individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” AG ¶ 17(c). The first and 
third prongs of this mitigating condition are not met because Applicant’s intentional 
falsifications were repeated, and they were not minor.  
 
 The second prong of this mitigating condition (“so much time”) focuses on 
whether the conduct was recent. There are no Abright line@ rules for determining when 
conduct is Arecent.@ The determination must be based on a careful evaluation of the 
totality of the evidence. See ISCR Case No. 02-24452 at 6 (App. Bd. Aug. 4, 2004). If 
the evidence shows Aa significant period of time has passed without any evidence of 
misconduct,@ then an administrative judge must determine whether that period of time 
demonstrates Achanged circumstances or conduct sufficient to warrant a finding of 
reform or rehabilitation.@ Id.  
 
 Applicant engaged in a 28-month pattern of deception, beginning with his false 
trip report in July of 2005 and finally ending with his acknowledgment in November 2008 
that his earlier statements were false. About 17 months have elapsed since Applicant’s 
last falsehoods, and only about five months have elapsed since he finally corrected the 
false information. Within his family, church community, and the friends who have 
supported his application, he enjoys a reputation for honesty and integrity. He is no 
longer looking for companionship in the wrong places. He asserted at the hearing that 
he uninstalled the instant messaging software from his computer and no longer 
exchanges messages with anyone from a foreign country. What cannot be determined 
is whether he will again resort to falsehood if he believes his clearance and his job are 
in jeopardy. It is significant that his overriding fear while he was involved with a foreign 
national was not whether he would be exploited and protected information would 
compromised, but rather whether he would lose his job. He still has substantial financial 
obligations and needs a clearance to keep his current job. Because of his pattern of 
 
10 
 
 
repeated deceptions motivated by self-preservation, I am not satisfied that enough time 
has passed to show that he is rehabilitated. 
 
 Now that Applicant has remarried, it is unlikely that he will engage in further 
romantic relationships with foreign nationals. Thus, I conclude the fourth prong of this 
mitigating condition (“unique circumstances”) is established. However, his bad judgment 
in fostering a romantic relationship with a citizen and resident of mainland China, and 
his repeated deceptions motivated by fear of losing his job cast doubt on his current 
reliability, trustworthiness, and good judgment. I conclude Applicant has not carried his 
burden of establishing AG ¶ 17(c). 
 
 Security concerns also may be mitigated if “the individual has acknowledged the 
behavior and obtained counseling to change the behavior or taken other positive steps 
to alleviate the stressors, circumstances, or factors that caused untrustworthy, 
unreliable, or other inappropriate behavior, and such behavior is unlikely to recur.” AG ¶ 
17(d). Applicant has acknowledged his behavior and no longer searches for 
companionship in foreign countries. While future inappropriate foreign contacts are 
unlikely, Applicant has not persuaded me that future deceptive behavior will not recur if 
he perceives that his clearance and his job are at risk. Thus, I conclude AG ¶ 17(d) is 
not established. 
 
 Finally, security concerns may be mitigated if “the individual has taken positive 
steps to reduce or eliminate vulnerability to exploitation, manipulation, or duress.” AG ¶ 
17(e). This mitigating condition is established because Applicant is married, no longer 
seeks foreign companionship, and apparently has made full disclosure to his new 
employer.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
 
11 
 
 
comments under Guideline E in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant is a well-educated, mature adult, and he has a wealth of experience in 
the intelligence community. He has provided many years of dedicated service and held 
high-level clearances for many years. While his long and faithful service is a mitigating 
factor, his experience in the intelligence community is a double-edged sword, because 
his experience should have made him more attuned to the risks to national security 
posed by fostering a romantic relationship with a Chinese national, about whom he 
knew very little. He, more so than others less experienced, should have realized the 
danger of bypassing the rules designed to protect him from exploitation. He should have 
understood the necessity for absolute candor, but he engaged in deceptive behavior for 
28 months because he feared losing his clearance and his job.  
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline E, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
not mitigated the security concerns based on personal conduct. Accordingly, I conclude 
he has not carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline E (Personal Conduct):  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.d:    Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is not clearly consistent with the national 
interest to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is denied. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
