1
                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS
          
            
In the matter of: )
)
-------------------------- )       ISCR Case No. 07-12433
SSN: ------------------ )
)
Applicant for Security Clearance )
Appearances
For Government: Jeff A. Nagel, Esquire, Department Counsel
For Applicant: Pro Se
February 26, 2009
______________
Decision
______________
MOGUL, Martin H., Administrative Judge:
On February 22, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA)
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing the security concerns under Guidelines
F, J, and E for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865,
Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended;
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the revised
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and
effective within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
Applicant responded to the SOR (RSOR) in writing on April 7, 2008, and
requested a hearing before an Administrative Judge. The case was assigned to this
Administrative Judge on December 12, 2008. DOHA issued a notice of hearing on
December 16, 2008, and the hearing was convened as scheduled on January 27, 2008,
in Sacramento, California. The Government offered Exhibits 1 through 9, which were
received without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits
A and B, which were admitted without objection. DOHA received the transcript of the
hearing (Tr) on February 4, 2009. 
2
Based upon a review of the case file, pleadings, exhibits, and testimony, eligibility
for access to classified information is denied.
Findings of Fact
In his RSOR Applicant admitted all of the SOR allegations: 1.a. through 1.j.,
under Guideline F, 2.a. through 2.h., under Guideline J, and 3.a. through 3.d., under
Guideline E.  All of the admitted allegations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. 
After a complete and thorough review of the evidence in the record, including
Applicant's RSOR, the admitted documents, and the testimony of Applicant, and upon
due consideration of that evidence, I make the additional findings of fact: 
Applicant is 44 years old. He is married, and he has six children.
Applicant is employed as a mechanic by a defense contractor, and he seeks a
DoD security clearance in connection with his employment in the defense sector.
Paragraph 1 Guideline F, Financial Considerations
The SOR lists 10 allegations of overdue debts, 1.a. through 1.j., under
Adjudicative Guideline F. Applicant admitted that all of these debts remain overdue and
unpaid in his RSOR. During his testimony, he gave some different and confusing
explanations as to whether some of these debts had been resolved. However, since
Applicant offered no evidence that he had paid anything on any of the debts, I find he
failed to prove that any of them have been satisfied. All of the debts will be reviewed in
the same order as they were listed in the SOR:
1.a. This overdue debt to Creditor 1 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $232. 
1.b. This overdue debt also to Creditor 2 is cited in the SOR in the amount of
$5,060, for a judgement, as a result of Applicant’s theft of a vehicle. Applicant previously
claimed that he had paid this debt, but he has produced no documentation to show that
the debt has been resolved, and on a February 7, 2008 credit report it show that this
debt remains unpaid. 
1.c. This third overdue debt to Creditor 3 is cited in the SOR in the amount of
$353.
1.d. This overdue debt to Creditor 4 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $158. 
1.e. This overdue debt to Creditor 5 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $595. 
1.f. This overdue debt to Creditor 6 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $592
1.g. This overdue debt to Creditor 7 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $5,540. 
3
1.h. This overdue debt to Creditor 8 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $3,572,
for a civil judgement entered against him. 
1.i. This overdue debt to Creditor 9 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $4,339. 
1.j. This overdue debt to Creditor 10 is cited in the SOR in the amount of $168. 
Paragraph 2 (Guideline J - Criminal Conduct) 
The Government alleges that Applicant has engaged in criminal acts.
2.a. Applicant was arrested on or about August 24,1986, and charged with (1) Hit
and Run Resulting in Death/Injury, (2) Perjury, and (3) Perjury-Punishment. He was
found guilty of Count (1) and was sentenced to serve 30 days in jail. 
2.b. Applicant was arrested on or about October 19, 1990, and charged with
2  Degree. He was found guilty and was sentenced to serve 36 months in jail,Burglary nd
suspended, sentenced to serve 36 months of probation, and granted work release. 
 2.c. Applicant was arrested on or about November 23,1993, and charged with (1)
Grand Theft Property, and (2) Conspiracy.
2.d. Applicant was arrested on or about September 3, 1997, and charged with
Convicted Felon in Possession of Firearm, a felony. He was convicted of a
misdemeanor charge and sentenced to complete 180 hours of community service and
awarded three years of probation. Six months after Applicant’s sentence, he was
arrested again and the misdemeanor charge was discarded, and he was convicted of
the original felony charge. His probation period was increased to five years. 
2.e. Applicant was arrested on or about October 4,1999, and charged with (1)
Failure to Provide for his Child, (2) Failure to Appear in Court, and twelve counts of
Contempt of Court. He plead guilty to Count (2) and he was found guilty of all other
counts. He was ordered to pay child support in the amount of $400.00 per month to
 begin in February 2000. On August 3, 2005, the case was dismissed. 
Applicant claimed that he served 45 days in jail for this charge, but ultimately he
claimed that he was not overdue on his child support.  No evidence was offered to
support Applicant’s claim that he was not guilty of the charge of failure to support his
child. 
2.f. Applicant was arrested on or about December 3,1999, and charged with (1)
Receive Stolen Property, (2) Chop Shop Operation, (3) Possession of a Controlled
Substance, and (4) Vin/Serial Numbers Removed. He was found guilty of Count (1),
sentenced to serve two days in jail, awarded five years of probation, ordered to take
Theft Classes, and perform community service work. He was also  ordered by the court
not to possess firearms and to pay restitution in the amount of $200.00. 
4
2.g. Applicant was arrested on or about March 28, 2001, and charged with (1)
Failure to Provide After Adjudication.
2.h. Applicant was arrested on or about May 24, 200I, and charged with (1)
Failure to Provide for your Child, (2) Failure to Appear in Court, and five counts of
Violation of Court Order. This case was transferred to a previously opened case against
Applicant.
2.i. That information set forth under paragraph 3., below, which constitutes a
violation of Federal law, Title 18, United States Code, Section 1001, a felony. 
Paragraph 3 Guideline E, Personal Conduct
3.a. Applicant falsified material facts on a Security Clearance Application (SCA),
executed by him on March 9, 2007, on which he was required to reply to the following
questions: "Section 23: a. Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any felony
offense? (Include those under the Uniform Code of Military Justice.)"; and "Section 23:
b. Have you ever been charged with or convicted of a firearms or explosives offense?"
and "Section 23: d. Have you ever been charged with or convicted of any offense(s)
related to alcohol or drugs?"; and "Section 23: f. In the last 7 years, have you been
arrested for, charged with, or convicted of any offense(s) not listed in response to a, b,
c, d, or e above? (Leave out traffic fines of less than $150 unless the violation was
alcohol or drug related.)." 
Applicant  answered "Yes" to question 23.a., and listed his 1999 Receiving
Stolen Property arrest and conviction.  He answered "No" to the remaining questions
(23.b., d. and f.) Applicant deliberately failed to provide that he had been charged with
other felony offense(s), firearms offense(s), drug-related charge(s), and he had been
arrested for, charged with and/or convicted of other offenses within the last seven years,
as set forth in subparagraphs 2.a., 2.b., 2.c, 2.d., 2.f., 2.g. and/or 2.h., above. 
3.b. Applicant falsified material on the following question of his SCA: “Section 27:
d. In the last 7 years, have you had any judgments against you that have not been
paid?"; to which he answered "No." Applicant deliberately failed to list that he had an
unpaid judgments that had been filed against him within the last seven years, as set
forth in subparagraphs 1.b. and 1.h., above. 
3.c. Applicant responded "No"  to: "Section 28: a. In the last 7 years, have you
been over 180 days delinquent on any debt(s)?" He deliberately failed to list that he had
been over 180 days delinquent on the debts, as set forth in subparagraphs 1.a., 1.c.,
1.d., 1.e., 1.f., 1.g., 1.i. and 1. j., above. 
3.d. Applicant responded "No"  to: "Section 28: b. Are you currently over 90 days
delinquent on any debt(s)?" He deliberately failed to list that he was currently 90 days
delinquent on the debts, as set forth in subparagraphs 1.a., 1.c., 1.d., 1.e., 1.f., 1.g., 1.i.
and 1. j., above. 
5
Applicant testified that he was not trying to mislead the Government, he simply
misread or failed to understand the questions. 
I find that his explanation does not explain how his responses could be so
incorrect, incomplete and misleading in five different responses.
Applicant  offered into evidence his performance review of 2008 (Exhibit A),
which gave him an overall rating of “4" which means “Exceeds Standards.” He also
offered into evidence a Request For Change of Status Form, which recommended that
he receive a pay increase as of March 5, 2007 (Exhibit B).
Policies
When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the
Administrative Judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information.
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The Administrative Judge’s over-arching
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as
the “whole person concept.” The Administrative Judge must consider all available,
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in
making a decision.   
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b)
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture.
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate,
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security
decision. 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of
6
the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of
classified information.
 
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
Analysis
Guideline F- Financial Considerations
The Government has established that Applicant has had a history of financial
difficulties and overdue debts.
Regarding the Disqualifying Conditions (DC) under Guideline F, I conclude both
DC 19. (a) and DC (c) apply, because of Applicant’s inability or unwillingness to satisfy
his debts, and his long history of not meeting financial obligations. 
I can not find that any Mitigating Condition (MC) applies as Applicant has failed to
resolve any of his overdue debts.   I, therefore, hold Guideline F against Applicant.
Guideline J - Criminal Conduct
The Government has established that Applicant engaged in criminal conduct on
at least eight different occasions that spanned a period from 1986 to the most recent
violation of Title 18, United States Code, Section 1001, a felony, when he furnished
untruthful information on his 2007 SCA.  
In reviewing the Disqualifying Conditions (DC) under Guideline J, DC 31. (a), a
single serious crime or multiple lesser offenses, applies in this case. I find that no MC
applies to this Applicant, because of the seriousness, extant and duration of Applicant’s
criminal conduct. Applicant has not mitigated this allegation. Paragraph 2 is found
against Applicant. 
Guideline E- Personal Conduct
With respect to Guideline E, the evidence establishes that Applicant provided
incorrect, untruthful, incomplete material information on several, separate questions that
he provided to the Government on the SCA that he executed on March 9, 2007.
Because of the extent of his lack of honesty and candor regarding very clearly written
questions, I find that Applicant did intend to mislead the Government.
7
In reviewing the DCs under Guideline E,  I conclude that because Applicant
deliberately omitted and concealed relevant facts from a SCA, DC 16. (a) applies
against Applicant. I find no MCs can be applied. I therefore, resolve Guideline E against
Applicant.
Whole Person Concept
Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a): “(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness
of the conduct; (2) the circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include
knowledgeable participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) extent to which participation
is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of rehabilitation and other permanent
behavioral changes; (7) the motivation for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure,
coercion, exploitation, or duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.”
Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a security
clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful consideration
of the guidelines and the whole person concept.       
I have considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions under
Guidelines F, J,  and E, in light of all the facts and circumstances surrounding this case.
Based on all of the reasons cited above, including Applicant’s history of financial
difficulties, his failure to resolve the overdue debts, his history of criminal conduct, and
his failure to give honest complete information to the Government, I find that the record
evidence leaves me with significant questions and doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and
suitability for a security clearance under the whole person concept. For all these
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns. 
Formal Findings
Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR,
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are:
Paragraph 1, Guideline F: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 1.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.e.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 1.f.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.g.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.h.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.i.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 1.j.: Against Applicant
8
Paragraph 2, Guideline J: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 2.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.d: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.e.: Against  Applicant
Subparagraph 2.f.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.g.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.h.: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 2.i.: Against Applicant
Paragraph 3, Guideline E: AGAINST APPLICANT
Subparagraph 3.a: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.b: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.c: Against Applicant
Subparagraph 3.d: Against Applicant
Conclusion
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security
clearance.  Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.
                                              
Martin H. Mogul
Administrative Judge
