 
1 
 
 
                                                              
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 ------------------------ )  ISCR Case No. 07-14650 
 SSN: ----------- ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Greg D. McCormack, Esq. 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
FOREMAN, LeRoy F., Administrative Judge: 
 
This case involves security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign 
Influence), based on Applicant’s family connections and property interests in Japan. 
Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a security clearance application on August 24, 2006. On May 
9, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a Statement of 
Reasons (SOR) detailing the basis for its preliminary decision to deny his application, 
citing security concerns under Guideline B. The action was taken under Executive Order 
10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as 
amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel 
Security Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive); and the 
adjudicative guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005.  
 
 Applicant received the SOR on July 2, 2008; answered it on July 7, 2008; and 
requested a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received the request on July 
 
2 
 
 
9, 2008. Department Counsel was ready to proceed on October 24, 2008, and the case 
was assigned to an administrative judge on October 24, 2008. The case was 
reassigned to another administrative judge on November 17, 2008, when Applicant 
expressed a desire for a hearing on the east coast even though he lives and works in 
Okinawa, nearer to the west coast. The case was reassigned to me on December 3, 
2008, to consolidate the docket. Scheduling the hearing was delayed by Applicant’s 
overseas location and the availability of his counsel. DOHA issued a notice of hearing 
on January 5, 2009, scheduling the hearing for February 2, 2009. I convened the 
hearing as scheduled. Government Exhibits (GX) 1 and 2 were admitted in evidence 
without objection. Applicant testified on his own behalf and submitted Applicant’s 
Exhibits (AX) A through D, which were admitted without objection. Applicant’s exhibits 
each contained multiple separate documents, which were identified by a number in 
addition to a letter, e.g., AX A-1. The record closed upon adjournment of the hearing on 
February 2, 2009. DOHA received the transcript (Tr.) on February 13, 2009. 
 
Administrative Notice 
 
I granted Department Counsel’s request that I take administrative notice of 
relevant facts about Japan (Tr. 17-19). The request and the documents attached as 
enclosures were not admitted in evidence but are attached to the record as Hearing 
Exhibit (HX) I. The facts administratively noticed are set out below in my findings of fact. 
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations in the SOR, 
except for the allegation that his spouse is a dual citizen of the U.S. and Japan. His 
admissions in his answer and at the hearing are incorporated in my findings of fact.  
 
 Applicant is a 30-year-old senior network installation technician for a defense 
contractor. He has worked for his current employer since August 2000. He served on 
active duty in the U.S. Marine Corps from October 1996 to September 2000 (AX E-1). 
While on active duty, he twice received the Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal 
(AX E-3). He continued in the U.S. Marine Corps Reserve until March 2004, when he 
was honorably discharged as a sergeant (pay grade E-5) (AX E-2). His last fitness 
report before his discharge described him as technically competent, exceptionally 
talented, and a solid leader (AX E-4). He held a clearance in the Marine Corps and 
retained it when he began working for a defense contractor.  
 
Applicant worked in network security as a Marine. He testified he believed he 
could do more for the Marine Corps as a civilian contractor, and he began work for his 
current employer while on terminal leave from the Marine Corps.  
 
 Applicant has been deployed to Okinawa, Japan, as a civilian contractor 
supporting Marine Corps communications networks since his release from active duty 
(AX A-1 to A-8). He provides tactical network security for the Marines and trains them 
on how to provide tactical network security in the field (Tr. 34-35). He interacts with the 
 
3 
 
 
Marines daily (Tr. 35). While working as a contractor, he completed the requirements for 
a bachelor of science degree in computer studies in May 2006 (AX F-3).  
 
Applicant has no interaction with the Japanese Self-Defense Forces (Tr. 44). He 
does not speak Japanese, and his social circle consists of U.S. military personnel and 
fellow contractor employees (Tr. 40).   
 
 Applicant submitted 13 letters supporting the continuation of his security 
clearance. His program manager, who has known him for eight years, describes him as 
trustworthy, loyal, and dedicated, and states that he conducts himself like a Marine 
officer or senior noncommissioned officer (AX D-2). Two colleagues, one a retired chief 
master sergeant in the Air Force, regard him as dependable, highly respected, and 
continuing to live the motto of the Marines (“Semper Fidelis”) (AX D-4, D-5). A Marine 
captain (AX D-6), three chief warrant officers (AX D-10, D-8, and D-13), two master 
sergeants (AX D-7, D-9), one gunnery sergeant (AX D-12), two staff sergeants (AX D-3, 
D-4), and a sergeant (AX D-1) describe him as highly competent, trustworthy, and 
totally dedicated to the Marines he supports. He received a certificate of commendation 
from the Marine Corps Base commander in August 2003 and a letter of recognition from 
the network operations officer in March 2008 for his exceptional performance (AX F-1, 
F-13). 
 
 Applicant married a citizen and resident of Japan in January 2002 (Tr. 26; GX 1 
at 16). They have two sons, ages six and five, who are dual citizens of the U.S. and 
Japan (Tr. 27). His sons hold both U.S. and Japanese passports (Tr. 52). They attend 
private schools in Japan (Tr. 40). Until about two years ago, his spouse taught English 
to Japanese children, but she is not currently employed outside the home (Tr. 27). She 
has never lived in the U.S., but she spent time in the U.S. as an exchange student and 
visited once when Applicant’s brother was married (Tr. 48). 
 
 Applicant’s father-in-law, mother-in-law, and brother-in-law are citizens and 
residents of Japan. His father-in-law served as a pilot in the Japanese Self-Defense 
Forces and retired as a colonel in 1998 after about 36 years of service (Tr. 28). His 
brother-in-law currently serves as a pilot in the Japanese Self-Defense Forces and 
holds the rank of major. 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law is employed by a financial institution in Japan that 
provides commercial loans. His only interaction with the U.S. military is to play golf with 
senior U.S. military officers on the Marine base (Tr. 28). Applicant’s mother-in-law is not 
currently employed, but she previously worked as a professional chef (Tr. 30). 
Applicant’s father-in-law and mother-in-law are “active grandparents,” and he and his 
spouse have regular contact with them (Tr. 30-31). Applicant’s brother-in-law is 
stationed on mainland Japan, and they only visit with him about every two years (Tr. 
31). As far as Applicant knows, his father-in-law and brother-in-law are not involved with 
Japanese intelligence services (Tr. 43).  
 
 
4 
 
 
Applicant’s father-in-law speaks broken English; his mother-in-law speaks 
virtually no English; and his brother-in-law speaks some English but is not fluent (Tr. 
45). Conversation with his in-laws is mostly limited to “courtesy” conversation about golf 
and children (Tr. 45). 
 
 Applicant recently purchased land and built a house in Okinawa. It was 
completed in January 2008 at a cost of $515,000. The house was financed through the 
Bank of Okinawa, which loaned him about $420,000 (Tr. 25). He was required to 
finance the house through a Japanese bank, and he deposits funds in a Japanese bank 
account to make the house payments (Tr. 38). He has no other financial assets in 
Japan. His primary bank account is with a U.S.-based credit union, and his credit cards 
are issued by U.S. institutions (Tr. 39). He has a retirement account worth about 
$80,000 and a savings account worth about $8,000 in U.S. institutions (Tr. 47; AX C-3, 
C-4). 
 
 Applicant testified that the real estate market in Japan is based on the land, 
because there is little interest in buying previously occupied homes. He would lose 
about 40% of his investment if he sold his home, but he would be financially able to 
handle the loss (Tr. 46). He is financially secure and earns more than $100,000 per year 
in his current job (AX C-1, C-2). He testified he is “not very attached” to the house, and 
he and his family would leave it if relations between the U.S. and Japan made it 
necessary (Tr. 50). He is aware that the U.S. is transferring forces from Okinawa to 
Guam. He testified he will go wherever his employer asks him to go (Tr. 49).  
 
 I have taken administrative notice of the following facts. Japan is a constitutional 
monarchy with a parliamentary government. It is one of the U.S.’s most important 
economic partners. Although Japan has some problems with child abuse, trafficking in 
persons, and discrimination against women, ethnic minorities, and foreigners, it has a 
generally good human rights record. The crime rate in Japan is lower than it is in the 
U.S., and there is no significant terrorist activity. The military alliance of the U.S. and 
Japan is the cornerstone of U.S. security interests in Asia and regional stability. U.S. 
and Japanese military forces routinely conduct joint exercises. Japan provides facilities, 
financial support, and material support to U.S. forwarded-deployed forces. Japan grants 
base rights on its territory in return for a U.S. promise to protect Japan’s security. Japan 
has provided extensive logistical support to U.S. operations in Afghanistan, and it has 
supported the U.S. operations in Iraq. Over 100 countries, including allies like Japan, 
have been known to collect sensitive information and technology in the U.S. In its 
Annual Report to Congress on Foreign Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage 
for 2000, the National Counterintelligence Center included a survey of “nearly a dozen” 
selected Fortune 500 companies, concluding that Japan was among the seven most 
active collectors of U.S. economic and technological information. Japan has not been 
listed by name in any subsequent updates by the Office of the National 
Counterintelligence Executive.  
 
 
5 
 
 
Policies 
 
 “[N]o one has a ‘right’ to a security clearance.” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988). As Commander in Chief, the President has the authority to 
control access to information bearing on national security and to determine whether an 
individual is sufficiently trustworthy to have access to such information.” Id. at 527. The 
President has authorized the Secretary of Defense or his designee to grant applicants 
eligibility for access to classified information “only upon a finding that it is clearly 
consistent with the national interest to do so.” Exec. Or. 10865, Safeguarding Classified 
Information within Industry § 2 (Feb. 20, 1960), as amended and modified.   
 
Eligibility for a security clearance is predicated upon the applicant meeting the 
criteria contained in the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). These guidelines are not 
inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the complexities of human behavior, these 
guidelines are applied in conjunction with an evaluation of the whole person. An 
administrative judge’s over-arching adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common 
sense decision. An administrative judge must consider all available, reliable information 
about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable. 
 
 The government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in persons with 
access to classified information. This relationship transcends normal duty hours and 
endures throughout off-duty hours. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the 
possible risk the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard 
classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible 
extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified 
information. 
 
Clearance decisions must be “in terms of the national interest and shall in no 
sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the applicant concerned.”  See Exec. Or. 
10865 § 7. Thus, a decision to deny a security clearance is not necessarily a 
determination as to the loyalty of the applicant.  It is merely an indication the applicant 
has not met the strict guidelines the President and the Secretary of Defense have 
established for issuing a clearance. 
 
 Initially, the government must establish, by substantial evidence, conditions in the 
personal or professional history of the applicant that may disqualify the applicant from 
being eligible for access to classified information. The government has the burden of 
establishing controverted facts alleged in the SOR. See Egan, 484 U.S. at 531.  
“Substantial evidence” is “more than a scintilla but less than a preponderance.”  See v. 
Washington Metro. Area Transit Auth., 36 F.3d 375, 380 (4th Cir. 1994). The guidelines 
presume a nexus or rational connection between proven conduct under any of the 
criteria listed therein and an applicant’s security suitability. See ISCR Case No. 95-0611 
at 2 (App. Bd. May 2, 1996).   
 
 Once the government establishes a disqualifying condition by substantial 
evidence, the burden shifts to the applicant to rebut, explain, extenuate, or mitigate the 
 
6 
 
 
facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant “has the ultimate burden of demonstrating that it 
is clearly consistent with the national interest to grant or continue his security 
clearance.” ISCR Case No. 01-20700 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 19, 2002). “[S]ecurity 
clearance determinations should err, if they must, on the side of denials.” Egan, 484 
U.S. at 531; see AG ¶ 2(b).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline B, Foreign Influence 
 
 The SOR alleges Applicant’s spouse and two children are dual citizens of Japan 
and the U.S. (SOR ¶¶ 1.a and 1.b); his father-in-law is a citizen and resident of Japan 
and retired as a colonel from the Japanese Self-Defense Forces in 1998 (SOR ¶ 1.c); 
his mother-in-law is a citizen and resident of Japan (SOR ¶ 1.d); his brother-in-law is a 
citizen and resident of Japan currently serving as a pilot in the Japanese Self-Defense 
Forces (SOR ¶ 1.e); and he owns a house in Okinawa worth about $515,000 that is 
financed by the Bank of Okinawa (SOR ¶ 1.f1). The evidence shows that Applicant’s 
spouse is a citizen only of Japan and not a dual citizen as alleged.  
 
The security concern under this guideline is set out in AG ¶ 6 as follows:  
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this Guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
 Four disqualifying conditions under this guideline are relevant to this case.  First, 
a disqualifying condition may be raised by “contact with a foreign family member, 
business or professional associate, friend, or other person who is a citizen of or resident 
in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of foreign exploitation, 
inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion.” AG ¶ 7(a). Second, a disqualifying 
condition may be raised by “connections to a foreign person, group, government, or 
country that create a potential conflict of interest between the individual’s obligation to 
protect sensitive information or technology and the individual’s desire to help a foreign 
person, group, or country by providing that information.” AG ¶ 7(b). Third, a security 
concern may be raised if an applicant is “sharing living quarters with a person or 
persons, regardless of citizenship status, if that relationship creates a heightened risk of 
foreign inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” AG ¶ 7(d). Fourth, a security 
                                                          
1 This subparagraph is incorrectly designated as 1.d in the SOR; it should be 1.f. I have made a 
handwritten correction to the SOR. 
 
7 
 
 
concern also may be raised by “a substantial business, financial, or property interest in 
a foreign country, or in any foreign-owned or foreign-operated business, which could 
subject the individual to heightened risk of foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 7(e). 
 
 The totality of an applicant’s family ties to a foreign country as well as each 
individual family tie must be considered. ISCR Case No. 01-22693 at 7 (App. Bd. Sep. 
22, 2003). A[T]here is a rebuttable presumption that a person has ties of affection for, or 
obligation to, the immediate family members of the person's spouse.@ ISCR Case No. 
01-03120, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 94 at * 8 (App. Bd. Feb. 20, 2002).   
 
 Guideline B is not limited to countries hostile to the United States.  “The United 
States has a compelling interest in protecting and safeguarding classified information 
from any person, organization, or country that is not authorized to have access to it, 
regardless of whether that person, organization, or country has interests inimical to 
those of the United States.”  ISCR Case No. 02-11570 at 5 (App. Bd. May 19, 2004).  
 
 Furthermore, friendly nations can have profound disagreements with the United 
States over matters they view as important to their vital interests or national security. 
Finally, we know friendly nations have engaged in espionage against the United States, 
especially in the economic, scientific, and technical fields.  See ISCR Case No. 00-
0317, 2002 DOHA LEXIS 83 at **15-16 (App. Bd. Mar. 29, 2002).  Nevertheless, the 
nature of a nation’s government, its relationship with the U.S., and its human rights 
record are relevant in assessing the likelihood that an applicant’s family members are 
vulnerable to government coercion. The risk of coercion, persuasion, or duress is 
significantly greater if the foreign country has an authoritarian government, a family 
member is associated with or dependent upon the government, or the country is known 
to conduct intelligence operations against the U.S. In considering the nature of the 
government, an administrative judge must also consider any terrorist activity in the 
country at issue. See generally ISCR Case No. 02-26130 at 3 (App. Bd. Dec. 7, 2006) 
(reversing decision to grant clearance where administrative judge did not consider 
terrorist activity in area where family members resided). 
 
 AG ¶¶ 7(a), (d), and (e) all require substantial evidence of a “heightened risk.” 
The “heightened risk” required to raise one of these disqualifying conditions is a 
relatively low standard. “Heightened risk” denotes a risk greater than the normal risk 
inherent in having a family member living under a foreign government. 
 
 A “heightened risk” is not raised by the nature of the government of Japan, 
because it is one of our closest allies and it has a good human rights record. Japanese 
industries have been known to target sensitive information and technology in the U.S., 
but many other industrialized countries, including allies, also practice economic and 
industrial espionage. Although Applicant does not appear to have particular feelings of 
affection for his brother-in-law, he has not rebutted the presumption that he has feelings 
of obligation toward his spouse’s immediate family members. Applicant’s brother-in-law 
is an officer in the Japanese Self-Defense Forces, but the military forces of the U.S. and 
Japan work closely together and share information on a regular basis. His brother-in-law 
 
8 
 
 
is a pilot, not an intelligence agent. Applicant’s father-in-law is retired from the Japanese 
military, but he is in the business of providing commercial loans and thus is connected 
with Japanese economic interests. The crime rate in Japan is much lower than in the 
U.S., and there is no evidence of significant terrorism in Okinawa or mainland Japan. 
Applicant has a significant financial investment in his home, but Japan does not have a 
record of taking property or using any other coercive measures to obtain information. 
 
Nevertheless, after considering the relatively low level risk involved in the term 
“heightened risk,” and the relatively low level of proof required to raise a disqualifying 
condition, i.e., more than a scintilla of evidence but less than a preponderance, I 
conclude the government has met its burden of raising the concerns based on 
“heightened risk” in AG ¶¶ 7(a), (d), and (e). The “heightened risk” also raises the 
potential conflict of interest in AG ¶ 7(b), shifting the burden to Applicant to rebut, 
explain, extenuate, or mitigate the facts. Directive ¶ E3.1.15. An applicant has the 
burden of proving a mitigating condition, and the burden of disproving it never shifts to 
the government. See ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 5 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005). 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline can be mitigated by showing that “the 
nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are 
located, or the positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is 
unlikely the individual will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interests of a foreign individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of 
the U.S.” AG ¶ 8(a). In light of the nature of the Japanese government and its 
relationships with the U.S., I am satisfied it is unlikely Applicant will be placed in a 
position of having to chose between the interests of the U.S. government and the 
Japanese government, but I am not satisfied of the unlikelihood that he might be placed 
in the position of having to chose between the interests of the U.S. and his spouse or in-
laws. Thus, I conclude AG ¶ 8(a) is not established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also can be mitigated by showing “there is 
no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the 
foreign person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such 
deep and longstanding relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be 
expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” AG ¶ 8(b). 
Applicant’s loyalty to his spouse and her family is not “minimal,” but his loyalties to the 
U.S. and the U.S. Marines he supports are deep and longstanding. His entire world, 
except for his immediate family, is centered on the Marines in Okinawa. His social life is 
among the military community, and he has virtually no social or professional life outside 
of his relationship with the Marines. I conclude this mitigating condition is established. 
 
 Security concerns under this guideline also may be mitigated by showing that 
“contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is 
little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation.” AG ¶ 8(c). 
There is a rebuttable presumption that contacts with an immediate family member in a 
foreign country are not casual.  ISCR Case No. 00-0484 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 1, 2002). 
This presumption does not apply to Applicant’s in-laws, because they are not immediate 
 
9 
 
 
family members as the term is used in the adjudicative guidelines. Applicant’s contacts 
with his brother-in-law are infrequent and limited to exchange of pleasantries. On the 
other hand, Applicant’s contacts with his mother-in-law and father-in-law are not 
infrequent. As he described it, they are active grandparents. Even though there is a 
language barrier, contacts are mutually motivated by familial affection. I conclude AG ¶ 
8(c) is applicable to Applicant’s brother-in-law, but not to his father-in-law and mother-in-
law.  
 
 Security concerns arising from financial interests can be mitigated if “the value or 
routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property interests is such that they 
are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not be used effectively to influence, 
manipulate, or pressure the individual.” AG ¶ 8(f). Applicant’s investment in his home is 
substantial, and its loss would cause him and his family considerable hardship, even 
though he is satisfied he could absorb such a loss. The likelihood that Japan would use 
his home to manipulate or pressure him is virtually nil, but the substantial value of his 
property makes this mitigating condition inapplicable. 
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, an administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. An administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence.  
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall common sense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. I have incorporated my 
comments under Guideline B in my whole person analysis. Some of the factors in AG ¶ 
2(a) were addressed under that guideline, but some warrant additional comment. 
 
 Applicant took off his Marine uniform more than eight years ago, but he has 
never left the Marine Corps. He is mentally and emotionally still a Marine. He is totally 
dedicated to his mission and the interests of the U.S. He has held a clearance 
continuously for more than 12 years without incident. He was sincere, candid, and 
persuasive at the hearing. He has thoughtfully considered the financial impact of leaving 
Japan if it were necessary, and he knows that redeployment of U.S. forces could require 
him and his family to leave Japan. His spouse and in-laws are not involved in politics or 
 
10 
 
 
associated with Japanese intelligence agencies or directly involved in high technology 
businesses. 
 
 After weighing the disqualifying and mitigating conditions under Guideline B, and 
evaluating all the evidence in the context of the whole person, I conclude Applicant has 
mitigated the security concerns based on foreign influence. Accordingly, I conclude he 
has carried his burden of showing that it is clearly consistent with the national interest to 
continue his eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 I make the following formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set 
forth in the SOR, as required by Directive ¶ E3.1.25: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B (Foreign Influence):  FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraphs 1.a-1.f:    For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances, it is clearly consistent with the national interest 
to continue Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance. Eligibility for access to 
classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
 
LeRoy F. Foreman 
Administrative Judge 
