KEYWORD: Guideline B
DIGEST: A Hearing Office Judge is not authorized to review and pass judgment on Appeal
Board decisions.  Quasi-judicial adjudications must be made within the bounds of applicable law
and agency policy not without regard to them.  There is a rebuttable presumption that an
applicant’s relationship with immediate family members is not casual.  Department Counsel is
not required to prove a threat of espionage.  Favorable decision reversed.
CASENO: 07-13696.a1
DATE: 02/09/2009
DATE: February 9, 2009
In Re:
--------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 07-13696
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
Emilio Jaksetic, Esq., Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Pro Se
2
 The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On April 3, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline B (Foreign Influence), of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992), as amended (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing.  On October 16, 2008, after the hearing, Administrative Judge Claude R. Heiny
granted Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Department Counsel timely appealed pursuant
to the Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Department Counsel raised the following issues on appeal: whether the Judge’s favorable
security clearance decision is arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.  
Specifically, Department Counsel argues that the Judge improperly used the decision to pass
judgment on prior Appeal Board precedent and that the Judge’s application of mitigating conditions
found in ¶ E2.8(a) through (c) of the Directive is arbitrary and capricious and is not supported by the
record evidence.  Department Counsel also contends that the Judge, in effect, improperly shifted the
burden to Department Counsel to present evidence of a clear and present danger or imminent threat
of espionage.  Finally, Department Counsel maintains that the Judge’s favorable conclusions
concerning Applicant’s security eligibility are not supported by the record evidence.  Finding error,
we reverse the Judge’s favorable security clearance decision.
Whether the Record Evidence Supports the Judge’s Factual Findings
A.  Facts
The Judge made the following relevant findings of fact:
Applicant was born in the Peoples Republic of China (PRC).  She came to the United States
at the age of 24 and completed her education here.  Applicant became a U.S. citizen in 2006.  In
1998, Applicant married a citizen of a Western European country.  Applicant’s husband has
permanent residency status in the U.S., but works as a civil servant in his country of birth.  They
have two children who were born in the U.S. and are U.S. citizens.  Applicant’s mother-in-law,
father-in-law, and sister-in-law are citizens and residents of her husband’s country of birth.
Applicant exchanges e-mails with her mother-in-law and sister-in-law on birthdays.  Applicant’s
parents are PRC citizens, but have permanent residency status in the U.S., and live with Applicant.
Applicant has an emotional bond with her brother, who is a citizen of and resides in the PRC. 
Decision at 10.  Applicant’s brother is the editor of a state-owned publication, and his wife is a
university librarian.  Applicant contacts her brother twice a year.  Applicant also speaks to her
mother’s sister a couple of times a year.  When Applicant traveled to the PRC in 2006 to visit her
gravely-ill grandmother, she stayed with her brother and got together with former classmates.
Applicant’s supervisor and her former neighbor testified to her professionalism and character.
The PRC is a repressive, totalitarian government with a poor record on human rights.  The
PRC’s foreign policy goals are antithetical to the United States.  The PRC has an active and effective
program of industrial espionage to obtain U.S. technology.  Decision at 5.          
3
B.  Discussion
Department Counsel’s appeal involves the Judge’s conclusions.
Whether the Record Supports the Judge’s Ultimate Conclusions
An Administrative Judge is required to “examine the relevant data and articulate a
satisfactory explanation for” the decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found
and the choice made.’”  Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins.
Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156,
168 (1962)). “[N]o one has a right to a security clearance. . . The general standard is that a
clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of national security.’”
Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 581, 528 (1988).  The Appeal Board may reverse the
Administrative Judge’s decision to grant, deny, or revoke a security clearance if it is arbitrary,
capricious, or contrary to law. Directive ¶ E3.1.32.3. 
Department Counsel notes that the Administrative Judge’s decision included a lengthy
exposition on prior Appeal Board rulings which ended with the statement “Notwithstanding the
Appeal Board’s position, I conclude that many of these attributes are pertinent to the analysis in this
case under the whole person concept.”  Footnote 10 of Decision, at page 11. Department Counsel
persuasively argues that the Judge acted in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious and contrary to law
to the extent that he deliberately rejected binding agency authority.  For purposes of this discussion,
we set aside the fact that many of the cases cited were explicitly interpreting the plain language of
a specific Guideline which is no longer in effect and the fact that the Judge’s statement of some of
the cited precedent is inaccurate.  Department Counsel is correct that a Hearing Office
Administrative Judge is not authorized to review and pass judgment on Appeal Board decisions.  The
Directive clearly places the responsibility for review at the Appeal Board level.  More broadly, quasi-
judicial adjudications must be made within the bounds of applicable law and agency policy, not
without regard to them. See, e.g., Croplife America v. Environmental Protection Agency, 329 F.3d
876, 882 (D.C. Cir. 2003) (administrative law judges cannot ignore agency policy in making rulings);
Nash v. Bowen, 869 F.2d 675, 680 (2d Cir. 1989) (administrative law judge is subordinate to head
of agency or department in matters of policy); Mullen v. Bowen, 800 F.2d 535, 540 n. 5 (6th Cir.
1986) (decisional independence does not relieve administrative law judge of the obligation to apply
agency policy).  See  ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 3 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003) (security clearance
decisions must be based on current DoD policy and standards). 
The Judge found that Applicant’s contacts and ties with relatives and friends in the PRC
raised security concerns under Guideline B.  However the Judge concluded that the security concerns
were mitigated under ¶ E2.8(a) through (c) of the Directive.  Department Counsel argues that the
Judge’s application of those mitigating conditions is arbitrary and capricious and is not supported
by the record evidence.  Department Counsel’s argument has merit.  
“[T]he nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in which these persons are located, or the1
positions or activities of those persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be placed in a position
of having to choose between the interests of a foreign individual, group, or government and the interests of the U.S.[.]”
Directive ¶ E2.8(a).
See ISCR Case No. 06-24575 at 3 (App. Bd. Nov. 9, 2007).2
“[C]ontact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and infrequent that there is little likelihood that3
it could create a risk for foreign influence or exploitation[.]” Directive ¶ E2.8(c).
“[T]here is no conflict of interest, either because the individual’s sense of loyalty or obligation to the foreign4
person, group, government, or country is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding relationships and
loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest[.]”
Directive ¶ E2.8(b). 
4
Paragraph E2.8(a) of the Directive  involves an applicant’s relationships with persons in1
other countries.  Of particular concern in this case are Applicant’s relationships with her brother and
sister-in-law.  Both are public employees of the PRC, and Applicant’s brother, the editor of a
government publication, is in a position of responsibility in the area of the PRC where he lives.  As
noted above, the Judge concluded that Applicant has an emotional bond with her brother.  Decision
at 10.  Moreover, Applicant’s parents, while they live with Applicant in the U.S., maintain ties to
the PRC.  Applicant’s mother last traveled to the PRC in April 2008.  It is also significant that
Applicant’s parents suffered at the hands of the Chinese government during the Cultural Revolution.
Transcript at 143.    Decision at 3.  Given Applicant’s brother’s government position and her parents2
continuing ties to the PRC, the Judge’s application of ¶ E2.8(a) is arbitrary and capricious and is not
supported by the record evidence, particularly in light of the PRC’s poor record on human rights,
which the Judge recognized in his decision.       
For mitigation under ¶ E2.8(c) of the Directive,   contact must be casual and infrequent.  The3
Judge applied mitigation with regard to Applicant’s brother, who is a citizen of and resident in the
PRC.  There is a rebuttable presumption that an applicant’s relationship with immediate family
members is not casual.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 02-24267 at  7 (App. Bd. May 24, 2005)  There is
nothing in the record of this case that rebuts that presumption.  In fact, the Judge stated that
Applicant has an emotional bond with her brother.  Decision at 10.  Applicant contacts her brother
by phone or e-mail twice a year and speaks to her aunt with about the same frequency.  However,
the totality of Applicant’s contacts with her relatives cannot be said to be casual.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 05-03279 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 20, 2007).  Furthermore, the frequency with which an
applicant speaks to family members does not diminish the strength of her family ties.  See, e.g., ISCR
Case No. 04-12500 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006).  Compare, also, ISCR Case No. 06-18337 (App.
Bd. Feb. 8, 2008).  In this case, Applicant is involved in the process of her brother’s immigration to
the U.S., which is expected to take ten years.  Transcript at  134.  The record does not support the
Judge’s application of ¶ E2.8(c) of the Directive. 
In applying ¶ E2.8(b) of the Directive,  the Judge minimized Applicant’s foreign ties and4
emphasized her strong connections to the United States.  Department Counsel correctly points out
5
that Applicant’s foreign ties are more significant than the Judge concluded.  Applicant has been a
U.S. citizen only since May 2006.  Apart from her children, Applicant’s family ties are to her
brother, her parents, and her husband.  Her brother, with whom Applicant has an emotional bond,
is a citizen and resident of the PRC.  Applicant’s parents reside in the United States, but are citizens
of the PRC.  They have ties to the PRC and are not eligible to become U.S. citizens until 2011.
While Applicant’s husband has legal residency status in the U.S., he is a German citizen and a civil
servant of a German state.  Applicant has been a permanent employee of her current employer only
since November 2007.  Given her ties, the Judge’s application of ¶ E2.8(b) is arbitrary and is not
supported by the record evidence.
Department Counsel also contends that the Judge, in effect, improperly shifted the burden
to Department Counsel to present evidence of a clear and present danger or imminent threat of
espionage.   Department Counsel’s contention has merit.  Under the Directive, once the Judge finds
that security concerns have been raised, the burden shifts to an applicant to extenuate or mitigate
those concerns.  Department Counsel is not required to prove a threat of espionage.  See, e.g.,ISCR
Case No. 02-09907 at 7 (App. Bd. Mar. 17, 2004).   The Judge concluded that there was little
likelihood that the PRC would use the presence of Applicant’s brother and his wife to pressure or
coerce Applicant because her brother and his wife lead low-profile, non-political lives and have not
been approached or threatened due to their relationship with Applicant and because there is no
indication that the PRC is aware of Applicant’s career in the United States.  The Board has
consistently held that factors such as an applicant’s relatives’ obscurity or the failure of foreign
authorities to contact those relatives in the past do not provide a meaningful measure of whether an
applicant’s circumstances pose a security risk.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 04-06386 at 4 (App. Bd.
Aug. 25, 2006).  The Judge’s conclusions in this regard are arbitrary, capricious, and contrary to law.
Finally, Department Counsel maintains that the Judge’s favorable conclusions regarding
Applicant’s security eligibility are not supported by the record evidence.  In evaluating Applicant’s
eligibility under the whole-person concept, the Judge used similar analysis and reached conclusions
similar to those discussed above.  The Judge relied in part on the same erroneous conclusions
discussed above, e.g., conclusions regarding the application of ¶ E2.8(a) through (c).  The Judge also
relied in part on his determination regarding Applicant’s credibility.  While a Judge’s credibility
determination is entitled to deference, it is not a substitute for record evidence.  See, e.g., ISCR Case
No. 02-14995 at 6 (App. Bd. Jul. 26, 2004).  In light of the record as a whole, the Judge did not
articulate a satisfactory explanation for his favorable conclusions, and his decision is not sustainable.
Order
The Judge’s decision granting Applicant a security clearance is REVERSED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan         
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
6
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: Jean E. Smallin                  
Jean E. Smallin
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
