                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-18283 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government:  Emilo Jaksetic, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Eric A. Eisen, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant is an Iranian born, naturalized U.S. citizen, who has lived in the United 
States since 1975. Applicant’s four siblings are citizens and residents of Iran. In 1992, 
Applicant became a U.S. citizen and has held a security clearance since 1993. Since 
1975, Applicant has traveled to Iran four times with the last visit in 2002. Applicant has 
rebutted or mitigated the government’s security concerns under Guideline B, foreign 
influence. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke his 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued to 
 
 
 
1
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
 
 
 
2
                                                                                                                                                                                          
Applicant a Statement of Reasons (SOR) on July 9, 2008, detailing security concerns 
under foreign influence. 
 
 On July 22, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR, and requested a hearing. On 
September 23, 2008, I was assigned the case. On October 7, 2008, DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing scheduling the hearing held on October 29, 2008. The government 
offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 6, which were admitted into evidence. Applicant testified 
on his own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through E, which were admitted into 
evidence. On November 6 , 2008, the transcript (Tr.) was received.  
 
Procedural and Evidentiary Rulings 
 
Request for Administrative Notice 
 
Department Counsel submitted a formal request that I take administrative notice 
of certain facts relating to Iran. The request and the attached documents were not 
admitted into evidence but were included in the record as Hearing Exhibits (HEx) 
I─XVII. The facts administratively noticed are set out in the Findings of Fact, below.  
 
Request to Submit Additional Material 
 
 On December 10, 2008, I received an e-mail from Applicant’s counsel asking that 
the record be opened to allow additional testimony to be added to the record. At the 
hearing, Applicant stated his foreign relatives did not know what he did. Applicant’s 
counsel asserts, if asked, Applicant would have stated even his wife did not know he 
had a clearance prior to this proceeding.  
 
Department Counsel objects to the request to reopen the record to allow 
Applicant to offer additional testimony. Department Counsel cites ISCR Case No. 03-
20327 (App. Bd. October 26, 2006) and ISCR Case No. 03-22643 (App. Bd. June 24, 
2005). Department Counsel stated if additional post-hearing testimony is permitted 
there would be no way to cross-examination Applicant as provided for under Directive, 
Additional Procedural Guidance, Paragraph E3.1.16 and Prehearing Guidance, 
Paragraph 12.  Department Counsel’s objection was sustained. The material was 
attached to the record, but not admitted as evidence. 
 
 Applicant submitted one document, a seven page letter, which was not offered as 
evidence but as argument. Department counsel had no objection to it being considered 
as argument. It was marked and admitted as Hearing Exhibit (HEx.) 1.2 (Tr. 19)  
 
 
 
 
 
guidelines (AG) approved by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the Department of 
Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
2 The document should have been marked and admitted as HEx. XVIII.  
 
 
 
3
Findings of Fact 
 
 In his Answer to the SOR, Applicant admitted the factual allegations. He also 
provided additional information to support his request for eligibility for a security 
clearance.  
 
 Applicant is a 51-year-old software engineer and scientist who has worked for a 
defense contractor since Novmeber 1987, and has held a secret security clearance 
since July 1993. The projects he works on are related to the sun and are readily 
available in professional literature of an unclassified nature. (Ex. 5, Ex. A) In 1993, he 
obtained a secret clearance. Applicant has received four achievement awards for his 
work performance. (Ex. B) Friends, coworkers, and supervisors speak highly of 
Applicant and his work. They believe Applicant’s work has been superior and deserving 
of special recognition. He is a hard-worker known for attention to detail, thoroughness, 
problem solving, patience, seriousness, diligence, mature judgment, dedication, his 
work ethic, and perseverance. His work is professional and of excellent quality. He is an 
exemplary employee. (Ex. B, C) 
 
 In 1957, Applicant was born in Iran. Applicant’s father died while Applicant was in 
high school. In 1975, following high school graduation, Applicant came to the United 
States on a student visa. In 1979, while Applicant was still in school, the Shah of Iran 
was overthrown and an Islamic state emerged. Applicant loves his family, but his views 
are in opposition of the current Iranian regime. (Ex 3) He does not like the Iranian 
government and believes it to be a nightmare for Iran. (Ex. 4) Applicant earned a 
Bachelor of Science degree in civil engineering and decided to remain in the U.S. 
Following graduation, he was unable to secure employment in his field of study.  
 
 In 1984, Applicant met his wife, married, moved to another state to be close to 
his wife’s relatives, and enrolled at university. (Tr. 46, 47) Three children were born of 
his marriage. His oldest son, now 26, graduated from college with a business degree 
and is self-supporting. His daughter is an art education major, who is graduating this 
year. His youngest son is in his second year at university. His marriage ended in divorce 
in 1990. Since his divorce, Applicant remains close to this children.  
 
  In 1987, he earned two additional Bachelor of Science degrees, one in 
mathematics and the other in computer science. Upon graduation, he obtained 
employment with his present employer. (Tr. 48) In October 1992, Applicant became a 
naturalized U.S. citizen. Since becoming a citizen, Applicant has regularly voted in 
federal, state, and local U.S. elections. (Tr. 103) In 1997, Applicant earned a Master of 
Science degree in software engineering. (Tr. 97)  
 
 In 1994, Applicant remarried an American citizen from the Philippines who works 
as a nurse’s aid. His wife does not hold a Filipino passport and does not consider 
herself to be a Filipino citizen. (Ex. 4) They have two children ages 2 and 9. (Tr. 51) All 
of Applicant’s children were born in the U.S. Applicant has $300,000 in equity in his 
home and $350,000 in his 401(k) retirement plan. (Tr. 55-56, Ex. E) 
 
 
 
 
4
                                                          
Applicant’s father ran an auto parts store. (Tr. 42) Applicant has a brother, three 
sisters and a half-sister. (Tr. 42) His parents are both dead. None of his siblings work for 
the Iranian government. None of his siblings have ever visited him in the U.S. (Ex 4) 
Applicant does not discuss with them where he works or what he does. (Ex. 5) Applicant 
has not sent a letter to any of his siblings during the past 25 years. (Tr. 70, Ex. 5) 
Applicant’s half-sister now lives in Canada. (Tr. 70) As of February 2007, Applicant had 
not talked to his half-sister for four or five years due to a conflict with the rest of the 
family. (Tr. 77, Ex 5) Applicant had an aunt living in the U.S. who died a few days before 
his mother. (Tr. 80) He has cousins living in the U.S. who are American citizens. (Tr. 80)  
 
 Applicant’s mother, prior her death was a housewife. His brother is a retired 
ophthalmologist.3 Three of his sisters are housewives. One sister is widowed. One is 
married to an oil refinery worker, who may be retired now, and their daughter is an art 
major studying in at a university in Kansas. His other sister’s husband owes a travel 
agency. (Tr. 79) None of his siblings know what he does. He has never talked about it 
and they never asked. (Tr. 69) 
 
 Military service is required all males in Iran. However, Applicant never served in 
the Iranian military. In 1995, Applicant returned to Iran. He was then 37-years-old and 
had passed the age of military conscription. (Tr. 63) He decided to visit his mother and 
siblings whom he had not seen in 20 years. Even though he was now a U.S. citizen, 
Applicant was told by the Interest Section (IS) of the Islamic Republic of Iran that he 
could not obtain a visa to enter Iran using a U.S. passport, because Iran considers him 
to be an Iranian citizen due to his birth in Iran. (Ex. 4) Applicant obtained an Iranian 
passport and went to Iran.  
 
Although married, he went to Iran by himself for he did not know what to expect, 
thought it might be dangerous, and did not want to subject his wife to possible danger. 
(Tr. 64) He had been gone 20 years and entered Iran as if he was entering a foreign 
country. He found a country much transformed. The people lacked basic freedom and 
“things were like nearly all in shades of gray.” (Tr. 65) His trip made him appreciate 
even more the freedom and civil liberties enjoyed in the U.S. 
 
Applicant‘s Iranian passport expired in November 2002. (Ex 5) In April 2008, 
Applicant surrendered his expired Iranian passport to his company’s facility security 
officer (FSO). (Tr. 88, Ex. 6)   
 
In 1998, Applicant returned to Iran, this time with his wife, to introduce his wife to 
his mother and family. Applicant’s Iranian passport was changed to include his wife. 
(Ex. 4, 5) That passport allowed him to visit Iran for a period of up to four months 
accompanied by his spouse and one child. He stayed two to three weeks in Iran. (Tr. 
67) In 2001, following the birth of his daughter, he returned to Iran to attend his niece’s 
wedding. (Ex. 5) In 2002, Applicant made his last trip to Iran. He was in London on 
3 Ophthalmology is the branch of medicine that deals with the diagnosis and treatment of eye 
disorders.  
 
 
 
 
5
                                                          
business and decided to make a final visit to see and say goodbye to his mother, who 
was elderly and suffering with health problems (Tr. 68, 76)  
 
At that time, his Iranian passport was due to expire and he did not intend to 
renew it. He realized that without an Iranian passport he would not be allowed to enter 
Iran. Applicant used his Iranian passport only on his travels to Iran.  
 
 Applicant considers himself an American citizen and not an Iranian citizen. (Ex. 
4) Applicant fully informed his employer of his Iranian trips. In 2007, Applicant’s mother 
died. Applicant did not attend her funeral. Since her death, Applicant has made a few 
telephone calls to his relatives in Iran related to his mother’s death and on the 
anniversaries of her death. (Tr. 82, 84) Applicant has in-laws, cousins, nieces, and 
nephews living in Iran. His contact with these individuals is even less than with his 
siblings. Applicant has no property or financial interest in Iran. In 2007, he was elected 
the president of his homeowner’s association. He has no intent of returning to Iran. (Tr. 
88) He is extremely proud of being a U.S. citizen. (Tr. 101) 
 
Iran 
 
 Iran is a constitutional Islamic republic with a theocratic system of government in 
which Shi’a Muslim clergy dominate the key power structures, and ultimate political 
authority is vested in a learned religious scholar. The U.S. has not had diplomatic 
relations with Iran since 1980. The President’s National Security Strategy has stated 
that the United States “may face no greater challenge from a single country than from 
Iran.”  
 
The U.S. Government has defined the areas of objectionable Iranian behavior as: 
 
$ Iran=s efforts to acquire nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction; 
$ Its support for and involvement in international terrorism; 
$ Its support for violent opposition to the Middle East peace process;  
$ Its dismal human rights record; and 
$ Iran=s intervention in the internal affairs of Iraq.4 
 
 The U.S. has designated and characterized Iran as the most active state sponsor 
of terrorism. Iran provides critical support to non-state terrorist groups. The government 
of Iran has committed numerous, serious human rights abuses against the Iranian 
people. Abuses include political killings and incarceration; summary executions, 
including of minors; disappearances; religious persecution; torture; arbitrary arrest and 
detention, including prolonged solitary confinement; denial of due process; severe 
restrictions on civil liberties - speech, press, assembly, association, movement and 
privacy; severe restrictions on freedom of religion; official corruption; violence and legal 
4U.S. Department of State; Country Reports on Terrorism, Chapter 3 – State Sponsors of 
Terrorism Overview, dated April 30, 2008, U.S. Department of State, State Sponsors of Terrorism. 
 
 
 
6
and societal discrimination against women, ethnic and religious minorities, and 
homosexuals; trafficking in persons; and child labor.  
 
 The State Department continues to warn U.S. citizens to consider carefully the 
risks of travel to Iran. U.S. citizens who were born in Iran and the children of Iranian 
citizens—even those without Iranian passports who do not consider themselves Iranian- 
are considered Iranian citizens by Iranian authorities, since Iran does not recognize dual 
citizenship. Therefore, despite the fact that these individuals hold U.S. citizenship, under 
Iranian law, they must enter and exit Iran on an Iranian passport, unless the Iranian 
government has recognized a formal renunciation or loss of Iranian citizenship. U.S.-
Iranian dual nationals have been denied permission to enter/depart Iran using their U.S. 
passport; they even had their U.S. passports confiscated upon arrival or departure. 
U.S.-Iranian dual citizens have been detained and harassed by the Iranian government. 
Iranian security personnel may place foreign visitors under surveillance. Hotel rooms, 
telephones and fax machines may be monitored, and personnel possessions in hotel 
rooms may be searched. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
 
 
7
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Foreign Influence  
 
AG & 6 expresses the security concerns regarding foreign influence: 
 
Foreign contacts and interests may be a security concern if the individual 
has divided loyalties or foreign financial interests, may be manipulated or 
induced to help a foreign person, group, organization, or government in a 
way that is not in U.S. interests, or is vulnerable to pressure or coercion by 
any foreign interest. Adjudication under this guideline can and should 
consider the identity of the foreign country in which the foreign contact or 
financial interest is located, including, but not limited to, such 
considerations as whether the foreign country is known to target United 
States citizens to obtain protected information and/or is associated with a 
risk of terrorism. 
 
In every case where a sibling lives overseas, there is a risk of pressure on this 
relative and through them upon the holder of a security clearance. Under the facts of 
this case, a heightened risk for exploitation, inducement, manipulation pressure, or 
coercion is substantiated. However, Applicant has significant ties to the U.S. and few 
ties to Iran. While he still has four siblings living in Iran, he lives with his wife in the U.S. 
His five children were born in the U.S. He has no financial or property interests in Iran. 
He owns a home in the U.S. and his ties with the U.S. are much stronger than his ties 
with Iran. 
 
However, Applicant’s brother and three sisters are citizens and residents of Iran. 
Having considered all of the Foreign Influence disqualifying conditions, applicable 
conditions that could possibly raise a security concern are AG & 7(a) “contact with a 
foreign family member, business or professional associate, friend, or other person who 
is a citizen of or resident in a foreign country if that contact creates a heightened risk of 
foreign exploitation, inducement, manipulation, pressure, or coercion” and AG & 7(b) 
 
 
 
8
“connections to a foreign person, group, government, or country that create a potential 
conflict of interest between the individual=s obligation to protect sensitive information or 
technology and the individual=s desire to help a foreign person, group, or country by 
providing that information” apply. 
 
AG & 8 provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns:  
 
(a) the nature of the relationships with foreign persons, the country in 
which these persons are located, or the positions or activities of those 
persons in that country are such that it is unlikely the individual will be 
placed in a position of having to choose between the interests of a foreign 
individual, group, organization, or government and the interests of the 
U.S.; 
 
(b) there is no conflict of interest, either because the individual=s sense of 
loyalty or obligations to the foreign person, group, government, or country 
is so minimal, or the individual has such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., that the individual can be expected 
to resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S. interest; 
 
(c) contact or communication with foreign citizens is so casual and 
infrequent that there is little likelihood that it could create a risk for foreign 
influence or exploitation; 
 
(d) the foreign contacts and activities are on U.S. Government business or 
are approved by the cognizant security authority;  
 
(e) the individual has promptly complied with existing agency requirements 
regarding the reporting of contacts, requests, or threats from persons, 
groups, or organizations from a foreign country; and 
 
(f) the value or routine nature of the foreign business, financial, or property 
interests is such that they are unlikely to result in a conflict and could not 
be used effectively to influence, manipulate, or pressure the individual.  
 
In 1975, Applicant left Iran. In 1992, he become a U.S. citizen and in 1993, 
obtained a secret security clearance. He has been with the same employer since 1987 
and his work performance has been outstanding. In 1995, twenty years after he left Iran 
he returned to visit his family. He has made four visits to Iran with his last visit in 2002. 
In 2007, his mother died and since her death his contact with his brother and three 
sisters who live in Iran has been limited to a couple of times a year. In April 2008, 
Applicant surrendered his Iranian passport, which expired in November 2002 to his 
company’s FSO.  
 
 
 
9
                                                          
AG && 8(a) and 8(c)5 partially apply. Because of his limited contact with his 
siblings, “it is unlikely [he] will be placed in a position of having to choose between the 
interest of [his family living in Iran] and the interest of the U.S.” His infrequent contacts 
(twice a year) and not particularly close relationship with his siblings since his mother’s 
death have a very low potential for forcing him to choose between the United States and 
Iran. He met his burden of showing there is “little likelihood that [his relationship with his 
Iranian siblings] could create a risk of foreign influence or exploitation. “ However AG 
&& 8(a) and 8(b) cannot be fully applied because of Iran’s hostile relationship with the 
U.S and Iran’s negative human rights record makes it more likely that Iran would violate 
the law to gain classified information.  
 
While danger certainly exists for all who go to Iran, Applicant and his siblings are 
in no greater danger than any other individual living and working in Iran. Applicant is in 
less danger since he no longer travels to Iran. None of his siblings know what he does. 
He has never talked about it and they never asked.  
 
There is no evidence that terrorists or the Iranian Government have approached 
or threatened Applicant or his siblings for any reason. There is no evidence that his 
siblings living in Iran currently engages in activities which would bring attention to them 
or that they or other Iranian elements are even aware of Applicant’s work. As such, 
there is a reduced possibility that his siblings or Applicant would be targets for coercion 
or exploitation. None of Applicant siblings work for a foreign government and none are 
involved with organizations which seek to harm the U.S. 
 
5 In ISCR Case No. 06-17838 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 28, 2008), the Appeal Board discussed the 
precedential value of the decisions predating the revision of the Adjudicative Guidelines indicated in n. 3, 
supra, and determined where the language of the Directive is unchanged or not substantively altered, the 
precedent remains valid. AG ¶ 8(c) apparently adopted the Appeal Board’s interpretation of Foreign 
Influence Mitigating Condition 1 (FIMC 1) under the previous guidelines. The Appeal Board had 
determined that contacts with relatives living in a foreign country must be both casual and infrequent to 
apply FIMC 1. See ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 2006). Moreover, contacts with such 
family members are presumed to be “not casual.” Id. In the analysis of countervailing evidence, it is legal 
error to give significant weight to any of the following facts or factors: applicant’s ties to the United States 
(ISCR Case No. 02-13595 at 5 (App. Bd. May 10, 2005)); lack of prominence of relatives living in a 
foreign country (Id.); “family members’ low-key and noncontroversial lifestyle, and the fact that the Iranian 
government has not contacted them about Applicant” (ISCR Case No. 04-12500 at 4 (App. Bd. Oct. 26, 
2006); one relative living in a foreign country may be sufficient to negate FIMC 1 (ISCR Case No. 03-
02382 at 5 (App. Bd. Feb. 15, 2006)); a foreign relative’s fragile health (ISCR Case No. 02-29403 at 4 
(App. Bd. Dec. 14, 2004)), advanced age (ISCR Case No. 02-00305 at 7 (App. Bd. Feb. 12, 2003), 
financial independence (ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005), or lack of financial 
dependency upon applicant (ISCR Case No. 03-15205 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan 21, 2005)); foreign relatives  
spend part of each year in the U.S. (ISCR Case No. 02-31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)); the lack of 
any connection between the foreign relative and the foreign government in question (ISCR Case No. 02-
31154 at 6 (App. Bd. Sep. 22, 2005)); the absence of any attempt at exploitation in the past (ISCR Case 
No. 03-15205 at 4 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005)); a foreign country’s friendly relationship with the U.S., its 
stable, democratic government, or its extensive foreign military agreements with the United States (ISCR 
Case No. 02-22461 at 5-6 (App. Bd. Oct. 27, 2005)) and an applicant’s “refusal to travel to Iran” and 
“meticulous work habits and practice of strictly following the rules relating to his work” (ISCR Case No. 03-
15205 at 3 (App. Bd. Jan. 21, 2005)). Notwithstanding the Appeal Board’s position, I conclude that many 
of these attributes are pertinent to the analysis in this case under the whole person concept.   
 
 
 
 
10
AG & 8(b) fully applies. There is no evidence that his siblings or their spouses 
have been political activists, challenging the policies of the Iranian Government. There 
is no evidence any of them currently works or ever worked for the Iranian Government, 
military, or new media, or that of any other foreign government. Applicant’s mother, prior 
her death was a housewife. His brother is a retired ophthalmologist and sisters are 
housewives. One sister is widowed. One is married to the owner of a travel agency. And 
the other is married to an oil refinery worker, who may now be retired, and their 
daughter is a student at a U.S. university.  
 
Applicant’s first wife, current wife, and five children are all U.S. citizens living in 
the U.S. He has $300,000 in equity in his home and $350,000 in his 401(k) retirement 
plan, all in the U.S. He has no foreign property or income.  
 
Applicant was born in Iran 52 years ago. He came to the United States following 
high school to attend college. He obtained three BS and one MS degrees from U.S. 
universities. He chose to stay in the U.S., following the 1979 fall of the Shah of Iran and 
the emergency of the Islamic state. Applicant loves his siblings, but his views are in 
opposition of the current Iranian regime. His four trips to Iran reinforced his appreciation 
for the freedom he has in the U.S. Applicant has “such deep and longstanding 
relationships and loyalties in the U.S., [he] can be expected to resolve any conflict of 
interest in favor of the U.S. interest.” 
 
AG & 8(f) partially applies because he has no interest in foreign property and he 
has significant U.S. property and assets. AG & 8(f) does not fully apply because the 
SOR and record do not raise AG & 7(e).  Since becoming a U.S. citizen, he has voted in 
U.S. elections. These mitigating conditions taken together are sufficient to fully 
overcome the foreign influence security concerns. 
 
There is little likelihood that Applicant will be placed in a position of having to 
choose between the interests of the U.S. and a foreign entity. Likewise, because of his 
close ties and his loyalties to the U.S., including his wife and five children (all U.S. born 
citizens), he would resolve any conflict of interest in favor of the U.S.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
Protection of our national security is of paramount concern. Security clearance 
decisions are not intended to assign guilt or to impose further punishment for past 
transgressions. Rather, the objective of the adjudicative process is the fair-minded, 
commonsense assessment of a person=s trustworthiness and fitness for access to 
classified information. In reaching this decision, I have considered the whole person 
concept in evaluating Applicant=s risk and vulnerability in protecting our national 
interests. I considered the totality of Applicant’s family ties to Iran and the heavy burden 
an Applicant carries when he has family members in a foreign country, such as Iran.  
 
 Under the whole person concept, the Administrative Judge must evaluate an 
Applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the Applicant’s 
 
 
 
11
conduct and all the circumstances. The Administrative Judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept. 
 
In 1975, Applicant came to the U.S. In 1992, he became a U.S. citizen and 
obtained a security clearance the following year. He has held a clearance more than 15 
years. However, merely having held a clearance is not in and of itself a reason to 
continue the retention of a clearance, but having been granted a clearance one must 
ask what has changed since that grant. Applicant was a naturalized U.S. citizen then as 
he is now. Then, he had foreign relatives consisting of his mother and four siblings. 
Now, he still has his siblings, but his closest relative, his mother has died. With her 
death, his communication with his four siblings has been reduced to one or two contacts 
a year.  
 
Following the grant of the clearance, he traveled to Iran four times and held an 
Iranian passport. Now, he no longer travels to Iran and has surrendered the expired 
Iranian passport to his FSO. He has no intention of ever returning to Iran. He chose not 
to return to Iran even for his mother’s funeral. Then, he was divorced from a U.S. citizen 
and had three children. Now he is married to a U.S. citizen and has five children, all 
born in the U.S. Then he had worked for his employer six years. Now he has worked for 
his employer 21 years. Then, he had lived in the U.S. for 18 years. Now, he has lived 
here for 33 years.  
 
Applicant does not intent to return to Iran. His family, property, and future are in 
the U.S. I have carefully weighed the evidence in favor of Applicant against the 
government=s concerns about Applicant=s ability to protect classified information. I have 
considered the Iranian government’s hostile relationship with the U.S. and unwillingness 
to comply with international law and respect the human rights of Iranians and former 
Iranians. I find that there is little potential for Applicant to be pressured, coerced, or 
exploited because he has siblings living in Iran. Overall, the record evidence leaves me 
without questions or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security 
clearance. For all these reasons, I conclude Applicant has mitigated the foreign 
influence security concerns. 
 
 
 
 
 
12
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline B:  FOR APPLICANT 
 
 Subparagraph 1.a – 1.d:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is granted. 
 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
 
 
 
