                                                             
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
  )  ISCR Case No. 07-18151 
  ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Francisco Mendez, Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Bobbie Henry, Esquire 
 
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
HEINY, Claude R., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant failed to timely file state and federal tax returns from 1998 through 
2007. She provided false answers on her security clearance questionnaire concerning 
unpaid judgments, bankruptcy filings, unpaid debts, and garnishments. Applicant has 
failed to rebut or mitigate the government’s security concerns under financial 
considerations, personal conduct, and criminal conduct. Clearance is denied. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
 Applicant contests the Defense Department’s intent to deny or revoke her 
eligibility for an industrial security clearance. Acting under the relevant Executive Order 
and DoD Directive,1 the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) issued a 
                                                          
1 Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 
1960), as amended; Department of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security 
Clearance Review Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective within the 
Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006. 
 
 
 
1
Statement of Reasons (SOR) on April 23, 2008, detailing security concerns under 
financial considerations, personal conduct, and criminal conduct 
  
 On July 20, 2008, Applicant answered the SOR and requested a hearing. On 
October 16, 2008, I was assigned the case. On October 22, 2008, DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing scheduling the hearing which was held on November 5, 2008. 
Applicant appeared at that hearing and requested a continuance. For good cause the 
continuance was granted. The SOR was amended; and on November 19, 2008, 
Applicant answered the amended allegations. On November 25, 2008, DOHA issued a 
notice of hearing scheduling a second hearing which was held on December 3, 2008. 
 
 The government offered Exhibits (Ex.) 1 through 13, which were admitted into 
evidence. Applicant testified on her own behalf and submitted Exhibits A through L, 
which were admitted into evidence. The record was held open to allow additional 
information from Applicant. On December 10, 2008, 12 pages of additional material 
were submitted. Department Counsel had no objection to the material, which was 
admitted into the record as Ex. M. Transcripts (Tr.) were received on December 12, 
2008 and January 12, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
 In her Answer to the SOR, Applicant denied the factual allegations in ¶¶1.b, 2.b, 
2.c., 2.d, 3.a, 3.b, and 3.c of the SOR. She admitted the remaining factual allegations, 
with explanations.  
 
 Applicant is a 59-year-old senior systems engineer who has worked for a 
defense contractor since October 2001, and is seeking to maintain a top secret security 
clearance. Applicant has a master’s degree in divinity and a PhD in counseling. (Tr. 
117)  
 
 From January 1970 through October 2001, Applicant worked for a government 
agency, retiring as a systems engineer. While employed, Applicant claimed zero 
exemptions on her employee exemption form (W 4), which resulted in her employer 
taking the maximum amount of tax from her bi-weekly pay. (Tr. 49) Applicant’s 
retirement pension was approximately $37,000 in 2002, has increased slightly each 
year, and was $40,000 in 2007. No taxes were ever withheld from her pension. 
Applicant’s taxable income nearly doubled from 2001 ($68,000) to 2002 ($126,000) 
when she acquired her new job. She started her new job two days after her retirement. 
She retired on a Friday and started her current job on a Monday. (Tr. 46)  
 
 Applicant married in 1976 and separated in September 2001. (Tr. 56) During the 
marriage, her husband handled the family’s finances. (Tr. 47) From mid-1980s to mid-
2001, Applicant’s husband operated a general contracting business. (Tr. 124) 
Applicant’s husband was hired to work on an individual’s home. That individual obtained 
a $23,000 default judgment against Applicant and her husband. Applicant first became 
aware of the problem in July 2000. A number of letters were sent to her home 
 
 
 
2
concerning this action. (Tr. 60) Applicant’s husband told her not to worry about it. 
Following the entry of the judgment, when her wages were garnished, Applicant hired 
an attorney to assist her. She was distraught and annoyed money was being taken from 
her pay check. (Tr. 95)  
From 1998 or 1999 until the date of the second hearing, Applicant failed to file 
either federal or state income tax returns or pay income taxes, penalties, or interest due. 
It is a misdemeanor to fail to file state and federal income tax. (Ex. 13) During a January 
2007 interview, Applicant stated that every two years or so, she received letters from tax 
authorities concerning her nonpayment of taxes. (Ex. 9) She said she received letter, 
opened them, and read them. (Tr. 52) The letters stated how much she owed in taxes. 
She asserts the letters never mentioned tax liens, but did state the outstanding balance 
owed. (Tr. 105) She assumed, once her taxes were filed, she would receive a refund.  
Over the years, Applicant employed three accountants to help her file her taxes. 
She never showed the letters from the tax authority to either of the first two accountants 
who were helping her with her taxes. (Tr. 80) 
 
In November 1994, the state obtained a tax lien against Applicant in the amount 
of $33,381. (Ex. 5) In July 2000, an individual obtained a $23,080 judgment against 
Applicant. (Ex. 2) In November 2000, a homeowners association obtained a $617 
judgment against Applicant. (Ex. 3) The action had been filed in October 1999. 
Applicant was advised by a foreclosure specialist she needed to apply for bankruptcy 
protection in attempt to forestall the foreclosure on her home. In June 2000 and April 
2001, Applicant filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy protection. (Ex. 6, 7, 8) On October 2002, 
the state filed a $69,954 tax lien against Applicant. (Ex. 4) In 2001, the home went to 
foreclosure. 
 
In late 2001 or early 2002, after the foreclosure on the home and the 
garnishment of her wages, Applicant came to believe she could not trust what her 
husband told her. (Tr. 96) Applicant’s wages were garnished from January 2001 until 
October 2001. Approximately $100 was garnished from her bi-weekly pay. When she 
changed jobs, the garnishment stopped. (Tr. 97) She has made no additional payments 
on this judgment after the last garnishment payment in 2001. Applicant believes this is 
not her obligation, but her husband’s obligation. However, Applicant stated she would 
do what she needed to do to clear up her record. She asserted, if she has to pay this 
judgment to do so, she would pay it. (Tr. 92, 99) No evidence of payment was 
presented. 
 
In August 2003, Applicant received the assistance of a tax preparer to help her 
complete her past due returns. Returns were prepared for 1998, 1999, and 2000 and 
signed by the accountant on August 15, 2003. (Tr. 83) All that was required was for 
Applicant to sign and submit the returns. Applicant failed to submit the forms. Applicant 
consulted a second paid tax consultant regarding her unpaid taxes. (Tr. 162) No returns 
were filed until after the second hearing. Applicant admits she did not file her tax returns 
due to her own negligence. (Tr. 158)  
 
 
 
 
3
 In November 2006, Applicant completed an Electronic Questionnaire for 
Investigations Processing (e-QIP). Applicant answered “no” to question 27a, which 
asked if, during the prior seven years, she had filed a petition for bankruptcy. Applicant 
answered “no” to question 27b, which asked if, during the prior seven years, her wages 
had been garnished or any property repossessed. Applicant answered “no” to question 
27c, which asked if, during the prior seven years, any lien had been placed against her 
property for failing to pay taxes.  
 
 Applicant answered “no” to question 27a and 27 b, which asked if, during the 
prior seven years, she had ever been more than 180 days delinquent on any debt or if, 
at the time she completed the e-QIP, she was currently more than 90 days delinquent 
on any debt. Applicant asserted she should have paid closer attention to the completion 
of the e-QIP. She also asserted she did not intentionally and willfully falsify her answers 
to the e-QIP. (Tr. 65, 67) In the 39 years Applicant has held a clearance, she has 
completed a reinvestigation every five to six years, some times with an accompanying 
lifestyle polygraph.  
 
 In her response to the SOR, Applicant asserted the $23,000 judgment by an 
individual was not her debt, but her husband’s debt; that there was no judgment by the 
home owner’s association listed on her credit report; and she denied a tax lien had been 
entered against her. Her response asserted the omissions from her e-QIP were 
inadvertent and not deliberate. She asserted she thought the bankruptcy procedure had 
been started, but was never finished. (Tr. 54) She did not think of the bankruptcy as 
having been filed because it was not completed. (Tr. 54) She also asserted she was 
under the impression that she did not owe any taxes and could file at any time.  
 
 In January 2007, Applicant was interviewed and asked about her failure to file 
taxes, the unpaid judgments, tax liens, and her responses to the e-QIP. When asked 
about outstanding debts by the interviewer, Applicant volunteered she had not filed 
taxes and the foreclosure. (Tr. 52, 115) In January 2007, Applicant stated she was 
going to obtain the services of a tax consultant and correct her failure to file. (Tr. 140) In 
February 2008, Applicant stated in response to written interrogatories that she was still 
working with a tax consultant to clear up her tax filings. (Ex 10)  
 
 At the hearing, Applicant presented copies of prepared state and federal income 
tax returns for years 1999 through 2007. (Ex. A – H, J - L) Applicant asserted she had 
not had an opportunity to review the submitted tax returns. (Tr. 131, 132) No state 
return was provided for 1998. On December 10, 2008, following the hearing, Applicant 
submitted evidence she had filed Federal tax returns for tax years 1998 through and 
including 2007. (Ex. M) The forms are stamped as received by the Internal Revenue 
Service December 4, 2008, the day after the second hearing. She also submitted 
evidence her state tax returns were filed for tax years 1998 through and including tax 
year 2007. Her state returns were stamped received by the state revenue administration 
division and dated received December 4, 2008. (Ex. M) The material submitted 
consisted only of the date stamped first page of each federal and state income tax 
return.  
 
 
 
4
 
 At the hearing, Applicant presented copies of her state income tax returns for 
1999 through 2007 and her federal returns from 1998 through 2007. Applicant had 
$231,000 in federal tax withheld from her wages between 1998 and 2007. She had 
$48,000 in state tax withheld. The amounts were for the following years: for 1998, 
$6,757 federal and no state return (Ex K); for 1999, $5,840 federal and $3,965 state (Ex 
I, J); for 2000, $6,492 federal and $4,245 state (Ex I, H,,L); for 2001, $10,434 federal 
and $4,289 state (Ex I, H); for 2002, $26,039 federal and $0 state (Ex F); for 2003, 
$28,413 federal and $0 state (Ex E); for 2004, $36,342 federal and $11,718 state (Ex 
D); for 2005, $36,703 federal and $0 state (Ex C); for 2006, $37,586 federal and 
$12,320 state (Ex I, B); and, for 2007, $36,530 federal and $12,020 state (Ex I, A). 
 
 Applicant’s state returns indicate she would receive a small refunds in 1999 
($379) and 2000 ($343). According to her calculations, she owed $44,387 in past due 
state taxes. The amount represents: 2001 ($1,621), 2002 ($10,506), 2003 ($12,977), 
2004 ($2,229), 2005 ($14,997), 2006 ($906), and 2007 ($1,151). These amounts 
represent taxes owed less amounts withheld on Applicant’s behalf from her pay checks.  
 
 Applicant’s calculations indicated three years of federal income tax refunds: 1998 
($1,655), 2006 ($4,462), and 2007 ($738). She owed $23,244 in past due federal taxes. 
The amount represents 1999 ($218), 2000 ($496), 2001 ($1,997), 2002 ($4,013), 2003 
($7,564), 2004 ($3,902), and 2005 ($5,054). These amounts represent taxes owed less 
amounts withheld from Applicant’s bi-weekly pay checks. According to her calculations, 
Applicant owes $67,631 in state and federal back taxes. Her calculations do not account 
for past due interest or penalties. Applicant asserted, but provided no supporting 
documentation, that she had the ability to immediately pay $60,000 in past due taxes, 
but would not be able to immediately pay $100,000 for past due taxes. (Tr. 138)  
 
 Filing of the returns stops the accumulations of additional penalties for failing to 
file, but does not impact on interest, which will continue to accrue until the taxes are 
paid. Once filed, Applicant intends to submit amended returns when more accurate 
information is known as to the amounts of state tax withheld. (Tr. 151)  
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In addition 
to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative guidelines list 
potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are useful in 
evaluating an applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
 
 
 
5
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 2(b) 
requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based on 
the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the government predicated upon trust and confidence. This relationship 
transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The government 
reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it grants access to 
classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration of the possible risk 
the applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or safeguard classified 
information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally permissible extrapolation 
as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).  
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
 
 Revised Adjudicative Guideline (AG) ¶ 18 articulates the security concerns 
relating to financial problems: 
 
Failure or inability to live within one's means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds. 
 
 
 
6
 
Additionally, an individual who is financially irresponsible may also be 
irresponsible, unconcerned, negligent, or careless in properly handling and 
safeguarding classified information. Behaving responsibly or irresponsibly in one aspect 
of life provides an indication of how a person may behave in other aspects of life.  
 
A person’s relationship with her creditors is a private matter until evidence is 
uncovered demonstrating an inability or unwillingness to repay debts under agreed 
upon terms. Absent evidence of strong extenuating or mitigating circumstances, an 
applicant with a history of serious or recurring financial difficulties is in a position of risk 
that is inconsistent with holding a security clearance. An applicant is not required to be 
debt free, but is required to manage her finances so as to meet her financial obligations. 
 
 Applicant’s history of delinquent debt is documented in her credit report, her 
interview by an Office of Personnel Management (OPM) investigator, her SOR 
response, her response to interrogatories, and her testimony. Applicant failed to file her 
taxes for ten years. Applicant, according to her calculations, owes in excess of $60,000 
in back taxes. In 2003, she had tax returns prepared, but failed to submit them. In 2007, 
she stated she would obtain a tax consultant to submit her returns. She made a similar 
claim in February 2008. At the first hearing, she had yet to submit the returns. The 
returns were not submitted until after the second hearing. She has yet to pay her tax or 
either of the two judgments entered against her in 2000. She has provided insufficient 
documentation to show significant progress resolving her debts. Disqualifying 
Conditions AG ¶ 19(a), “inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts” and AG ¶19(c), “a 
history of not meeting financial obligations,” apply. 
 
 Five mitigating conditions under AG ¶¶ 20(a) – (e) are potentially applicable: 
 
(a) the behavior happened so long ago, was so infrequent, or occurred 
under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast 
doubt on the individual's current reliability, trustworthiness, or good 
judgment; 
 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the circumstances; 
 
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; 
 
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts; and 
 
 
 
 
7
(e) the individual has a reasonable basis to dispute the legitimacy of the 
past-due debt which is the cause of the problem and provides 
documented proof to substantiate the basis of the dispute or provides 
evidence of actions to resolve the issue. 
 
AG ¶ 20(a) does not apply. Ten years of state and federal tax returns were not 
timely filed. This is not infrequent conduct. The returns were filed after the second 
hearing and she has yet to make payment of her taxes. The last payment on either of 
the two judgments occurred in 2001. Applicant’s said she was negligent for failing to file 
her tax returns. Her recent filing is insufficient to find this is not behavior which was 
occurred under such circumstances that it is unlikely to recur. It does cast doubt on her 
reliability, trustworthiness, and judgment.  
 
In September 2001, Applicant separated from her husband. She has failed to 
show how that event seven years ago impacts on her current finances or her ability to 
file her returns. Applicant asserted she had enough funds to pay $60,000 in back taxes. 
She did not address why she had not paid the $600 judgment or the other unpaid 
judgment. AG & 20(b) does not apply. 
 
The federal and states taxes remain unpaid as does the two judgments. There is 
no evidence she has attended financial classes. There is no good-faith effort to repay 
the overdue creditor or otherwise resolve the debts. Applicant stopped paying on the 
$23,000 judgment when she changed jobs and the garnishment ended. She made no 
payments since 2001. Neither AG & 20(c) nor & 20(d) apply. 
 
Guideline E, Personal Conduct  
 
 The Directive sets out various factors relevant to an applicant=s personal conduct 
that may be potentially disqualifying. Paragraph 15 of the Adjudicative Guidelines (AG) 
states a concern where there is conduct “involving questionable judgment, lack of 
candor, dishonesty, or unwillingness to comply with rules and regulations can raise 
questions about an individual's reliability, trustworthiness and ability to protect classified 
information. Of special interest is any failure to provide truthful and candid answers 
during the security clearance process or any other failure to cooperate with the security 
clearance process.” 
 
 Under AG &16(a), “deliberate omission, concealment, or falsification of relevant 
facts from any personnel security questionnaire, personal history statement, or similar 
form used to conduct investigations, determine employment qualifications, award 
benefits or status, determine security clearance eligibility or trustworthiness, or award 
fiduciary responsibilities” and AG &16(b) “deliberately providing false or misleading 
information concerning relevant facts to an employer, investigator, security official, 
competent medical authority, or other official government representative,” apply. 
Applicant=s false answers on her e-QIP concerning her unpaid judgments, unpaid taxes, 
tax lien, garnishment, and bankruptcy filings tend to show questionable judgment, 
unreliability, and a lack of trustworthiness. 
 
 
 
8
 
 The November 2006 e-QIP, question 27, asked Applicant if during the prior 
seven years, which would have been since November 1999, she had any liens placed 
against her property for failing to pay taxes or other debts. She answered “no.” The 
state filed a tax lien against her in 2002. Applicant asserts she was unaware of any tax 
liens and did not intentionally provide false information. Tax liens are routinely imposed 
only after a person is notified of the tax obligations and provided an opportunity to 
respond. Applicant knew she was delinquent on her state and federal taxes. She stated 
she was receiving letters about her unpaid taxes, which she had read, and knew the tax 
authority claimed she owed back taxes.  
 
 Bankruptcy petitions were filed in June 2000 and April 2001 in an attempt to 
prevent the foreclosure of her home. Despite the clear language of the e-QIP, which 
asked if during the prior seven years she had filed a petition under any chapter of the 
bankruptcy code, she answered “no.” She asserts she answered this question as she 
did because the bankruptcy, though started, was never finished. The question asks 
about filings and not the about discharged debts or bankruptcies being dismissed. 
 
 In November 2000, a homeowners association obtained a $617 judgment against 
Applicant. The action had been filed in October 1999. The action was filed and 
judgment entered against her and her husband while they still occupied their home. 
Foreclosure of the home occurred in late 2001.  
 
 Applicant was aware of the $23,000 judgment against her and a garnishment of 
her wages because money was taken from her pay check for approximately ten months 
between January 2001 and October 2001. She knew of the judgment because she hired 
an attorney to help her address the garnishment. When Applicant completed her e-QIP, 
she was asked in question 27 if she had any unpaid judgments against her she failed to 
list either of the unpaid judgments. 
 
 Applicant had not filed taxes for ten years nor paid any past due tax. She was 
receiving letters from tax authorities telling her she owed back taxes. When she 
completed her e-QIP she was asked in question 28 if she had ever been more than 180 
days delinquent on any debt or was currently delinquent on any debt. She was aware 
she owed taxes.  
 
Applicant’s explanations for failings to list her bankruptcy filings, unpaid 
judgments, past due taxes, and garnishment are not credible. Her assertion that she 
was not being deceptive is unpersuasive. Applicant knew she had not filed taxes for 10 
years and knew she was receiving letters stating she owed past due taxes. She knew of 
the $23,000 unpaid judgment and garnishment. I find Applicant deliberately falsified her 
answers to question 27 and 28 of the security clearance application.  
 
Under the Directive, an applicant may mitigate the security concerns arising from 
questionable personal conduct under certain circumstances. AG ¶17 provides 
conditions that could mitigate personal conduct security concerns, including AG ¶ 17(a): 
 
 
 
9
“if a person provides the individual made prompt, good-faith efforts to correct the 
omission, concealment, or falsification before being confronted with the facts.” I find this 
mitigating factor does not apply. Applicant has not met her burden of proving that she 
made good-faith efforts to correct the omissions in her security clearance application or 
that her efforts were prompt. She completed her e-QIP in November 2006 and was 
interviewed in January 2007. There is no evidence she volunteered any information 
before being questioned about her unpaid taxes.  
 
AG ¶ 17(f) provides mitigation where “the information was unsubstantiated or 
from a source of questionable reliability.” Applicant=s failure to pay taxes for ten years, 
failure to list her bankruptcy filings, failure to list her unpaid judgments, and her 
garnishment is information pertinent to a determination of her judgment, trustworthiness, 
and reliability. I find this mitigating factor does not apply.  
 
AG ¶ 17(c) provides mitigation where “the offense is so minor, or so much time 
has passed, or the behavior is so infrequent, or it happened under such unique 
circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the individual's 
reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The security clearance application in 
issue was executed in November 2006. The past due taxes and two judgments remain 
unpaid and are therefore considered recent. The available evidence shows Applicant 
gave five false answers on the security clearance application. This was not a single, 
isolated incident. I conclude this potentially mitigating condition does not apply. I also 
considered carefully the other potentially mitigating conditions and conclude they do not 
apply.  
 
Guideline J, Criminal Conduct 
 
AG ¶ 30 expresses the security concern pertaining to criminal conduct: “Criminal 
activity creates doubt about a person's judgment, reliability, and trustworthiness. By its 
very nature, it calls into question a person's ability or willingness to comply with laws, 
rules and regulations.”  
 
AG ¶ 31(a) states it may be disqualifying where there “a single serious crime or 
multiple lesser offenses.” Similarly, AG ¶ 31(c) provides “allegation or admission of 
criminal conduct, regardless of whether the person was formally charged, formally 
prosecuted or convicted” may be disqualifying. It is a misdemeanor to fail to file state 
and/or federal tax returns. Paragraph 3 of the SOR alleges Applicant violated 18 U.S.C. 
' 1001 by deliberately making a materially false statement on her security clearance 
application. For the reasons discussed above, I find Applicant deliberately made 
materially false statements on her SF 86 in violation of 18 U.S.C. ' 1001.  
 
Security concerns raised by criminal conduct may be mitigated under certain 
circumstances. AG ¶ 32(a) provides conditions that could mitigate security concerns if 
“so much time has elapsed since the criminal behavior happened, or it happened under 
such unusual circumstances that it is unlikely to recur and does not cast doubt on the 
individual's reliability, trustworthiness, or good judgment.” The false statements at issue 
 
 
 
10
were made on the security clearance application that is presently before us and is 
therefore recent. This mitigating condition does not apply. There was not showing her 
failing to pay taxes was due to is unusual circumstance. Her failure started three years 
before she changed job. There is no showing her false answers were the result of 
unusual circumstances.  
 
Under AG ¶ 32 (d), criminal conduct may be mitigated if “there is evidence of 
successful rehabilitation; including but not limited to the passage of time without 
recurrence of criminal activity, remorse or restitution, job training or higher education, 
good employment record, or constructive community involvement.” Following the 
hearing, Applicant filed her state and federal tax returns. However, Applicant=s evidence 
does not convince me that there is Aclear evidence of successful rehabilitation.” This 
potentially mitigating condition does not apply. The other potentially mitigating 
conditions were carefully considered and do not apply.  
 
Whole Person Concept 
 
 Under the whole person concept, the administrative judge must evaluate an 
applicant’s eligibility for a security clearance by considering the totality of the applicant’s 
conduct and all the circumstances. The administrative judge should consider the nine 
adjudicative process factors listed at AG ¶ 2(a):  
 
(1) the nature, extent, and seriousness of the conduct; (2) the 
circumstances surrounding the conduct, to include knowledgeable 
participation; (3) the frequency and recency of the conduct; (4) the 
individual’s age and maturity at the time of the conduct; (5) the extent to 
which participation is voluntary; (6) the presence or absence of 
rehabilitation and other permanent behavioral changes; (7) the motivation 
for the conduct; (8) the potential for pressure, coercion, exploitation, or 
duress; and (9) the likelihood of continuation or recurrence. 
 
 Under AG ¶ 2(c), the ultimate determination of whether to grant eligibility for a 
security clearance must be an overall commonsense judgment based upon careful 
consideration of the guidelines and the whole person concept.  
 
I considered the potentially disqualifying and mitigating conditions in light of all 
the facts and circumstances surrounding this case. Failing to file tax returns and pay 
state and federal income tax for ten years indicates poor self-control, lack of judgment, 
or unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. Failing to pay judgments and 
providing false answers on a security questionnaire also indicates a lack of judgment or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations. She stopped making payment on the 
$23,000 judgment when she changed jobs and the garnishment of her wages stopped. 
She says she will pay this if she has to, but provided no evidence of having done so. 
She asserts she has sufficient funs to pay $60,000 in back taxes, but failed to explain 
why she has not paid the $600 homeowner’s judgment. She has known of this small 
 
 
 
11
 
 
 
12
judgment since at least April 2008 when she received the SOR and the debt remains 
unpaid. 
 
She did not file her taxes until after her second hearing, which again supports her 
claim that she will do so if she has to in order to keep her clearance. Ten years of 
unpaid taxes, bankruptcy filings, garnishment of one’s wages, and unpaid judgments 
are a type of obligations an applicant is expected to remember and report on her e-QIP. 
According to her own calculations, she owes in excess of $60,000 in back taxes, which 
makes no accounting for penalties and past due interest. She owes an additional 
$23,000 for an unpaid judgment. Overall, the record evidence leaves me with questions 
or doubts as to Applicant’s eligibility and suitability for a security clearance. For these 
reasons, I conclude Applicant has not mitigated the security concerns arising from her 
financial considerations and personal conduct.  
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, financial considerations: AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a – 1.e:  Against Applicant 
 
 Paragraph 2, Personal Conduct:   AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 2.a – 2.d:  Against Applicant 
   
 Paragraph 3, Criminal Conduct:  AGAINST APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 3.a – 3.c:  Against Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
 In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is not 
clearly consistent with the national interest to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Eligibility for access to classified information is denied.  
 
 
 
_________________ 
CLAUDE R. HEINY II 
Administrative Judge 
