 
1 
 
 
                                                              
                           DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE 
         DEFENSE OFFICE OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 
           
             
 
In the matter of: ) 
 ) 
 XXXXXXXXXX, XXXXX )  ISCR Case No. 07-15897 
 SSN: XXX-XX-XXXX ) 
 ) 
Applicant for Security Clearance ) 
 
 
Appearances 
 
For Government: Melvin A. Howry, Esq., Department Counsel 
For Applicant: Pro se  
 
 
 
______________ 
 
Decision 
______________ 
 
 
TUIDER, Robert J., Administrative Judge: 
 
Applicant has mitigated security concerns pertaining to Financial 
Considerations. Clearance is granted. 
 
Statement of the Case 
 
Applicant submitted a Security Clearance Application (SF-86), on September 
14, 2004. On July 16, 2008, the Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) 
issued a Statement of Reasons (SOR) detailing security concerns under Guideline F 
for Applicant. The action was taken under Executive Order 10865, Safeguarding 
Classified Information within Industry (February 20, 1960), as amended; Department 
of Defense Directive 5220.6, Defense Industrial Personnel Security Clearance Review 
Program (January 2, 1992), as amended (Directive), and the revised adjudicative 
guidelines (AG) promulgated by the President on December 29, 2005, and effective 
within the Department of Defense for SORs issued after September 1, 2006.  
  
 Applicant answered the SOR in writing on September 26, 2008, and requested 
a hearing before an administrative judge. DOHA received her response on September 
 
2 
 
 
29, 2008. Department Counsel was prepared to proceed on November 5, 2008. On 
November 14, 2008, the case was assigned to another administrative judge, and on 
January 15, 2009, the case was reassigned to me due to caseload considerations. 
DOHA issued a notice of hearing on December 12, 2008, scheduling the hearing for 
January 22, 2009. The hearing was held as scheduled. 
 
The Government offered Government Exhibits (GE) 1 through 9, which were 
received without objection. The Government submitted a List of Government Exhibits, 
Exhibit (Ex.) I. The Applicant offered a binder with three separate tabs collectively 
marked as Applicant Exhibit (AE) A, which was received without objection, and 
testified on her own behalf.  
 
I held the record open to afford the Applicant the opportunity to submit 
additional documents on her behalf. Applicant timely submitted a series of e-mails 
collectively marked as AE B, which were received without objection. DOHA received 
the hearing transcript (Tr.) on February 2, 2009.  
 
Findings of Fact 
 
Applicant admitted SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.c., 1.e. – 1.i., 1.k. and denied 1.d. and 1.j. 
All admissions and denials were accompanied by explanation. Her admissions and 
explanations are incorporated herein as findings of fact. After a thorough review of the 
evidence, I make the following additional findings of fact:  
 
Applicant is a 37-year-old logistics analyst, who has worked for her defense 
contractor employer since April 2008. GE 2, Tr. 19-20. She currently holds a top 
secret clearance, discussed infra, and seeks to renew her clearance. To remain 
eligible for employment, she must maintain a secret clearance. Tr. 20-21.  
 
Applicant graduated from high school in June 1989, and was awarded a 
bachelor of science degree majoring in information technology in October 2003. GE 2, 
Tr. 21-23. She served in the U.S. Army from November 1991 to August 2000, and was 
honorably discharged as a Sergeant (pay grade E-5). While in the Army, she 
successfully held a top secret clearance, which was granted in December 1996. She 
maintained that clearance with several employers post-Army until now. GE 2, Tr. 20-
21, 28-29. 
 
Applicant was previously married from December 1990 to February 1993. That 
marriage ended by divorce. Applicant remarried in December 1998, and that marriage 
ended by divorce in January 2002. She has a nine-year-old son from her second 
marriage. Applicant lives and works in a very remote U.S. location in military housing 
with her 61-year-old mother, and nine-year-old son. Her mother suffers from the 
effects of a 2003 heart attack and receives social security disability payments. 
Applicant’s mother is unable to care for herself both financially and physically. 
Applicant provides her mother financial support sufficient to claim her as a tax 
exemption. GE 2, Tr. 23-28. 
 
3 
 
 
Applicant’s background investigation addressed her financial situation and 
included the review of her signed sworn October 2002 statement, her September 2004 
SF-86, her December 2004, May 2006, December 2007, June 2008, November 2008 
credit reports, and April 2008 DOHA Interrogatories. GE 1 – 8.  
 
Applicant’s SOR identified 11 separate line items, which included three charged 
off accounts, and eight collection accounts approximating $36,900.  
 
Applicant attributes her financial problems to unemployment following her 
discharge from the Army, a series of low paying jobs, a former husband who incurred 
debt and did not contribute to the family income, and a separation followed by divorce. 
It was not until she secured her present job that she was able to earn sufficient income 
to support herself and her family. Tr. 35-56. 
 
Since her SOR was issued, Applicant has paid off one charged off account in 
the amount of $683.00 (SOR ¶ 1.b.). In September 2008, she entered into an 
agreement with a credit management company to consolidate her debts. Since 
October 2008, she has been paying this company a monthly fee by direct debit that is 
applied to the company’s fee or debt principle. AE A. Additionally, post-hearing she 
provided evidence of having sought financial counseling and provided updates of her 
progress in attaining financial stability. AE B. 
 
Applicant provided five favorable reference letters from individuals who have 
known her in a professional and personal capacity. All references support the notion 
that Applicant is trustworthy and honorable. AE A. 
 
Policies 
 
 When evaluating an Applicant’s suitability for a security clearance, the 
administrative judge must consider the revised adjudicative guidelines (AG). In 
addition to brief introductory explanations for each guideline, the adjudicative 
guidelines list potentially disqualifying conditions and mitigating conditions, which are 
useful in evaluating an Applicant’s eligibility for access to classified information. 
 
These guidelines are not inflexible rules of law. Instead, recognizing the 
complexities of human behavior, these guidelines are applied in conjunction with the 
factors listed in the adjudicative process. The administrative judge’s over-arching 
adjudicative goal is a fair, impartial and common sense decision. According to AG ¶ 
2(c), the entire process is a conscientious scrutiny of a number of variables known as 
the “whole person concept.” The administrative judge must consider all available, 
reliable information about the person, past and present, favorable and unfavorable, in 
making a decision. 
 
The protection of the national security is the paramount consideration. AG ¶ 
2(b) requires that “[a]ny doubt concerning personnel being considered for access to 
classified information will be resolved in favor of national security.” In reaching this 
 
4 
 
 
decision, I have drawn only those conclusions that are reasonable, logical and based 
on the evidence contained in the record. Likewise, I have avoided drawing inferences 
grounded on mere speculation or conjecture. 
 
Under Directive ¶ E3.1.14, the Government must present evidence to establish 
controverted facts alleged in the SOR. Under Directive ¶ E3.1.15, the Applicant is 
responsible for presenting “witnesses and other evidence to rebut, explain, extenuate, 
or mitigate facts admitted by applicant or proven by Department Counsel. . . .” The 
Applicant has the ultimate burden of persuasion as to obtaining a favorable security 
decision.  
 
A person who seeks access to classified information enters into a fiduciary 
relationship with the Government predicated upon trust and confidence. This 
relationship transcends normal duty hours and endures throughout off-duty hours. The 
Government reposes a high degree of trust and confidence in individuals to whom it 
grants access to classified information. Decisions include, by necessity, consideration 
of the possible risk the Applicant may deliberately or inadvertently fail to protect or 
safeguard classified information. Such decisions entail a certain degree of legally 
permissible extrapolation as to potential, rather than actual, risk of compromise of 
classified information. 
  
Section 7 of Executive Order 10865 provides that decisions shall be “in terms of 
the national interest and shall in no sense be a determination as to the loyalty of the 
applicant concerned.” See also EO 12968, Section 3.1(b) (listing multiple prerequisites 
for access to classified or sensitive information).   
 
Analysis 
 
Guideline F, Financial Considerations 
  
  Under AG 18, the Government’s concern is: 
 
“[f]ailure or inability to live within one’s means, satisfy debts, and meet 
financial obligations may indicate poor self-control, lack of judgment, or 
unwillingness to abide by rules and regulations, all of which can raise 
questions about an individual’s reliability, trustworthiness and ability to 
protect classified information. An individual who is financially 
overextended is at risk of having to engage in illegal acts to generate 
funds.” 
 
 The Government established that Applicant owed substantial debt as reflected 
in SOR ¶¶ 1.a. – 1.k. through her admissions and evidence presented. At the time the 
SOR was issued in July 2008, Applicant owed 11 debts approximating $36,900. 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Under AG ¶ 19, two disqualifying conditions raise a security concern: 
 
(a) inability or unwillingness to satisfy debts; and 
 
(c) a history of not meeting financial obligations. 
 
Applicant’s indebtedness stems from a lengthy period of underemployment and 
unemployment. Additionally, her former husband incurred debt during Applicant’s 
second marriage which she is responsible for. All of this contributed to Applicant being 
placed in a financial tailspin.  
 
Her financial situation has substantially improved as a result of finding a job 
which provides her with enough income to support her family and meet her financial 
obligations. She entered into an agreement with a credit management company to 
whom she pays a monthly fee by direct debit, and has sought financial counseling. 
She has submitted post-hearing updates on her financial progress. She has 
established a credible budget. All indicators point to an individual who has taken this 
process quite seriously and taken what appears to be all reasonable steps to correct 
her financial situation. What is different now as opposed to before is she has the 
means, tools and resolve to achieve financial stability. 
 
Under AG ¶ 20, there are three potentially mitigating conditions: 
(b) the conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely 
beyond the person's control (e.g., loss of employment, a business 
downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or 
separation), and the individual acted responsibly under the 
circumstances;  
(c) the person has received or is receiving counseling for the problem 
and/or there are clear indications that the problem is being resolved or is 
under control; and  
(d) the individual initiated a good-faith effort to repay overdue creditors or 
otherwise resolve debts. 
 
 AG ¶ 20(b) applies because at the time Applicant incurred the debts, she was 
either underemployed or unemployed, and married to a spouse whose spending 
exceeded his contributions. Her financial situation continued to deteriorate during her 
separation and divorce. AG ¶ 20(c) applies because Applicant sought financial 
counseling. While paying down her debts, she continues to explore strategies to 
improve her financial situation. AG ¶ 20(d) applies because Applicant initiated a good-
faith effort to repay overdue creditors or otherwise resolve debts. In short, Applicant 
has made substantial progress in turning her financial situation around. She has 
established a viable budget, which shows a net remainder after her monthly bills are 
paid. 
 
6 
 
 
                                                          
 
To conclude, Applicant presented sufficient evidence to explain, extenuate, or 
mitigate the financial considerations security concerns. Applicant met her ultimate 
burden of persuasion to obtain a favorable clearance decision. I also gave 
considerable weight to her years of honorable service in the Army, her years of 
successfully holding a top secret clearance, her service as a defense contractor 
serving in a very remote U.S. location, and her being the sole support for her nine-
year-old son and to a lesser extent her 61-year-old mother. In reaching this 
conclusion, the whole person concept was given due consideration and that analysis 
does support a favorable decision. 
 
I take this position based on the law, as set forth in Department of Navy v. Egan, 
484 U.S. 518 (1988), my “careful consideration of the whole person factors”1 and 
supporting evidence, my application of the pertinent factors under the Adjudicative 
Process, and my interpretation of my responsibilities under the Guidelines. Applicant 
has mitigated or overcome the Government’s case. For the reasons stated, I conclude 
she is eligible for access to classified information. 
 
Formal Findings 
 
 Formal findings for or against Applicant on the allegations set forth in the SOR, 
as required by section E3.1.25 of Enclosure 3 of the Directive, are: 
 
 Paragraph 1, Guideline F:   FOR APPLICANT 
 
  Subparagraph 1.a. – 1.k.:  For Applicant 
 
Conclusion 
 
In light of all of the circumstances presented by the record in this case, it is 
clearly consistent with national security to grant Applicant eligibility for a security 
clearance. Clearance is granted. 
 
 
                                                     
_________________ 
ROBERT J. TUIDER 
Administrative Judge 
1 See ISCR Case No. 04-06242 at 2 (App. Bd. June 28, 2006).  
