KEYWORD: Guideline F
DIGEST: The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant was capable of doing more to resolve her
delinquent debts and did not act responsibly under the circumstances is supported by the record
evidence.  Adverse decision affirmed.  
CASENO: 08-03221.a1
DATE: 02/25/2009
DATE: February 25, 2009
In Re:
----------------
Applicant for Security Clearance
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ISCR Case No. 08-03221
APPEAL BOARD DECISION
APPEARANCES
FOR GOVERNMENT
James B. Norman, Esq., Chief Department Counsel
FOR APPLICANT
Greg T. Rinckey, Esq.
The Defense Office of Hearings and Appeals (DOHA) declined to grant Applicant a security
clearance.  On May 13, 2008, DOHA issued a statement of reasons (SOR) advising Applicant of the
basis for that decision—security concerns raised under Guideline F (Financial Considerations) of
Department of Defense Directive 5220.6 (Jan. 2, 1992, as amended) (Directive).  Applicant
requested a hearing. On October 29, 2008, after the hearing,  Administrative Judge Erin C. Hogan
denied Applicant’s request for a security clearance.  Applicant timely appealed pursuant to the
Directive ¶¶ E3.1.28 and E3.1.30.
Applicant raises the following issues on appeal: whether the government met its burden of
[T]he conditions that resulted in the financial problem were largely beyond the person’s control (e.g., loss of1
employment, a business downturn, unexpected medical emergency, or a death, divorce or separation), and the individual
acted responsibly under the circumstances. 
The Judge also found, based on Applicant’s testimony about her husband’s debts: “Most of the medical debts2
were written off due to a public health policy of the state where they were living.” Decision at 3.
establishing disqualifying conditions; and whether, in the alternative, Applicant established her case
in mitigation of the Guideline F security concerns.  For the following reasons, the Board affirms the
Judge’s unfavorable decision. 
Applicant asserts that the government did not provide substantial evidence that Applicant is
financially overextended.  Applicant states that Department Counsel did not call any witnesses or
introduce any statements by government employees regarding the bases for the SOR.  Applicant
further asserts that the documentary evidence introduced is either outdated or supports Applicant’s
position.
The fact that Department Counsel did not call witnesses or place the statements of
government employees on the record is not dispositive of the issue of the sufficiency of the
government’s proof.   The government relied on Applicant’s answer to the SOR, Applicant’s answers
to interrogatories and two credit reports to establish its case.  After a review of the record evidence,
the Board is satisfied that the government met its burden of production with regard to the security
concerns stated in the SOR.  
Applicant argues that despite her inability to retire all her delinquent debts, she has been
making an honest attempt to correct the situation and repay her debts.  She states that she has been
able to retire a number of her outstanding debts notwithstanding the difficulties presented by her late
husband’s illnesses and her own medical problems.  Applicant argues that because of these factors
the Judge’s unfavorable decision should be reversed.  Applicant has not demonstrated that the Judge
has committed error.
The presence of some mitigating evidence does not alone compel the Judge to make a
favorable security clearance decision.  As the trier of fact, the Judge has to weigh the evidence as a
whole and decide whether the favorable evidence outweighs the unfavorable evidence, or vice versa.
See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-10320 at 2 (App. Bd. Nov. 7, 2007).  An applicant’s disagreement with
the Judge’s weighing of the evidence, or an ability to argue for a different interpretation of the
evidence, is not sufficient to demonstrate the Judge weighed the evidence or reached conclusions in
a manner that is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g., ISCR Case No. 06-17409 at 3
(App. Bd. Oct. 12, 2007).  
In this case, the Judge weighed the mitigating evidence offered by Applicant against the
seriousness of the disqualifying conduct and considered the possible application of relevant
conditions and factors.  She concluded that Guideline F Mitigating Condition 20.b.  applied to the1
case, acknowledging that Applicant’s husband’s illness  and her own health issues contributed to her2
financial situation.  The Judge also recognized that Applicant is making some efforts to repay her
debts.  However, the Judge reasonably explained why the applicability of that factor was of
insufficient strength to overcome the government’s security concerns.  Specifically, the Judge noted
that Applicant has a good paying job and elects to contribute to her 401(k) account to the detriment
of her ability to retire her substantial delinquent student loan debt, which has been outstanding for
more than 12 years.  The Judge’s conclusion that Applicant was capable of doing more to resolve
her delinquent accounts and did not act responsibly under the circumstances is supported by the
record evidence.  The Judge’s conclusion that not enough time has passed to establish that Applicant
will make good on all her outstanding debt is also supported by the record.
The Board does not review a case de novo.  The favorable evidence cited by Applicant is not
sufficient to demonstrate the Judge’s decision is arbitrary, capricious, or contrary to law.  See, e.g.,
ISCR Case No. 06-11172 at 3 (App. Bd. Sep. 4, 2007).  After reviewing the record, the Board
concludes that the Judge examined the relevant data and articulated a satisfactory explanation for
her decision, “including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choice made.’” Motor
Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the United States v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)
(quoting Burlington Truck Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  “The general
standard is that a clearance may be granted only when ‘clearly consistent with the interests of the
national security.’” Department of the Navy v. Egan, 484 U.S. 518, 528 (1988).  Therefore, the
Judge’s ultimate unfavorable security clearance decision under Guideline F is sustainable.
Order
The decision of the Judge denying Applicant a security clearance is AFFIRMED.
Signed: Michael Y. Ra’anan        
Michael Y. Ra’anan
Administrative Judge
Chairman, Appeal Board
Signed: Jeffrey D. Billett             
Jeffrey D. Billett
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
Signed: William S. Fields            
William S. Fields
Administrative Judge
Member, Appeal Board
